<html><body><pre>
[Title 40 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - July 1, 2005 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]


<R02>
          40


          Part 60 (Appendices)

                         Revised as of July 1, 2005


          Protection of Environment
          
          <R03>


________________________

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of July 1, 2005
          With Ancillaries
                    Published by
                    Office of the Federal Register
                    National Archives and Records
                    Administration
                    A Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 40:
          Chapter I--Environmental Protection Agency                 3
  Finding Aids:
      Material Approved for Incorporated by Reference.........     705
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     709
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     727
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     737

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and appendix letter. 
                       Thus, 40 CFR 60, 
                       appendices refers to title 
                       40, part 60, appendix A.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, July 1, 2005), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in 11 separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I). A list of CFR titles, chapters, 
and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

[[Page vii]]


REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of textual material 
appearing in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408 or e-mail, 
fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800 or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to the Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 
371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO Customer Service call 202-
512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, Weekly Compilation of Presidential 
Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic 
format at www.gpoaccess.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For more information, 
contact Electronic Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government 
Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-
mail, gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal--
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

July 1, 2005.

[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 40--Protection of Environment is composed of thirty-one 
volumes. The parts in these volumes are arranged in the following order: 
parts 1-49, parts 50-51, part 52 (52.01-52.1018), part 52 (52.1019-End), 
parts 53-59, part 60 (60.1-End), part 60 (Appendices), parts 61-62, part 
63 (63.1-63.599), part 63 (63.600-63.1199), part 63 (63.1200-63.1439), 
part 63 (63.1440-63.6175), part 63 (63.6580-63.8830), part 63 (63.8980-
End) parts 64-71, parts 72-80, parts 81-85, part 86 (86.1-86.599-99) 
part 86 (86.600-1-End), parts 87-99, parts 100-135, parts 136-149, parts 
150-189, parts 190-259, parts 260-265, parts 266-299, parts 300-399, 
parts 400-424, parts 425-699, parts 700-789, and part 790 to End. The 
contents of these volumes represent all current regulations codified 
under this title of the CFR as of July 1, 2005.

    Chapter I--Environmental Protection Agency appears in all thirty-one 
volumes. An alphabetical Listing of Pesticide Chemicals Index appears in 
parts 150-189. Regulations issued by the Council on Environmental 
Quality appear in the volume containing part 790 to End. The OMB control 
numbers for title 40 appear in Sec.  9.1 of this chapter.

    For this volume, Ruth Green was Chief Editor. The Code of Federal 
Regulations publication program is under the direction of Frances D. 
McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                   TITLE 40--PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENT


<R02>

                      (This book contains part 60)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--Environmental Protection Agency (Continued)......          60

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
         CHAPTER I--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------


  Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to chapter I appear at 65 FR 
47324, 47325, Aug. 2, 2000.

                 SUBCHAPTER C--AIR PROGRAMS (CONTINUED)
Part                                                                Page
60              Appendix A to part 60--Test methods.........           5

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
                  SUBCHAPTER C_AIR PROGRAMS (CONTINUED)

<R05>


<R03>
PART 60_STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE FOR NEW STATIONARY SOURCES (CONTINUED)
--Table of Contents

<R05>


Appendix A-1 to Part 60--Test Methods 1 through 2F
Appendix A-2 to Part 60--Test Methods 2G through 3C
Appendix A-3 to Part 60--Test Methods 4 through 5I
Appendix A-4 to Part 60--Test Methods 6 through 10B
Appendix A-5 to Part 60--Test Methods 11 through 15A
Appendix A-6 to Part 60--Test Methods 16 through 18
Appendix A-7 to Part 60--Test Methods 19 through 25E
Appendix A-8 to Part 60--Test Methods 26 through 29
Appendix B to Part 60--Performance Specifications
Appendix C to Part 60--Determination of Emmission Rate Change
Appendix D to Part 60--Required Emission Inventory Information
Appendix E to Part 60 [Reserved]
Appendix F to Part 60--Quality Assurance Procedures
Appendix G to Part 60--Provisions for an Alternative Method of 
          Demonstrating Compliance with 40 CFR 60.43 for the Newton 
          Power Station of Central Illinois Public Service Company
Appendix H to Part 60 [Reserved]
Appendix I to Part 60--Removable Label and Owner's Manual

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 7401-7601.

    Source: 36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971, unless otherwise noted.

           Appendix A-1 to Part 60--Test Methods 1 through 2F

Method 1--Sample and velocity traverses for stationary sources
Method 1A--Sample and velocity traverses for stationary sources with 
small stacks or ducts
Method 2--Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate 
(Type S pitot tube)
Method 2A--Direct measurement of gas volume through pipes and small 
ducts
Method 2B--Determination of exhaust gas volume flow rate from gasoline 
vapor incinerators
Method 2C--Determination of gas velocity and volumetric flow rate in 
small stacks or ducts (standard pitot tube)
Method 2D--Measurement of gas volume flow rates in small pipes and ducts
Method 2E--Determination of landfill gas production flow rate
Method 2F--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate 
With Three-Dimensional Probes
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining to 
any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It

[[Page 6]]

should be clearly understood that unless otherwise identified all such 
methods and changes must have prior approval of the Administrator. An 
owner employing such methods or deviations from the test methods without 
obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of subsequent disapproval 
and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are 
properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

     Method 1--Sample and Velocity Traverses for Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test method: Method 2.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Measured Parameters. The purpose of the method is to provide 
guidance for the selection of sampling ports and traverse points at 
which sampling for air pollutants will be performed pursuant to 
regulations set forth in this part. Two procedures are presented: a 
simplified procedure, and an alternative procedure (see Section 11.5). 
The magnitude of cyclonic flow of effluent gas in a stack or duct is the 
only parameter quantitatively measured in the simplified procedure.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable to gas streams flowing 
in ducts, stacks, and flues. This method cannot be used when: (1) the 
flow is cyclonic or swirling; or (2) a stack is smaller than 0.30 meter 
(12 in.) in diameter, or 0.071 m\2\ (113 in.\2\) in cross-sectional 
area. The simplified procedure cannot be used when the measurement site 
is less than two stack or duct diameters downstream or less than a half 
diameter upstream from a flow disturbance.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

    Note: The requirements of this method must be considered before 
construction of a new facility from which emissions are to be measured; 
failure to do so may require subsequent alterations to the stack or 
deviation from the standard procedure. Cases involving variants are 
subject to approval by the Administrator.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 This method is designed to aid in the representative measurement 
of pollutant emissions and/or total volumetric flow rate from a 
stationary source. A measurement site where the effluent stream is 
flowing in a known direction is selected, and the cross-section of the 
stack is divided into a number of equal areas. Traverse points are then 
located within each of these equal areas.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies.

    6.1 Apparatus. The apparatus described below is required only when 
utilizing the alternative site selection procedure described in Section 
11.5 of this method.
    6.1.1 Directional Probe. Any directional probe, such as United 
Sensor Type DA Three-Dimensional Directional Probe, capable of measuring 
both the pitch and yaw angles of gas flows is acceptable. Before using 
the probe, assign an identification number to the directional probe, and 
permanently mark or engrave the number on the body of the probe. The 
pressure holes of directional

[[Page 7]]

probes are susceptible to plugging when used in particulate-laden gas 
streams. Therefore, a procedure for cleaning the pressure holes by 
``back-purging'' with pressurized air is required.
    6.1.2 Differential Pressure Gauges. Inclined manometers, U-tube 
manometers, or other differential pressure gauges (e.g., magnehelic 
gauges) that meet the specifications described in Method 2, Section 6.2.

    Note: If the differential pressure gauge produces both negative and 
positive readings, then both negative and positive pressure readings 
shall be calibrated at a minimum of three points as specified in Method 
2, Section 6.2.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

 8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport [Reserved]

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                             11.0 Procedure

    11.1 Selection of Measurement Site.
    11.1.1 Sampling and/or velocity measurements are performed at a site 
located at least eight stack or duct diameters downstream and two 
diameters upstream from any flow disturbance such as a bend, expansion, 
or contraction in the stack, or from a visible flame. If necessary, an 
alternative location may be selected, at a position at least two stack 
or duct diameters downstream and a half diameter upstream from any flow 
disturbance.
    11.1.2 An alternative procedure is available for determining the 
acceptability of a measurement location not meeting the criteria above. 
This procedure described in Section 11.5 allows for the determination of 
gas flow angles at the sampling points and comparison of the measured 
results with acceptability criteria.
    11.2 Determining the Number of Traverse Points.
    11.2.1 Particulate Traverses.
    11.2.1.1 When the eight- and two-diameter criterion can be met, the 
minimum number of traverse points shall be: (1) twelve, for circular or 
rectangular stacks with diameters (or equivalent diameters) greater than 
0.61 meter (24 in.); (2) eight, for circular stacks with diameters 
between 0.30 and 0.61 meter (12 and 24 in.); and (3) nine, for 
rectangular stacks with equivalent diameters between 0.30 and 0.61 meter 
(12 and 24 in.).
    11.2.1.2 When the eight- and two-diameter criterion cannot be met, 
the minimum number of traverse points is determined from Figure 1-1. 
Before referring to the figure, however, determine the istances from the 
measurement site to the nearest upstream and downstream disturbances, 
and divide each distance by the stack diameter or equivalent diameter, 
to determine the distance in terms of the number of duct diameters. 
Then, determine from Figure 1-1 the minimum number of traverse points 
that corresponds: (1) to the number of duct diameters upstream; and (2) 
to the number of diameters downstream. Select the higher of the two 
minimum numbers of traverse points, or a greater value, so that for 
circular stacks the number is a multiple of 4, and for rectangular 
stacks, the number is one of those shown in Table 1-1.
    11.2.2 Velocity (Non-Particulate) Traverses. When velocity or 
volumetric flow rate is to be determined (but not particulate matter), 
the same procedure as that used for particulate traverses (Section 
11.2.1) is followed, except that Figure 1-2 may be used instead of 
Figure 1-1.
    11.3 Cross-Sectional Layout and Location of Traverse Points.
    11.3.1 Circular Stacks.
    11.3.1.1 Locate the traverse points on two perpendicular diameters 
according to Table 1-2 and the example shown in Figure 1-3. Any equation 
(see examples in References 2 and 3 in Section 16.0) that gives the same 
values as those in Table 1-2 may be used in lieu of Table 1-2.
    11.3.1.2 For particulate traverses, one of the diameters must 
coincide with the plane containing the greatest expected concentration 
variation (e.g., after bends); one diameter shall be congruent to the 
direction of the bend. This requirement becomes less critical as the 
distance from the disturbance increases; therefore, other diameter 
locations may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    11.3.1.3 In addition, for elliptical stacks having unequal 
perpendicular diameters, separate traverse points shall be calculated 
and located along each diameter. To determine the cross-sectional area 
of the elliptical stack, use the following equation:

Square Area=D<INF>1</INF> x D<INF>2</INF> x 0.7854

Where: D<INF>1</INF>=Stack diameter 1
D<INF>2</INF>=Stack diameter 2

    11.3.1.4 In addition, for stacks having diameters greater than 0.61 
m (24 in.), no traverse points shall be within 2.5 centimeters (1.00 
in.) of the stack walls; and for stack diameters equal to or less than 
0.61 m (24 in.), no traverse points shall be located within 1.3 cm (0.50 
in.) of the stack walls. To meet these criteria, observe the procedures 
given below.
    11.3.2 Stacks With Diameters Greater Than 0.61 m (24 in.).
    11.3.2.1 When any of the traverse points as located in Section 
11.3.1 fall within 2.5 cm (1.0 in.) of the stack walls, relocate them 
away from the stack walls to: (1) a distance of 2.5 cm (1.0 in.); or (2) 
a distance equal to

[[Page 8]]

the nozzle inside diameter, whichever is larger. These relocated 
traverse points (on each end of a diameter) shall be the ``adjusted'' 
traverse points.
    11.3.2.2 Whenever two successive traverse points are combined to 
form a single adjusted traverse point, treat the adjusted point as two 
separate traverse points, both in the sampling and/or velocity 
measurement procedure, and in recording of the data.
    11.3.3 Stacks With Diameters Equal To or Less Than 0.61 m (24 in.). 
Follow the procedure in Section 11.3.1.1, noting only that any 
``adjusted'' points should be relocated away from the stack walls to: 
(1) a distance of 1.3 cm (0.50 in.); or (2) a distance equal to the 
nozzle inside diameter, whichever is larger.
    11.3.4 Rectangular Stacks.
    11.3.4.1 Determine the number of traverse points as explained in 
Sections 11.1 and 11.2 of this method. From Table 1-1, determine the 
grid configuration. Divide the stack cross-section into as many equal 
rectangular elemental areas as traverse points, and then locate a 
traverse point at the centroid of each equal area according to the 
example in Figure 1-4.
    11.3.4.2 To use more than the minimum number of traverse points, 
expand the ``minimum number of traverse points'' matrix (see Table 1-1) 
by adding the extra traverse points along one or the other or both legs 
of the matrix; the final matrix need not be balanced. For example, if a 
4 x 3 ``minimum number of points'' matrix were expanded to 36 points, 
the final matrix could be 9 x 4 or 12 x 3, and would not necessarily 
have to be 6 x 6. After constructing the final matrix, divide the stack 
cross-section into as many equal rectangular, elemental areas as 
traverse points, and locate a traverse point at the centroid of each 
equal area.
    11.3.4.3 The situation of traverse points being too close to the 
stack walls is not expected to arise with rectangular stacks. If this 
problem should ever arise, the Administrator must be contacted for 
resolution of the matter.
    11.4 Verification of Absence of Cyclonic Flow.
    11.4.1 In most stationary sources, the direction of stack gas flow 
is essentially parallel to the stack walls. However, cyclonic flow may 
exist (1) after such devices as cyclones and inertial demisters 
following venturi scrubbers, or (2) in stacks having tangential inlets 
or other duct configurations which tend to induce swirling; in these 
instances, the presence or absence of cyclonic flow at the sampling 
location must be determined. The following techniques are acceptable for 
this determination.
    11.4.2 Level and zero the manometer. Connect a Type S pitot tube to 
the manometer and leak-check system. Position the Type S pitot tube at 
each traverse point, in succession, so that the planes of the face 
openings of the pitot tube are perpendicular to the stack cross-
sectional plane; when the Type S pitot tube is in this position, it is 
at ``0[deg] reference.'' Note the differential pressure ([Delta]p) 
reading at each traverse point. If a null (zero) pitot reading is 
obtained at 0[deg] reference at a given traverse point, an acceptable 
flow condition exists at that point. If the pitot reading is not zero at 
0[deg] reference, rotate the pitot tube (up to <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>90[deg] yaw angle), until a null reading is obtained. 
Carefully determine and record the value of the rotation angle ([alpha]) 
to the nearest degree. After the null technique has been applied at each 
traverse point, calculate the average of the absolute values of [alpha]; 
assign [alpha] values of 0[deg] to those points for which no rotation 
was required, and include these in the overall average. If the average 
value of [alpha] is greater than 20[deg], the overall flow condition in 
the stack is unacceptable, and alternative methodology, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator, must be used to perform accurate sample 
and velocity traverses.
    11.5 The alternative site selection procedure may be used to 
determine the rotation angles in lieu of the procedure outlined in 
Section 11.4.
    11.5.1 Alternative Measurement Site Selection Procedure. This 
alternative applies to sources where measurement locations are less than 
2 equivalent or duct diameters downstream or less than one-half duct 
diameter upstream from a flow disturbance. The alternative should be 
limited to ducts larger than 24 in. in diameter where blockage and wall 
effects are minimal. A directional flow-sensing probe is used to measure 
pitch and yaw angles of the gas flow at 40 or more traverse points; the 
resultant angle is calculated and compared with acceptable criteria for 
mean and standard deviation.

    Note: Both the pitch and yaw angles are measured from a line passing 
through the traverse point and parallel to the stack axis. The pitch 
angle is the angle of the gas flow component in the plane that INCLUDES 
the traverse line and is parallel to the stack axis. The yaw angle is 
the angle of the gas flow component in the plane PERPENDICULAR to the 
traverse line at the traverse point and is measured from the line 
passing through the traverse point and parallel to the stack axis.

    11.5.2 Traverse Points. Use a minimum of 40 traverse points for 
circular ducts and 42 points for rectangular ducts for the gas flow 
angle determinations. Follow the procedure outlined in Section 11.3 and 
Table 1-1 or 1-2 for the location and layout of the traverse points. If 
the measurement location is determined to be acceptable according to the 
criteria in this alternative procedure, use the same traverse point 
number and locations for sampling and velocity measurements.
    11.5.3 Measurement Procedure.

[[Page 9]]

    11.5.3.1 Prepare the directional probe and differential pressure 
gauges as recommended by the manufacturer. Capillary tubing or surge 
tanks may be used to dampen pressure fluctuations. It is recommended, 
but not required, that a pretest leak check be conducted. To perform a 
leak check, pressurize or use suction on the impact opening until a 
reading of at least 7.6 cm (3 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O registers on the 
differential pressure gauge, then plug the impact opening. The pressure 
of a leak-free system will remain stable for at least 15 seconds.
    11.5.3.2 Level and zero the manometers. Since the manometer level 
and zero may drift because of vibrations and temperature changes, 
periodically check the level and zero during the traverse.
    11.5.3.3 Position the probe at the appropriate locations in the gas 
stream, and rotate until zero deflection is indicated for the yaw angle 
pressure gauge. Determine and record the yaw angle. Record the pressure 
gauge readings for the pitch angle, and determine the pitch angle from 
the calibration curve. Repeat this procedure for each traverse point. 
Complete a ``back-purge'' of the pressure lines and the impact openings 
prior to measurements of each traverse point.
    11.5.3.4 A post-test check as described in Section 11.5.3.1 is 
required. If the criteria for a leak-free system are not met, repair the 
equipment, and repeat the flow angle measurements.
    11.5.4 Calibration. Use a flow system as described in Sections 
10.1.2.1 and 10.1.2.2 of Method 2. In addition, the flow system shall 
have the capacity to generate two test-section velocities: one between 
365 and 730 m/min (1,200 and 2,400 ft/min) and one between 730 and 1,100 
m/min (2,400 and 3,600 ft/min).
    11.5.4.1 Cut two entry ports in the test section. The axes through 
the entry ports shall be perpendicular to each other and intersect in 
the centroid of the test section. The ports should be elongated slots 
parallel to the axis of the test section and of sufficient length to 
allow measurement of pitch angles while maintaining the pitot head 
position at the test-section centroid. To facilitate alignment of the 
directional probe during calibration, the test section should be 
constructed of plexiglass or some other transparent material. All 
calibration measurements should be made at the same point in the test 
section, preferably at the centroid of the test section.
    11.5.4.2 To ensure that the gas flow is parallel to the central axis 
of the test section, follow the procedure outlined in Section 11.4 for 
cyclonic flow determination to measure the gas flow angles at the 
centroid of the test section from two test ports located 90[deg] apart. 
The gas flow angle measured in each port must be <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of 0[deg]. Straightening vanes should be 
installed, if necessary, to meet this criterion.
    11.5.4.3 Pitch Angle Calibration. Perform a calibration traverse 
according to the manufacturer's recommended protocol in 5[deg] 
increments for angles from -60[deg] to +60[deg] at one velocity in each 
of the two ranges specified above. Average the pressure ratio values 
obtained for each angle in the two flow ranges, and plot a calibration 
curve with the average values of the pressure ratio (or other suitable 
measurement factor as recommended by the manufacturer) versus the pitch 
angle. Draw a smooth line through the data points. Plot also the data 
values for each traverse point. Determine the differences between the 
measured data values and the angle from the calibration curve at the 
same pressure ratio. The difference at each comparison must be within 
2[deg] for angles between 0[deg] and 40[deg] and within 3[deg] for 
angles between 40[deg] and 60[deg].
    11.5.4.4 Yaw Angle Calibration. Mark the three-dimensional probe to 
allow the determination of the yaw position of the probe. This is 
usually a line extending the length of the probe and aligned with the 
impact opening. To determine the accuracy of measurements of the yaw 
angle, only the zero or null position need be calibrated as follows: 
Place the directional probe in the test section, and rotate the probe 
until the zero position is found. With a protractor or other angle 
measuring device, measure the angle indicated by the yaw angle indicator 
on the three-dimensional probe. This should be within 2[deg] of 0[deg]. 
Repeat this measurement for any other points along the length of the 
pitot where yaw angle measurements could be read in order to account for 
variations in the pitot markings used to indicate pitot head positions.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.
L=length.
n=total number of traverse points.
P<INF>i</INF>=pitch angle at traverse point i, degree.
R<INF>avg</INF>=average resultant angle, degree.
R<INF>i</INF>=resultant angle at traverse point i, degree.
S<INF>d</INF>=standard deviation, degree.
W=width.
Y<INF>i</INF>=yaw angle at traverse point i, degree.
    12.2 For a rectangular cross section, an equivalent diameter 
(D<INF>e</INF>) shall be calculated using the following equation, to 
determine the upstream and downstream distances:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.037

    12.3 If use of the alternative site selection procedure (Section 
11.5 of this method) is required, perform the following calculations 
using the equations below: the resultant angle at each traverse point, 
the average resultant angle, and the standard deviation. Complete the 
calculations retaining at least

[[Page 10]]

one extra significant figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round the 
values after the final calculations.
    12.3.1 Calculate the resultant angle at each traverse point:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.038
    
    12.3.2 Calculate the average resultant for the measurements:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.039
    
    12.3.3 Calculate the standard deviations:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.040
    
    12.3.4 Acceptability Criteria. The measurement location is 
acceptable if R<INF>avg</INF> <= 20[deg] and S<INF>d</INF> <= 10[deg].

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Determining Dust Concentration in a Gas Stream, ASME Performance 
Test Code No. 27. New York. 1957.
    2. DeVorkin, Howard, et al. Air Pollution Source Testing Manual. Air 
Pollution Control District. Los Angeles, CA. November 1963.
    3. Methods for Determining of Velocity, Volume, Dust and Mist 
Content of Gases. Western Precipitation Division of Joy Manufacturing 
Co. Los Angeles, CA. Bulletin WP-50. 1968.
    4. Standard Method for Sampling Stacks for Particulate Matter. In: 
1971 Book of ASTM Standards, Part 23. ASTM Designation D 2928-71. 
Philadelphia, PA. 1971.
    5. Hanson, H.A., et al. Particulate Sampling Strategies for Large 
Power Plants Including Nonuniform Flow. USEPA, ORD, ESRL, Research 
Triangle Park, NC. EPA-600/2-76-170. June 1976.
    6. Entropy Environmentalists, Inc. Determination of the Optimum 
Number of Sampling Points: An Analysis of Method 1 Criteria. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. EPA 
Contract No. 68-01-3172, Task 7.
    7. Hanson, H.A., R.J. Davini, J.K. Morgan, and A.A. Iversen. 
Particulate Sampling Strategies for Large Power Plants Including 
Nonuniform Flow. USEPA, Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication No. EPA-
600/2-76-170. June 1976. 350 pp.
    8. Brooks, E.F., and R.L. Williams. Flow and Gas Sampling Manual. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. 
Publication No. EPA-600/2-76-203. July 1976. 93 pp.
    9. Entropy Environmentalists, Inc. Traverse Point Study. EPA 
Contract No. 68-02-3172. June 1977. 19 pp.
    10. Brown, J. and K. Yu. Test Report: Particulate Sampling Strategy 
in Circular Ducts. Emission Measurement Branch. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. July 31, 1980. 12 
pp.
    11. Hawksley, P.G.W., S. Badzioch, and J.H. Blackett. Measurement of 
Solids in Flue Gases. Leatherhead, England, The British Coal Utilisation 
Research Association. 1961. pp. 129-133.
    12. Knapp, K.T. The Number of Sampling Points Needed for 
Representative Source Sampling. In: Proceedings of the Fourth National 
Conference on Energy and Environment. Theodore, L. et al. (ed). Dayton, 
Dayton Section of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers. October 
3-7, 1976. pp. 563-568.
    13. Smith, W.S. and D.J. Grove. A Proposed Extension of EPA Method 1 
Criteria. Pollution Engineering. XV (8):36-37. August 1983.
    14. Gerhart, P.M. and M.J. Dorsey. Investigation of Field Test 
Procedures for Large Fans. University of Akron. Akron, OH. (EPRI 
Contract CS-1651). Final Report (RP-1649-5). December 1980.
    15. Smith, W.S. and D.J. Grove. A New Look at Isokinetic Sampling--
Theory and Applications. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. VIII 
(3):19-24. August 1983.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 11]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.041


          Table 1-1 Cross-Section Layout for Rectangular Stacks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Number of tranverse points layout                  Matrix
------------------------------------------------------------------------
9......................................  3x3
12.....................................  4x3
16.....................................  4x4
20.....................................  5x4
25.....................................  5x5
30.....................................  6x5
36.....................................  6x6
42.....................................  7x6
49.....................................  7x7
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 12]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.042


                                                Table 1-2--Location of Traverse Points in Circular Stacks
                                             [Percent of stack diameter from inside wall to tranverse point]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                      Number of traverse points on a diameter
         Traverse  point  number on  a diameter          -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             2       4       6       8      10      12      14      16      18      20      22      24
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.......................................................    14.6     6.7     4.4     3.2     2.6     2.1     1.8     1.6     1.4     1.3     1.1     1.1
2.......................................................    85.4    25.0    14.6    10.5     8.2     6.7     5.7     4.9     4.4     3.9     3.5     3.2
3.......................................................  ......    75.0    29.6    19.4    14.6    11.8     9.9     8.5     7.5     6.7     6.0     5.5
4.......................................................  ......    93.3    70.4    32.3    22.6    17.7    14.6    12.5    10.9     9.7     8.7     7.9
5.......................................................  ......  ......    85.4    67.7    34.2    25.0    20.1    16.9    14.6    12.9    11.6    10.5

[[Page 13]]

 
6.......................................................  ......  ......    95.6    80.6    65.8    35.6    26.9    22.0    18.8    16.5    14.6    13.2
7.......................................................  ......  ......  ......    89.5    77.4    64.4    36.6    28.3    23.6    20.4    18.0    16.1
8.......................................................  ......  ......  ......    96.8    85.4    75.0    63.4    37.5    29.6    25.0    21.8    19.4
9.......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......    91.8    82.3    73.1    62.5    38.2    30.6    26.2    23.0
10......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......    97.4    88.2    79.9    71.7    61.8    38.8    31.5    27.2
11......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    93.3    85.4    78.0    70.4    61.2    39.3    32.3
12......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    97.9    90.1    83.1    76.4    69.4    60.7    39.8
13......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    94.3    87.5    81.2    75.0    68.5    60.2
14......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    98.2    91.5    85.4    79.6    73.8    67.7
15......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    95.1    89.1    83.5    78.2    72.8
16......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    98.4    92.5    87.1    82.0    77.0
17......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    95.6    90.3    85.4    80.6
18......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    98.6    93.3    88.4    83.9
19......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    96.1    91.3    86.8
20......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    98.7    94.0    89.5
21......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    96.5    92.1
22......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    98.9    94.5
23......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    96.8
24......................................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......    99.9
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                                                                                  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.043
                                                                                                                                                  
  Method 1A--Sample and Velocity Traverses for Stationary Sources With 
                          Small Stacks or Ducts

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test method: Method 1.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Measured Parameters. The purpose of the method is to provide 
guidance for the selection of sampling ports and traverse points at 
which sampling for air pollutants will be performed pursuant to 
regulations set forth in this part.
    1.2 Applicability. The applicability and principle of this method 
are identical to Method 1, except its applicability is limited to stacks 
or ducts. This method is applicable to flowing gas streams in ducts, 
stacks, and flues of less than about 0.30 meter (12 in.) in diameter, or 
0.071 m <SUP>2</SUP> (113 in.<SUP>2</SUP>) in cross-sectional area, but 
equal to or greater than about 0.10 meter (4 in.) in diameter, or 0.0081 
m <SUP>2</SUP> (12.57 in.<SUP>2</SUP>) in cross-sectional area. This 
method cannot be used when the flow is cyclonic or swirling.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

[[Page 14]]

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 The method is designed to aid in the representative measurement 
of pollutant emissions and/or total volumetric flow rate from a 
stationary source. A measurement site or a pair of measurement sites 
where the effluent stream is flowing in a known direction is (are) 
selected. The cross-section of the stack is divided into a number of 
equal areas. Traverse points are then located within each of these equal 
areas.
    2.2 In these small diameter stacks or ducts, the conventional Method 
5 stack assembly (consisting of a Type S pitot tube attached to a 
sampling probe, equipped with a nozzle and thermocouple) blocks a 
significant portion of the cross-section of the duct and causes 
inaccurate measurements. Therefore, for particulate matter (PM) sampling 
in small stacks or ducts, the gas velocity is measured using a standard 
pitot tube downstream of the actual emission sampling site. The straight 
run of duct between the PM sampling and velocity measurement sites 
allows the flow profile, temporarily disturbed by the presence of the 
sampling probe, to redevelop and stabilize.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                  6.0 Equipment and Supplies [Reserved]

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

 8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport [Reserved]

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                             11.0 Procedure

    11.1 Selection of Measurement Site.
    11.1.1 Particulate Measurements--Steady or Unsteady Flow. Select a 
particulate measurement site located preferably at least eight 
equivalent stack or duct diameters downstream and 10 equivalent 
diameters upstream from any flow disturbances such as bends, expansions, 
or contractions in the stack, or from a visible flame. Next, locate the 
velocity measurement site eight equivalent diameters downstream of the 
particulate measurement site (see Figure 1A-1). If such locations are 
not available, select an alternative particulate measurement location at 
least two equivalent stack or duct diameters downstream and two and one-
half diameters upstream from any flow disturbance. Then, locate the 
velocity measurement site two equivalent diameters downstream from the 
particulate measurement site. (See Section 12.2 of Method 1 for 
calculating equivalent diameters for a rectangular cross-section.)
    11.1.2 PM Sampling (Steady Flow) or Velocity (Steady or Unsteady 
Flow) Measurements. For PM sampling when the volumetric flow rate in a 
duct is constant with respect to time, Section 11.1.1 of Method 1 may be 
followed, with the PM sampling and velocity measurement performed at one 
location. To demonstrate that the flow rate is constant (within 10 
percent) when PM measurements are made, perform complete velocity 
traverses before and after the PM sampling run, and calculate the 
deviation of the flow rate derived after the PM sampling run from the 
one derived before the PM sampling run. The PM sampling run is 
acceptable if the deviation does not exceed 10 percent.
    11.2 Determining the Number of Traverse Points.
    11.2.1 Particulate Measurements (Steady or Unsteady Flow). Use 
Figure 1-1 of Method 1 to determine the number of traverse points to use 
at both the velocity measurement and PM sampling locations. Before 
referring to the figure, however, determine the distances between both 
the velocity measurement and PM sampling sites to the nearest upstream 
and downstream disturbances. Then divide each distance by the stack 
diameter or equivalent diameter to express the distances in terms of the 
number of duct diameters. Then, determine the number of traverse points 
from Figure 1-1 of Method 1 corresponding to each of these four 
distances. Choose the highest of the four numbers of traverse points (or 
a greater number) so that, for circular ducts the number is a multiple 
of four; and for rectangular ducts, the number is one of those shown in 
Table 1-1 of Method 1. When the optimum duct diameter location criteria 
can be satisfied, the minimum number of traverse points required is 
eight for circular ducts and nine for rectangular ducts.
    11.2.2 PM Sampling (Steady Flow) or only Velocity (Non-Particulate) 
Measurements. Use Figure 1-2 of Method 1 to determine number of traverse 
points, following the same procedure used for PM sampling as described 
in Section 11.2.1 of Method 1. When the optimum duct diameter location 
criteria can be satisfied, the minimum number of traverse points 
required is eight for circular ducts and nine for rectangular ducts.

[[Page 15]]

    11.3 Cross-sectional Layout, Location of Traverse Points, and 
Verification of the Absence of Cyclonic Flow. Same as Method 1, Sections 
11.3 and 11.4, respectively.

             12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations [Reserved]

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 1, Section 16.0, References 1 through 6, with the 
addition of the following:
    1. Vollaro, Robert F. Recommended Procedure for Sample Traverses in 
Ducts Smaller Than 12 Inches in Diameter. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina. January 1977.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.044

 Method 2--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate 
                           (Type S Pitot Tube)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test method: Method 1.

                       1.0 Scope and Application.

    1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of the average 
velocity and the volumetric flow rate of a gas stream.
    1.2 This method is not applicable at measurement sites that fail to 
meet the criteria of Method 1, Section 11.1. Also, the method cannot be 
used for direct measurement in cyclonic or swirling gas streams; Section 
11.4 of Method 1 shows how to determine cyclonic or swirling flow 
conditions. When unacceptable conditions exist, alternative procedures, 
subject to the approval of the Administrator, must be employed to 
produce accurate flow rate determinations. Examples of such alternative 
procedures are: (1) to install straightening vanes; (2) to calculate the 
total volumetric flow rate stoichiometrically, or (3) to move to another 
measurement site at which the flow is acceptable.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                         2.0 Summary of Method.

    2.1 The average gas velocity in a stack is determined from the gas 
density and from measurement of the average velocity head with a Type S 
(Stausscheibe or reverse type) pitot tube.

[[Page 16]]

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Specifications for the apparatus are given below. Any other 
apparatus that has been demonstrated (subject to approval of the 
Administrator) to be capable of meeting the specifications will be 
considered acceptable.
    6.1 Type S Pitot Tube.
    6.1.1 Pitot tube made of metal tubing (e.g., stainless steel) as 
shown in Figure 2-1. It is recommended that the external tubing diameter 
(dimension D<INF>t</INF>, Figure 2-2b) be between 0.48 and 0.95 cm (\3/
16\ and \3/8\ inch). There shall be an equal distance from the base of 
each leg of the pitot tube to its face-opening plane (dimensions 
P<INF>A</INF> and P<INF>B</INF>, Figure 2-2b); it is recommended that 
this distance be between 1.05 and 1.50 times the external tubing 
diameter. The face openings of the pitot tube shall, preferably, be 
aligned as shown in Figure 2-2; however, slight misalignments of the 
openings are permissible (see Figure 2-3).
    6.1.2 The Type S pitot tube shall have a known coefficient, 
determined as outlined in Section 10.0. An identification number shall 
be assigned to the pitot tube; this number shall be permanently marked 
or engraved on the body of the tube. A standard pitot tube may be used 
instead of a Type S, provided that it meets the specifications of 
Sections 6.7 and 10.2. Note, however, that the static and impact 
pressure holes of standard pitot tubes are susceptible to plugging in 
particulate-laden gas streams. Therefore, whenever a standard pitot tube 
is used to perform a traverse, adequate proof must be furnished that the 
openings of the pitot tube have not plugged up during the traverse 
period. This can be accomplished by comparing the velocity head 
([Delta]p) measurement recorded at a selected traverse point (readable 
[Delta]p value) with a second [Delta]p measurement recorded after ``back 
purging'' with pressurized air to clean the impact and static holes of 
the standard pitot tube. If the before and after [Delta]p measurements 
are within 5 percent, then the traverse data are acceptable. Otherwise, 
the data should be rejected and the traverse measurements redone. Note 
that the selected traverse point should be one that demonstrates a 
readable [Delta]p value. If ``back purging'' at regular intervals is 
part of a routine procedure, then comparative [Delta]p measurements 
shall be conducted as above for the last two traverse points that 
exhibit suitable [Delta]p measurements.
    6.2 Differential Pressure Gauge. An inclined manometer or equivalent 
device. Most sampling trains are equipped with a 10 in. (water column) 
inclined-vertical manometer, having 0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>0 divisions on 
the 0 to 1 in. inclined scale, and 0.1 in. H<INF>2</INF>0 divisions on 
the 1 to 10 in. vertical scale. This type of manometer (or other gauge 
of equivalent sensitivity) is satisfactory for the measurement of 
[Delta]p values as low as 1.27 mm (0.05 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0. However, a 
differential pressure gauge of greater sensitivity shall be used 
(subject to the approval of the Administrator), if any of the following 
is found to be true: (1) the arithmetic average of all [Delta]p readings 
at the traverse points in the stack is less than 1.27 mm (0.05 in.) 
H<INF>2</INF>0; (2) for traverses of 12 or more points, more than 10 
percent of the individual [Delta]p readings are below 1.27 mm (0.05 in.) 
H<INF>2</INF>0; or (3) for traverses of fewer than 12 points, more than 
one [Delta]p reading is below 1.27 mm (0.05 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0. 
Reference 18 (see Section 17.0) describes commercially available 
instrumentation for the measurement of low-range gas velocities.
    6.2.1 As an alternative to criteria (1) through (3) above, Equation 
2-1 (Section 12.2) may be used to determine the necessity of using a 
more sensitive differential pressure gauge. If T is greater than 1.05, 
the velocity head data are unacceptable and a more sensitive 
differential pressure gauge must be used.

    Note: If differential pressure gauges other than inclined manometers 
are used (e.g., magnehelic gauges), their calibration must be checked 
after each test series. To check the calibration of a differential 
pressure gauge, compare [Delta]p readings of the gauge with those of a 
gauge-oil manometer at a minimum of three points, approximately 
representing the range of [Delta]p values in the stack. If, at each 
point, the values of [Delta]p as read by the differential pressure gauge 
and gauge-oil manometer agree to within 5 percent, the differential 
pressure gauge shall be considered to be in proper calibration. 
Otherwise, the test series shall either be voided, or procedures to 
adjust the measured [Delta]p values and final results shall be used, 
subject to the approval of the Administrator.

    6.3 Temperature Sensor. A thermocouple, liquid-filled bulb 
thermometer, bimetallic thermometer, mercury-in-glass thermometer, or 
other gauge capable of measuring temperatures to within 1.5 percent of 
the minimum absolute stack temperature. The temperature sensor shall be 
attached to the pitot tube such that the sensor tip does not touch any 
metal; the gauge shall be in an interference-free arrangement with 
respect to the pitot tube face openings (see Figure 2-1 and Figure 2-4). 
Alternative positions may

[[Page 17]]

be used if the pitot tube-temperature gauge system is calibrated 
according to the procedure of Section 10.0. Provided that a difference 
of not more than 1 percent in the average velocity measurement is 
introduced, the temperature gauge need not be attached to the pitot 
tube. This alternative is subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    6.4 Pressure Probe and Gauge. A piezometer tube and mercury- or 
water-filled U-tube manometer capable of measuring stack pressure to 
within 2.5 mm (0.1 in.) Hg. The static tap of a standard type pitot tube 
or one leg of a Type S pitot tube with the face opening planes 
positioned parallel to the gas flow may also be used as the pressure 
probe.
    6.5 Barometer. A mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.54 mm (0.1 in.) Hg.

    Note: The barometric pressure reading may be obtained from a nearby 
National Weather Service station. In this case, the station value (which 
is the absolute barometric pressure) shall be requested and an 
adjustment for elevation differences between the weather station and 
sampling point shall be made at a rate of minus 2.5 mm (0.1 in.) Hg per 
30 m (100 ft) elevation increase or plus 2.5 mm (0.1 in.) Hg per 30 m 
(100 ft.) for elevation decrease.

    6.6 Gas Density Determination Equipment. Method 3 equipment, if 
needed (see Section 8.6), to determine the stack gas dry molecular 
weight, and Method 4 (reference method) or Method 5 equipment for 
moisture content determination. Other methods may be used subject to 
approval of the Administrator.
    6.7 Calibration Pitot Tube. When calibration of the Type S pitot 
tube is necessary (see Section 10.1), a standard pitot tube shall be 
used for a reference. The standard pitot tube shall, preferably, have a 
known coefficient, obtained either (1) directly from the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg MD 20899, 
(301) 975-2002, or (2) by calibration against another standard pitot 
tube with an NIST-traceable coefficient. Alternatively, a standard pitot 
tube designed according to the criteria given in Sections 6.7.1 through 
6.7.5 below and illustrated in Figure 2-5 (see also References 7, 8, and 
17 in Section 17.0) may be used. Pitot tubes designed according to these 
specifications will have baseline coefficients of 0.99 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01.
    6.7.1 Standard Pitot Design.
    6.7.1.1 Hemispherical (shown in Figure 2-5), ellipsoidal, or conical 
tip.
    6.7.1.2 A minimum of six diameters straight run (based upon D, the 
external diameter of the tube) between the tip and the static pressure 
holes.
    6.7.1.3 A minimum of eight diameters straight run between the static 
pressure holes and the centerline of the external tube, following the 
90[deg] bend.
    6.7.1.4 Static pressure holes of equal size (approximately 0.1 D), 
equally spaced in a piezometer ring configuration.
    6.7.1.5 90[deg] bend, with curved or mitered junction.
    6.8 Differential Pressure Gauge for Type S Pitot Tube Calibration. 
An inclined manometer or equivalent. If the single-velocity calibration 
technique is employed (see Section 10.1.2.3), the calibration 
differential pressure gauge shall be readable to the nearest 0.127 mm 
(0.005 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0. For multivelocity calibrations, the gauge 
shall be readable to the nearest 0.127 mm (0.005 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0 for 
[Delta]p values between 1.27 and 25.4 mm (0.05 and 1.00 in.) 
H<INF>2</INF>0, and to the nearest 1.27 mm (0.05 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0 for 
[Delta]p values above 25.4 mm (1.00 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0. A special, more 
sensitive gauge will be required to read [Delta]p values below 1.27 mm 
(0.05 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0 (see Reference 18 in Section 16.0).

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 2-1. Capillary tubing or 
surge tanks installed between the manometer and pitot tube may be used 
to dampen [Delta]p fluctuations. It is recommended, but not required, 
that a pretest leak-check be conducted as follows: (1) blow through the 
pitot impact opening until at least 7.6 cm (3.0 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0 
velocity head registers on the manometer; then, close off the impact 
opening. The pressure shall remain stable for at least 15 seconds; (2) 
do the same for the static pressure side, except using suction to obtain 
the minimum of 7.6 cm (3.0 in.) H<INF>2</INF>0. Other leak-check 
procedures, subject to the approval of the Administrator, may be used.
    8.2 Level and zero the manometer. Because the manometer level and 
zero may drift due to vibrations and temperature changes, make periodic 
checks during the traverse (at least once per hour). Record all 
necessary data on a form similar to that shown in Figure 2-6.
    8.3 Measure the velocity head and temperature at the traverse points 
specified by Method 1. Ensure that the proper differential pressure 
gauge is being used for the range of [Delta]p values encountered (see 
Section 6.2). If it is necessary to change to a more sensitive gauge, do 
so, and remeasure the [Delta]p and temperature readings at each traverse 
point. Conduct a post-test leak-check (mandatory), as described in 
Section 8.1 above, to validate the traverse run.
    8.4 Measure the static pressure in the stack. One reading is usually 
adequate.
    8.5 Determine the atmospheric pressure.
    8.6 Determine the stack gas dry molecular weight. For combustion 
processes or processes that emit essentially CO<INF>2</INF>, 
O<INF>2</INF>, CO, and N<INF>2</INF>, use Method 3. For processes 
emitting

[[Page 18]]

essentially air, an analysis need not be conducted; use a dry molecular 
weight of 29.0. For other processes, other methods, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator, must be used.
    8.7 Obtain the moisture content from Method 4 (reference method, or 
equivalent) or from Method 5.
    8.8 Determine the cross-sectional area of the stack or duct at the 
sampling location. Whenever possible, physically measure the stack 
dimensions rather than using blueprints. Do not assume that stack 
diameters are equal. Measure each diameter distance to verify its 
dimensions.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1-10.4.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment          measurement of stack
                                 calibration.       gas flow rate,
                                                    sample volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Type S Pitot Tube. Before its initial use, carefully examine 
the Type S pitot tube top, side, and end views to verify that the face 
openings of the tube are aligned within the specifications illustrated 
in Figures 2-2 and 2-3. The pitot tube shall not be used if it fails to 
meet these alignment specifications. After verifying the face opening 
alignment, measure and record the following dimensions of the pitot 
tube: (a) the external tubing diameter (dimension D<INF>t</INF>, Figure 
2-2b); and (b) the base-to-opening plane distances (dimensions 
P<INF>A</INF> and P<INF>B</INF>, Figure 2-2b). If D<INF>t</INF> is 
between 0.48 and 0.95 cm \3/16\ and \3/8\ in.), and if P<INF>A</INF> and 
P<INF>B</INF> are equal and between 1.05 and 1.50 D<INF>t</INF>, there 
are two possible options: (1) the pitot tube may be calibrated according 
to the procedure outlined in Sections 10.1.2 through 10.1.5, or (2) a 
baseline (isolated tube) coefficient value of 0.84 may be assigned to 
the pitot tube. Note, however, that if the pitot tube is part of an 
assembly, calibration may still be required, despite knowledge of the 
baseline coefficient value (see Section 10.1.1). If D<INF>t</INF>, 
P<INF>A</INF>, and P<INF>B</INF> are outside the specified limits, the 
pitot tube must be calibrated as outlined in Sections 10.1.2 through 
10.1.5.
    10.1.1 Type S Pitot Tube Assemblies. During sample and velocity 
traverses, the isolated Type S pitot tube is not always used; in many 
instances, the pitot tube is used in combination with other source-
sampling components (e.g., thermocouple, sampling probe, nozzle) as part 
of an ``assembly.'' The presence of other sampling components can 
sometimes affect the baseline value of the Type S pitot tube coefficient 
(Reference 9 in Section 17.0); therefore, an assigned (or otherwise 
known) baseline coefficient value may or may not be valid for a given 
assembly. The baseline and assembly coefficient values will be identical 
only when the relative placement of the components in the assembly is 
such that aerodynamic interference effects are eliminated. Figures 2-4, 
2-7, and 2-8 illustrate interference-free component arrangements for 
Type S pitot tubes having external tubing diameters between 0.48 and 
0.95 cm (\3/16\ and \3/8\ in.). Type S pitot tube assemblies that fail 
to meet any or all of the specifications of Figures 2-4, 2-7, and 2-8 
shall be calibrated according to the procedure outlined in Sections 
10.1.2 through 10.1.5, and prior to calibration, the values of the 
intercomponent spacings (pitot-nozzle, pitot-thermocouple, pitot-probe 
sheath) shall be measured and recorded.

    Note: Do not use a Type S pitot tube assembly that is constructed 
such that the impact pressure opening plane of the pitot tube is below 
the entry plane of the nozzle (see Figure 2-6B).

    10.1.2 Calibration Setup. If the Type S pitot tube is to be 
calibrated, one leg of the tube shall be permanently marked A, and the 
other, B. Calibration shall be performed in a flow system having the 
following essential design features:
    10.1.2.1 The flowing gas stream must be confined to a duct of 
definite cross-sectional area, either circular or rectangular. For 
circular cross sections, the minimum duct diameter shall be 30.48 cm (12 
in.); for rectangular cross sections, the width (shorter side) shall be 
at least 25.4 cm (10 in.).
    10.1.2.2 The cross-sectional area of the calibration duct must be 
constant over a distance of 10 or more duct diameters. For a rectangular 
cross section, use an equivalent diameter, calculated according to 
Equation 2-2 (see Section 12.3), to determine the number of duct 
diameters. To ensure the presence of stable, fully developed flow 
patterns at the calibration site, or ``test section,'' the site must be 
located at least eight diameters downstream and two diameters upstream 
from the nearest disturbances.

    Note: The eight- and two-diameter criteria are not absolute; other 
test section locations may be used (subject to approval of the 
Administrator), provided that the flow at the test site has been 
demonstrated to be or found stable and parallel to the duct axis.

    10.1.2.3 The flow system shall have the capacity to generate a test-
section velocity around 910 m/min (3,000 ft/min). This velocity must be 
constant with time to guarantee steady flow during calibration. Note 
that Type S pitot tube coefficients obtained by

[[Page 19]]

single-velocity calibration at 910 m/min (3,000 ft/min) will generally 
be valid to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent for the measurement of 
velocities above 300 m/min (1,000 ft/min) and to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 
percent for the measurement of velocities between 180 and 300 m/min (600 
and 1,000 ft/min). If a more precise correlation between the pitot tube 
coefficient, (C<INF>p</INF>), and velocity is desired, the flow system 
should have the capacity to generate at least four distinct, time-
invariant test-section velocities covering the velocity range from 180 
to 1,500 m/min (600 to 5,000 ft/min), and calibration data shall be 
taken at regular velocity intervals over this range (see References 9 
and 14 in Section 17.0 for details).
    10.1.2.4 Two entry ports, one for each of the standard and Type S 
pitot tubes, shall be cut in the test section. The standard pitot entry 
port shall be located slightly downstream of the Type S port, so that 
the standard and Type S impact openings will lie in the same cross-
sectional plane during calibration. To facilitate alignment of the pitot 
tubes during calibration, it is advisable that the test section be 
constructed of Plexiglas<SUP>TM</SUP> or some other transparent 
material.
    10.1.3 Calibration Procedure. Note that this procedure is a general 
one and must not be used without first referring to the special 
considerations presented in Section 10.1.5. Note also that this 
procedure applies only to single-velocity calibration. To obtain 
calibration data for the A and B sides of the Type S pitot tube, proceed 
as follows:
    10.1.3.1 Make sure that the manometer is properly filled and that 
the oil is free from contamination and is of the proper density. Inspect 
and leak-check all pitot lines; repair or replace if necessary.
    10.1.3.2 Level and zero the manometer. Switch on the fan, and allow 
the flow to stabilize. Seal the Type S pitot tube entry port.
    10.1.3.3 Ensure that the manometer is level and zeroed. Position the 
standard pitot tube at the calibration point (determined as outlined in 
Section 10.1.5.1), and align the tube so that its tip is pointed 
directly into the flow. Particular care should be taken in aligning the 
tube to avoid yaw and pitch angles. Make sure that the entry port 
surrounding the tube is properly sealed.
    10.1.3.4 Read [Delta]p<INF>std</INF>, and record its value in a data 
table similar to the one shown in Figure 2-9. Remove the standard pitot 
tube from the duct, and disconnect it from the manometer. Seal the 
standard entry port.
    10.1.3.5 Connect the Type S pitot tube to the manometer and leak-
check. Open the Type S tube entry port. Check the manometer level and 
zero. Insert and align the Type S pitot tube so that its A side impact 
opening is at the same point as was the standard pitot tube and is 
pointed directly into the flow. Make sure that the entry port 
surrounding the tube is properly sealed.
    10.1.3.6 Read [Delta]p<INF>s</INF>, and enter its value in the data 
table. Remove the Type S pitot tube from the duct, and disconnect it 
from the manometer.
    10.1.3.7 Repeat Steps 10.1.3.3 through 10.1.3.6 until three pairs of 
[Delta]p readings have been obtained for the A side of the Type S pitot 
tube.
    10.1.3.8 Repeat Steps 10.1.3.3 through 10.1.3.7 for the B side of 
the Type S pitot tube.
    10.1.3.9 Perform calculations as described in Section 12.4. Use the 
Type S pitot tube only if the values of [sigma]<INF>A</INF> and 
[sigma]<INF>B</INF> are less than or equal to 0.01 and if the absolute 
value of the difference between C<INF>p(A)</INF> and C<INF>p(B)</INF> is 
0.01 or less.
    10.1.4 Special Considerations.
    10.1.4.1 Selection of Calibration Point.
    10.1.4.1.1 When an isolated Type S pitot tube is calibrated, select 
a calibration point at or near the center of the duct, and follow the 
procedures outlined in Section 10.1.3. The Type S pitot coefficients 
measured or calculated, (i.e., C<INF>p(A)</INF> and C<INF>p(B)</INF>) 
will be valid, so long as either: (1) the isolated pitot tube is used; 
or (2) the pitot tube is used with other components (nozzle, 
thermocouple, sample probe) in an arrangement that is free from 
aerodynamic interference effects (see Figures 2-4, 2-7, and 2-8).
    10.1.4.1.2 For Type S pitot tube-thermocouple combinations (without 
probe assembly), select a calibration point at or near the center of the 
duct, and follow the procedures outlined in Section 10.1.3. The 
coefficients so obtained will be valid so long as the pitot tube-
thermocouple combination is used by itself or with other components in 
an interference-free arrangement (Figures 2-4, 2-7, and 2-8).
    10.1.4.1.3 For Type S pitot tube combinations with complete probe 
assemblies, the calibration point should be located at or near the 
center of the duct; however, insertion of a probe sheath into a small 
duct may cause significant cross-sectional area interference and 
blockage and yield incorrect coefficient values (Reference 9 in Section 
17.0). Therefore, to minimize the blockage effect, the calibration point 
may be a few inches off-center if necessary. The actual blockage effect 
will be negligible when the theoretical blockage, as determined by a 
projected-area model of the probe sheath, is 2 percent or less of the 
duct cross-sectional area for assemblies without external sheaths 
(Figure 2-10a), and 3 percent or less for assemblies with external 
sheaths (Figure 2-10b).
    10.1.4.2 For those probe assemblies in which pitot tube-nozzle 
interference is a factor (i.e., those in which the pitot-nozzle 
separation distance fails to meet the specifications illustrated in 
Figure 2-7A), the value of C<INF>p(s)</INF> depends upon the amount of 
free space between the tube and nozzle and, therefore,

[[Page 20]]

is a function of nozzle size. In these instances, separate calibrations 
shall be performed with each of the commonly used nozzle sizes in place. 
Note that the single-velocity calibration technique is acceptable for 
this purpose, even though the larger nozzle sizes (<ls-thn-eq>0.635 cm 
or \1/4\ in.) are not ordinarily used for isokinetic sampling at 
velocities around 910 m/min (3,000 ft/min), which is the calibration 
velocity. Note also that it is not necessary to draw an isokinetic 
sample during calibration (see Reference 19 in Section 17.0).
    10.1.4.3 For a probe assembly constructed such that its pitot tube 
is always used in the same orientation, only one side of the pitot tube 
need be calibrated (the side which will face the flow). The pitot tube 
must still meet the alignment specifications of Figure 2-2 or 2-3, 
however, and must have an average deviation ([sigma]) value of 0.01 or 
less (see Section 10.1.4.4).
    10.1.5 Field Use and Recalibration.
    10.1.5.1 Field Use.
    10.1.5.1.1 When a Type S pitot tube (isolated or in an assembly) is 
used in the field, the appropriate coefficient value (whether assigned 
or obtained by calibration) shall be used to perform velocity 
calculations. For calibrated Type S pitot tubes, the A side coefficient 
shall be used when the A side of the tube faces the flow, and the B side 
coefficient shall be used when the B side faces the flow. Alternatively, 
the arithmetic average of the A and B side coefficient values may be 
used, irrespective of which side faces the flow.
    10.1.5.1.2 When a probe assembly is used to sample a small duct, 
30.5 to 91.4 cm (12 to 36 in.) in diameter, the probe sheath sometimes 
blocks a significant part of the duct cross-section, causing a reduction 
in the effective value of C<INF>p(s)</INF>. Consult Reference 9 (see 
Section 17.0) for details. Conventional pitot-sampling probe assemblies 
are not recommended for use in ducts having inside diameters smaller 
than 30.5 cm (12 in.) (see Reference 16 in Section 17.0).
    10.1.5.2 Recalibration.
    10.1.5.2.1 Isolated Pitot Tubes. After each field use, the pitot 
tube shall be carefully reexamined in top, side, and end views. If the 
pitot face openings are still aligned within the specifications 
illustrated in Figure 2-2 and Figure 2-3, it can be assumed that the 
baseline coefficient of the pitot tube has not changed. If, however, the 
tube has been damaged to the extent that it no longer meets the 
specifications of Figure 2-2 and Figure 2-3, the damage shall either be 
repaired to restore proper alignment of the face openings, or the tube 
shall be discarded.
    10.1.5.2.2 Pitot Tube Assemblies. After each field use, check the 
face opening alignment of the pitot tube, as in Section 10.1.5.2.1. 
Also, remeasure the intercomponent spacings of the assembly. If the 
intercomponent spacings have not changed and the face opening alignment 
is acceptable, it can be assumed that the coefficient of the assembly 
has not changed. If the face opening alignment is no longer within the 
specifications of Figure 2-2 and Figure 2-3, either repair the damage or 
replace the pitot tube (calibrating the new assembly, if necessary). If 
the intercomponent spacings have changed, restore the original spacings, 
or recalibrate the assembly.
    10.2 Standard Pitot Tube (if applicable). If a standard pitot tube 
is used for the velocity traverse, the tube shall be constructed 
according to the criteria of Section 6.7 and shall be assigned a 
baseline coefficient value of 0.99. If the standard pitot tube is used 
as part of an assembly, the tube shall be in an interference-free 
arrangement (subject to the approval of the Administrator).
    10.3 Temperature Sensors.
    10.3.1 After each field use, calibrate dial thermometers, liquid-
filled bulb thermometers, thermocouple-potentiometer systems, and other 
sensors at a temperature within 10 percent of the average absolute stack 
temperature. For temperatures up to 405 [deg]C (761 [deg]F), use an ASTM 
mercury-in-glass reference thermometer, or equivalent, as a reference. 
Alternatively, either a reference thermocouple and potentiometer 
(calibrated against NIST standards) or thermometric fixed points (e.g., 
ice bath and boiling water, corrected for barometric pressure) may be 
used. For temperatures above 405 [deg]C (761 [deg]F), use a reference 
thermocouple-potentiometer system calibrated against NIST standards or 
an alternative reference, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    10.3.2 The temperature data recorded in the field shall be 
considered valid. If, during calibration, the absolute temperature 
measured with the sensor being calibrated and the reference sensor agree 
within 1.5 percent, the temperature data taken in the field shall be 
considered valid. Otherwise, the pollutant emission test shall either be 
considered invalid or adjustments (if appropriate) of the test results 
shall be made, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    10.4 Barometer. Calibrate the barometer used against a mercury 
barometer.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.
A=Cross-sectional area of stack, m\2\ (ft\2\).
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream (from Method 4 (reference 
method) or Method 5), proportion by volume.

[[Page 21]]

C<INF>p</INF>=Pitot tube coefficient, dimensionless.
C<INF>p(s)</INF>=Type S pitot tube coefficient, dimensionless.
C<INF>p(std)</INF>=Standard pitot tube coefficient; use 0.99 if the 
coefficient is unknown and the tube is designed according to the 
criteria of Sections 6.7.1 to 6.7.5 of this method.
D<INF>e</INF>=Equivalent diameter.
K=0.127 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (metric units). 0.005 in. H<INF>2</INF>O 
(English units).
K<INF>p</INF>=Velocity equation constant.
L=Length.
M<INF>d</INF>=Molecular weight of stack gas, dry basis (see Section 
8.6), g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
M<INF>s</INF>=Molecular weight of stack gas, wet basis, g/g-mole (lb/lb-
mole).
n=Total number of traverse points.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at measurement site, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>g</INF>=Stack static pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute stack pressure (P<INF>bar</INF> + P<INF>g</INF>), 
mm Hg (in. Hg),
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Dry volumetric stack gas flow rate corrected to standard 
conditions, dscm/hr (dscf/hr).
T=Sensitivity factor for differential pressure gauges.
T<INF>s</INF>=Stack temperature, [deg]C ( [deg]F).
T<INF>s(abs)</INF>=Absolute stack temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R).
    =273 + T<INF>s</INF> for metric units,
    =460 + T<INF>s</INF> for English units.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>s</INF>=Average stack gas velocity, m/sec (ft/sec).
W=Width.
[Delta]p=Velocity head of stack gas, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. 
H<INF>20</INF>).
[Delta]p<INF>i</INF>=Individual velocity head reading at traverse point 
``i'', mm (in.) H<INF>2</INF>O.
[Delta]p<INF>std</INF>=Velocity head measured by the standard pitot 
tube, cm (in.) H<INF>2</INF>O.
[Delta]p<INF>s</INF>=Velocity head measured by the Type S pitot tube, cm 
(in.) H<INF>2</INF>O.
3600=Conversion Factor, sec/hr.
18.0=Molecular weight of water, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).

    12.2 Calculate T as follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.045
    
    12.3 Calculate D<INF>e</INF> as follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.046
    
    12.4 Calibration of Type S Pitot Tube.
    12.4.1 For each of the six pairs of [Delta]p readings (i.e., three 
from side A and three from side B) obtained in Section 10.1.3, calculate 
the value of the Type S pitot tube coefficient according to Equation 2-
3:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.047

    12.4.2 Calculate C<INF>p(A)</INF>, the mean A-side coefficient, and 
C<INF>p(B)</INF>, the mean B-side coefficient. Calculate the difference 
between these two average values.
    12.4.3 Calculate the deviation of each of the three A-side values of 
C<INF>p(s)</INF> from C<INF>p(A)</INF>, and the deviation of each of the 
three B-side values of C<INF>p(s)</INF> from C<INF>p(B)</INF>, using 
Equation 2-4:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.048

    12.4.4 Calculate [sigma] the average deviation from the mean, for 
both the A and B sides of the pitot tube. Use Equation 2-5:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.049

    12.5 Molecular Weight of Stack Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.050
    
    12.6 Average Stack Gas Velocity.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.051
    

[[Page 22]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.053

    12.7 Average Stack Gas Dry Volumetric Flow Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.054
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Mark, L.S. Mechanical Engineers' Handbook. New York. McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., Inc. 1951.
    2. Perry, J.H., ed. Chemical Engineers' Handbook. New York. McGraw-
Hill Book Co., Inc. 1960.
    3. Shigehara, R.T., W.F. Todd, and W.S. Smith. Significance of 
Errors in Stack Sampling Measurements. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Research Triangle Park, N.C. (Presented at the Annual Meeting of 
the Air Pollution Control Association, St. Louis, MO., June 14-19, 
1970).
    4. Standard Method for Sampling Stacks for Particulate Matter. In: 
1971 Book of ASTM Standards, Part 23. Philadelphia, PA. 1971. ASTM 
Designation D 2928-71.
    5. Vennard, J.K. Elementary Fluid Mechanics. New York. John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc. 1947.
    6. Fluid Meters--Their Theory and Application. American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, New York, N.Y. 1959.
    7. ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals. 1972. p. 208.
    8. Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Part 26. 1974. p. 648.
    9. Vollaro, R.F. Guidelines for Type S Pitot Tube Calibration. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, N.C. (Presented 
at 1st Annual Meeting, Source Evaluation Society, Dayton, OH, September 
18, 1975.)
    10. Vollaro, R.F. A Type S Pitot Tube Calibration Study. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research 
Triangle Park, N.C. July 1974.
    11. Vollaro, R.F. The Effects of Impact Opening Misalignment on the 
Value of the Type S Pitot Tube Coefficient. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, 
NC. October 1976.
    12. Vollaro, R.F. Establishment of a Baseline Coefficient Value for 
Properly Constructed Type S Pitot Tubes. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, NC. 
November 1976.
    13. Vollaro, R.F. An Evaluation of Single-Velocity Calibration 
Technique as a Means of Determining Type S Pitot Tube Coefficients. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research 
Triangle Park, NC. August 1975.
    14. Vollaro, R.F. The Use of Type S Pitot Tubes for the Measurement 
of Low Velocities. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Emission 
Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, NC. November 1976.
    15. Smith, Marvin L. Velocity Calibration of EPA Type Source 
Sampling Probe. United Technologies Corporation, Pratt and Whitney 
Aircraft Division, East Hartford, CT. 1975.
    16. Vollaro, R.F. Recommended Procedure for Sample Traverses in 
Ducts Smaller than 12 Inches in Diameter. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, NC. 
November 1976.
    17. Ower, E. and R.C. Pankhurst. The Measurement of Air Flow, 4th 
Ed. London, Pergamon Press. 1966.

[[Page 23]]

    18. Vollaro, R.F. A Survey of Commercially Available Instrumentation 
for the Measurement of Low-Range Gas Velocities. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, 
NC. November 1976. (Unpublished Paper).
    19. Gnyp, A.W., et al. An Experimental Investigation of the Effect 
of Pitot Tube-Sampling Probe Configurations on the Magnitude of the S 
Type Pitot Tube Coefficient for Commercially Available Source Sampling 
Probes. Prepared by the University of Windsor for the Ministry of the 
Environment, Toronto, Canada. February 1975.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.055


[[Page 24]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.056


[[Page 25]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.057


[[Page 26]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.059

PLANT___________________________________________________________________
DATE____________________________________________________________________

[[Page 27]]

RUN NO._________________________________________________________________
STACK DIA. OR DIMENSIONS, m (in.)_______________________________________
BAROMETRIC PRESS., mm Hg (in. Hg)_______________________________________
CROSS SECTIONAL AREA, m\2\ (ft\2\)______________________________________
OPERATORS_______________________________________________________________
PITOT TUBE I.D. NO._____________________________________________________
AVG. COEFFICIENT, Cp =__________________________________________________
LAST DATE CALIBRATED____________________________________________________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    SCHEMATIC OF STACK CROSS SECTION

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Stack  temperature
         Traverse  Pt. No.             Vel. Hd.,  [Delta]p  -----------------------------------------------  Pg  mm Hg  (in. Hg)      ([Delta]p)\1/2\
                                          mm (in.)  H2O       Ts,  [deg]C ( [deg]F)   Ts,  [deg]K ([deg]R)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
                                                                                          Average(1)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   Figure 2-6. Velocity Traverse Data

[[Page 28]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.061

PITOT TUBE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER:_______________________________________
DATE:___________________________________________________________________
CALIBRATED BY:__________________________________________________________

                                             ``A'' Side Calibration
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   [Delta]Pstd  cm   [Delta]P(s)  cm H2O                      Deviation  Cp(s)--
            Run No.                 H2O  (in H2O)          (in H2O)              Cp(s)               Cp(A)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
--------------------------------
2
--------------------------------
3
--------------------------------

[[Page 29]]

 
                                                     Cp, avg
                                                     (SIDE A)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                             ``B'' Side Calibration
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   [Delta]Pstd  cm   [Delta]P(s)  cm H2O                      Deviation  Cp(s)--
            Run No.                 H2O  (in H2O)          (in H2O)              Cp(s)               Cp(B)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
--------------------------------
2
--------------------------------
3
--------------------------------
                                                     Cp, avg
                                                     (SIDE B)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                     [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.062
                                                     
[Cp, avg (side A)--Cp, avg (side B)]*
    *Must be less than or equal to 0.01

                 Figure 2-9. Pitot Tube Calibration Data

[[Page 30]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.063

  Method 2A--Direct Measurement of Gas Volume Through Pipes and Small 
                                  Ducts

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of gas flow 
rates in pipes and small ducts, either in-line or at exhaust positions, 
within the temperature range of 0 to 50 [deg]C (32 to 122 [deg]F).
    1.2 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas volume meter is used to measure gas volume directly. 
Temperature and pressure measurements are made to allow correction of 
the volume to standard conditions.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety

[[Page 31]]

and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory 
limitations prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Specifications for the apparatus are given below. Any other 
apparatus that has been demonstrated (subject to approval of the 
Administrator) to be capable of meeting the specifications will be 
considered acceptable.
    6.1 Gas Volume Meter. A positive displacement meter, turbine meter, 
or other direct measuring device capable of measuring volume to within 2 
percent. The meter shall be equipped with a temperature sensor (accurate 
to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the minimum absolute 
temperature) and a pressure gauge (accurate to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm Hg). The manufacturer's recommended capacity of 
the meter shall be sufficient for the expected maximum and minimum flow 
rates for the sampling conditions. Temperature, pressure, corrosive 
characteristics, and pipe size are factors necessary to consider in 
selecting a suitable gas meter.
    6.2 Barometer. A mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm 
Hg.

    Note: In many cases, the barometric reading may be obtained from a 
nearby National Weather Service station, in which case the station value 
(which is the absolute barometric pressure) shall be requested and an 
adjustment for elevation differences between the weather station and 
sampling point shall be applied at a rate of minus 2.5 mm (0.1 in.) Hg 
per 30 m (100 ft) elevation increase or vice versa for elevation 
decrease.

    6.3 Stopwatch. Capable of measurement to within 1 second.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Installation. As there are numerous types of pipes and small 
ducts that may be subject to volume measurement, it would be difficult 
to describe all possible installation schemes. In general, flange 
fittings should be used for all connections wherever possible. Gaskets 
or other seal materials should be used to assure leak-tight connections. 
The volume meter should be located so as to avoid severe vibrations and 
other factors that may affect the meter calibration.
    8.2 Leak Test.
    8.2.1 A volume meter installed at a location under positive pressure 
may be leak-checked at the meter connections by using a liquid leak 
detector solution containing a surfactant. Apply a small amount of the 
solution to the connections. If a leak exists, bubbles will form, and 
the leak must be corrected.
    8.2.2 A volume meter installed at a location under negative pressure 
is very difficult to test for leaks without blocking flow at the inlet 
of the line and watching for meter movement. If this procedure is not 
possible, visually check all connections to assure leak-tight seals.
    8.3 Volume Measurement.
    8.3.1 For sources with continuous, steady emission flow rates, 
record the initial meter volume reading, meter temperature(s), meter 
pressure, and start the stopwatch. Throughout the test period, record 
the meter temperatures and pressures so that average values can be 
determined. At the end of the test, stop the timer, and record the 
elapsed time, the final volume reading, meter temperature, and pressure. 
Record the barometric pressure at the beginning and end of the test run. 
Record the data on a table similar to that shown in Figure 2A-1.
    8.3.2 For sources with noncontinuous, non-steady emission flow 
rates, use the procedure in Section 8.3.1 with the addition of the 
following: Record all the meter parameters and the start and stop times 
corresponding to each process cyclical or noncontinuous event.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1-10.4.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment          measurement of stack
                                 calibration.       gas flow rate,
                                                    sample volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Volume Meter.
    10.1.1 The volume meter is calibrated against a standard reference 
meter prior to its initial use in the field. The reference meter is a 
spirometer or liquid displacement meter with a capacity consistent with 
that of the test meter.
    10.1.2 Alternatively, a calibrated, standard pitot may be used as 
the reference meter in conjunction with a wind tunnel assembly. Attach 
the test meter to the wind tunnel so that the total flow passes through 
the test meter. For each calibration run, conduct a 4-point traverse 
along one stack diameter at a position at least eight diameters of 
straight tunnel downstream and two diameters upstream of any bend, 
inlet, or air mover. Determine the traverse point locations as specified 
in Method 1. Calculate the reference volume using the velocity values 
following the procedure in Method 2, the wind tunnel cross-sectional 
area, and the run time.

[[Page 32]]

    10.1.3 Set up the test meter in a configuration similar to that used 
in the field installation (i.e., in relation to the flow moving device). 
Connect the temperature sensor and pressure gauge as they are to be used 
in the field. Connect the reference meter at the inlet of the flow line, 
if appropriate for the meter, and begin gas flow through the system to 
condition the meters. During this conditioning operation, check the 
system for leaks.
    10.1.4 The calibration shall be performed during at least three 
different flow rates. The calibration flow rates shall be about 0.3, 
0.6, and 0.9 times the rated maximum flow rate of the test meter.
    10.1.5 For each calibration run, the data to be collected include: 
reference meter initial and final volume readings, the test meter 
initial and final volume reading, meter average temperature and 
pressure, barometric pressure, and run time. Repeat the runs at each 
flow rate at least three times.
    10.1.6 Calculate the test meter calibration coefficient as indicated 
in Section 12.2.
    10.1.7 Compare the three Y<INF>m</INF> values at each of the flow 
rates tested and determine the maximum and minimum values. The 
difference between the maximum and minimum values at each flow rate 
should be no greater than 0.030. Extra runs may be required to complete 
this requirement. If this specification cannot be met in six successive 
runs, the test meter is not suitable for use. In addition, the meter 
coefficients should be between 0.95 and 1.05. If these specifications 
are met at all the flow rates, average all the Y<INF>m</INF> values from 
runs meeting the specifications to obtain an average meter calibration 
coefficient, Y<INF>m</INF>.
    10.1.8 The procedure above shall be performed at least once for each 
volume meter. Thereafter, an abbreviated calibration check shall be 
completed following each field test. The calibration of the volume meter 
shall be checked with the meter pressure set at the average value 
encountered during the field test. Three calibration checks (runs) shall 
be performed using this average flow rate value. Calculate the average 
value of the calibration factor. If the calibration has changed by more 
than 5 percent, recalibrate the meter over the full range of flow as 
described above.

    Note: If the volume meter calibration coefficient values obtained 
before and after a test series differ by more than 5 percent, the test 
series shall either be voided, or calculations for the test series shall 
be performed using whichever meter coefficient value (i.e., before or 
after) gives the greater value of pollutant emission rate.

    10.2 Temperature Sensor. After each test series, check the 
temperature sensor at ambient temperature. Use an American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) mercury-in-glass reference thermometer, or 
equivalent, as a reference. If the sensor being checked agrees within 2 
percent (absolute temperature) of the reference, the temperature data 
collected in the field shall be considered valid. Otherwise, the test 
data shall be considered invalid or adjustments of the results shall be 
made, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    10.3 Barometer. Calibrate the barometer used against a mercury 
barometer prior to the field test.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra decimal figure 
beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.

    12.1 Nomenclature.

f=Final reading.
i=Initial reading.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg.
P<INF>g</INF>=Average static pressure in volume meter, mm Hg.
Q<INF>s</INF>=Gas flow rate, m<SUP>3</SUP>/min, standard conditions.
s=Standard conditions, 20 [deg]C and 760 mm Hg.
T<INF>r</INF>=Reference meter average temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>m</INF>=Test meter average temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R).
V<INF>r</INF>=Reference meter volume reading, m<SUP>3</SUP>.
V<INF>m</INF>=Test meter volume reading, m<SUP>3</SUP>.
Y<INF>m</INF>=Test meter calibration coefficient, dimensionless.
[thetas]=Elapsed test period time, min.
    12.2 Test Meter Calibration Coefficient.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.064
    
    12.3 Volume.

[[Page 33]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.065

    12.4 Gas Flow Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.066
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Rom, Jerome J. Maintenance, Calibration, and Operation of 
Isokinetic Source Sampling Equipment. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication No. APTD-0576. March 
1972.
    2. Wortman, Martin, R. Vollaro, and P.R. Westlin. Dry Gas Volume 
Meter Calibrations. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. Vol. 2, No. 2. 
May 1977.
    3. Westlin, P.R., and R.T. Shigehara. Procedure for Calibrating and 
Using Dry Gas Volume Meters as Calibration Standards. Source Evaluation 
Society Newsletter. Vol. 3, No. 1. February 1978.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

 Method 2B--Determination of Exhaust Gas Volume Flow Rate From Gasoline 
                           Vapor Incinerators

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of at 
least the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 
2A, Method 10, Method 25A, Method 25B.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of exhaust 
volume flow rate from incinerators that process gasoline vapors 
consisting primarily of alkanes, alkenes, and/or arenes (aromatic 
hydrocarbons). It is assumed that the amount of auxiliary fuel is 
negligible.
    1.2 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Organic carbon concentration and volume flow rate are measured 
at the incinerator inlet using either Method 25A or Method 25B and 
Method 2A, respectively. Organic carbon, carbon dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>), and carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations are measured 
at the outlet using either Method 25A or Method 25B and Method 10, 
respectively. The ratio of total carbon at the incinerator inlet and 
outlet is multiplied by the inlet volume to determine the exhaust volume 
flow rate.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as Section 3.0 of Method 10 and Method 25A.

                            4.0 Interferences

    Same as Section 4.0 of Method 10.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
test method to establish appropriate safety and health practices and 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of Method 2A, Method 10, and Method 25A and/or 
Method 25B as applicable, with the addition of the following:
    6.1 This analyzer must meet the specifications set forth in Section 
6.1.2 of Method 10, except that the span shall be 15 percent 
CO<INF>2</INF> by volume.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of Method 10 and Method 25A, with the following 
addition and exceptions:
    7.1 Carbon Dioxide Analyzer Calibration. CO<INF>2</INF> gases 
meeting the specifications set forth in Section 7 of Method 6C are 
required.
    7.2 Hydrocarbon Analyzer Calibration. Methane shall not be used as a 
calibration gas when performing this method.
    7.3 Fuel Gas. If Method 25B is used to measure the organic carbon 
concentrations at both the inlet and exhaust, no fuel gas is required.

[[Page 34]]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Pre-test Procedures. Perform all pre-test procedures (e.g., 
system performance checks, leak checks) necessary to determine gas 
volume flow rate and organic carbon concentration in the vapor line to 
the incinerator inlet and to determine organic carbon, carbon monoxide, 
and carbon dioxide concentrations at the incinerator exhaust, as 
outlined in Method 2A, Method 10, and Method 25A and/or Method 25B as 
applicable.
    8.2 Sampling. At the beginning of the test period, record the 
initial parameters for the inlet volume meter according to the 
procedures in Method 2A and mark all of the recorder strip charts to 
indicate the start of the test. Conduct sampling and analysis as 
outlined in Method 2A, Method 10, and Method 25A and/or Method 25B as 
applicable. Continue recording inlet organic and exhaust CO<INF>2</INF>, 
CO, and organic concentrations throughout the test. During periods of 
process interruption and halting of gas flow, stop the timer and mark 
the recorder strip charts so that data from this interruption are not 
included in the calculations. At the end of the test period, record the 
final parameters for the inlet volume meter and mark the end on all of 
the recorder strip charts.
    8.3 Post-test Procedures. Perform all post-test procedures (e.g., 
drift tests, leak checks), as outlined in Method 2A, Method 10, and 
Method 25A and/or Method 25B as applicable.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    Same as Section 9.0 of Method 2A, Method 10, and Method 25A.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Section 10.0 of Method 2A, Method 10, and Method 25A.

    Note: If a manifold system is used for the exhaust analyzers, all 
the analyzers and sample pumps must be operating when the analyzer 
calibrations are performed.

    10.1 If an analyzer output does not meet the specifications of the 
method, invalidate the test data for the period. Alternatively, 
calculate the exhaust volume results using initial calibration data and 
using final calibration data and report both resulting volumes. Then, 
for emissions calculations, use the volume measurement resulting in the 
greatest emission rate or concentration.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out the calculations, retaining at least one extra decimal 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after the 
final calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

Co<INF>e</INF>=Mean carbon monoxide concentration in system exhaust, 
ppm.
(CO<INF>2</INF>)<INF>2</INF>=Ambient carbon dioxide concentration, ppm 
(if not measured during the test period, may be assumed to equal 300 
ppm).
(CO<INF>2</INF>)<INF>e</INF>=Mean carbon dioxide concentration in system 
exhaust, ppm.
HC<INF>e</INF>=Mean organic concentration in system exhaust as defined 
by the calibration gas, ppm.
Hc<INF>i</INF>=Mean organic concentration in system inlet as defined by 
the calibration gas, ppm.
K<INF>e</INF>=Hydrocarbon calibration gas factor for the exhaust 
hydrocarbon analyzer, unitless [equal to the number of carbon atoms per 
molecule of the gas used to calibrate the analyzer (2 for ethane, 3 for 
propane, etc.)].
K<INF>i</INF>=Hydrocarbon calibration gas factor for the inlet 
hydrocarbon analyzer, unitless.
V<INF>es</INF>=Exhaust gas volume, m\3\.
V<INF>is</INF>=Inlet gas volume, m\3\.
Q<INF>es</INF>=Exhaust gas volume flow rate, m\3\/min.
Q<INF>is</INF>=Inlet gas volume flow rate, m\3\/min.
[thetas]=Sample run time, min.
s=Standard conditions: 20 [deg]C, 760 mm Hg.

    12.2 Concentrations. Determine mean concentrations of inlet 
organics, outlet CO<INF>2</INF>, outlet CO, and outlet organics 
according to the procedures in the respective methods and the analyzers' 
calibration curves, and for the time intervals specified in the 
applicable regulations.
    12.3 Exhaust Gas Volume. Calculate the exhaust gas volume as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.067

    12.4 Exhaust Gas Volume Flow Rate. Calculate the exhaust gas volume 
flow rate as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.210


[[Page 35]]



                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Section 16.0 of Method 2A, Method 10, and Method 25A.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 2C--Determination of Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate in 
               Small Stacks or Ducts (Standard Pitot Tube)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of average 
velocity and volumetric flow rate of gas streams in small stacks or 
ducts. Limits on the applicability of this method are identical to those 
set forth in Method 2, Section 1.0, except that this method is limited 
to stationary source stacks or ducts less than about 0.30 meter (12 in.) 
in diameter, or 0.071 m\2\ (113 in.\2\) in cross-sectional area, but 
equal to or greater than about 0.10 meter (4 in.) in diameter, or 0.0081 
m\2\ (12.57 in.\2\) in cross-sectional area.
    1.2 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 The average gas velocity in a stack or duct is determined from 
the gas density and from measurement of velocity heads with a standard 
pitot tube.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
test method to establish appropriate safety and health practices and 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Method 2, Section 6.0, with the exception of the following:
    6.1 Standard Pitot Tube (instead of Type S). A standard pitot tube 
which meets the specifications of Section 6.7 of Method 2. Use a 
coefficient of 0.99 unless it is calibrated against another standard 
pitot tube with a NIST-traceable coefficient (see Section 10.2 of Method 
2).
    6.2 Alternative Pitot Tube. A modified hemispherical-nosed pitot 
tube (see Figure 2C-1), which features a shortened stem and enlarged 
impact and static pressure holes. Use a coefficient of 0.99 unless it is 
calibrated as mentioned in Section 6.1 above. This pitot tube is useful 
in particulate liquid droplet-laden gas streams when a ``back purge'' is 
ineffective.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Follow the general procedures in Section 8.0 of Method 2, except 
conduct the measurements at the traverse points specified in Method 1A. 
The static and impact pressure holes of standard pitot tubes are 
susceptible to plugging in particulate-laden gas streams. Therefore, 
adequate proof that the openings of the pitot tube have not plugged 
during the traverse period must be furnished; this can be done by taking 
the velocity head ([Delta]p) heading at the final traverse point, 
cleaning out the impact and static holes of the standard pitot tube by 
``back-purging'' with pressurized air, and then taking another [Delta]p 
reading. If the [Delta]p readings made before and after the air purge 
are the same (within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent) the traverse is 
acceptable. Otherwise, reject the run. Note that if the [Delta]p at the 
final traverse point is unsuitably low, another point may be selected. 
If ``back purging'' at regular intervals is part of the procedure, then 
take comparative [Delta]p readings, as above, for the last two back 
purges at which suitably high [Delta]p readings are observed.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.0..........................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment          measurement of stack
                                 calibration.       gas velocity head.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 36]]

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 2, Sections 10.2 through 10.4.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Same as Method 2, Section 12.0.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 2, Section 16.0.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.068

Method 2D--Measurement of Gas Volume Flow Rates in Small Pipes and Ducts

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, and Method 2A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of the 
volumetric flow rates of gas streams in small pipes and ducts. It can be 
applied to intermittent or variable gas flows only with particular 
caution.
    1.2 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 All the gas flow in the pipe or duct is directed through a 
rotameter, orifice plate or similar device to measure flow rate or 
pressure drop. The device has been previously calibrated in a manner 
that insures its proper calibration for the gas being measured. Absolute 
temperature and pressure measurements are made to allow correction of 
volumetric flow rates to standard conditions.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
test method to establish appropriate safety and health practices and 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.

[[Page 37]]

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Specifications for the apparatus are given below. Any other 
apparatus that has been demonstrated (subject to approval of the 
Administrator) to be capable of meeting the specifications will be 
considered acceptable.
    6.1 Gas Metering Rate or Flow Element Device. A rotameter, orifice 
plate, or other volume rate or pressure drop measuring device capable of 
measuring the stack flow rate to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent. 
The metering device shall be equipped with a temperature gauge accurate 
to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the minimum absolute stack 
temperature and a pressure gauge (accurate to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 mm Hg). The capacity of the metering device shall be 
sufficient for the expected maximum and minimum flow rates at the stack 
gas conditions. The magnitude and variability of stack gas flow rate, 
molecular weight, temperature, pressure, dewpoint, and corrosive 
characteristics, and pipe or duct size are factors to consider in 
choosing a suitable metering device.
    6.2 Barometer. Same as Method 2, Section 6.5.
    6.3 Stopwatch. Capable of measurement to within 1 second.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Installation and Leak Check. Same as Method 2A, Sections 8.1 and 
8.2, respectively.
    8.2 Volume Rate Measurement.
    8.2.1 Continuous, Steady Flow. At least once an hour, record the 
metering device flow rate or pressure drop reading, and the metering 
device temperature and pressure. Make a minimum of 12 equally spaced 
readings of each parameter during the test period. Record the barometric 
pressure at the beginning and end of the test period. Record the data on 
a table similar to that shown in Figure 2D-1.
    8.2.2 Noncontinuous and Nonsteady Flow. Use volume rate devices with 
particular caution. Calibration will be affected by variation in stack 
gas temperature, pressure and molecular weight. Use the procedure in 
Section 8.2.1 with the addition of the following: Record all the 
metering device parameters on a time interval frequency sufficient to 
adequately profile each process cyclical or noncontinuous event. A 
multichannel continuous recorder may be used.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.0..........................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment          measurement of stack
                                 calibration.       gas flow rate or
                                                    sample volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 2A, Section 10.0, with the following exception:
    10.1 Gas Metering Device. Same as Method 2A, Section 10.1, except 
calibrate the metering device with the principle stack gas to be 
measured (examples: air, nitrogen) against a standard reference meter. A 
calibrated dry gas meter is an acceptable reference meter. Ideally, 
calibrate the metering device in the field with the actual gas to be 
metered. For metering devices that have a volume rate readout, calculate 
the test metering device calibration coefficient, Y<INF>m</INF>, for 
each run shown in Equation 2D-2 Section 12.3.
    10.2 For metering devices that do not have a volume rate readout, 
refer to the manufacturer's instructions to calculate the V<INF>m2</INF> 
corresponding to each V<INF>r</INF>.
    10.3 Temperature Gauge. Use the procedure and specifications in 
Method 2A, Section 10.2. Perform the calibration at a temperature that 
approximates field test conditions.
    10.4 Barometer. Calibrate the barometer to be used in the field test 
with a mercury barometer prior to the field test.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedure.

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>m</INF>=Test meter average static pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
Q<INF>r</INF>=Reference meter volume flow rate reading, m\3\/min (ft\3\/
min).
Q<INF>m</INF>=Test meter volume flow rate reading, m\3\/min (ft\3\/min).
T<INF>r</INF>=Absolute reference meter average temperature, [deg]K 
([deg]R).
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute test meter average temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R).
K<INF>l</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,=17.65 [deg]R/in. Hg 
for English units.
    12.2 Gas Flow Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.069
    
    12.3 Test Meter Device Calibration Coefficient. Calculation for 
testing metering device calibration coefficient, Y<INF>m</INF>.

[[Page 38]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.070

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Spink, L.K. Principles and Practice of Flowmeter Engineering. The 
Foxboro Company. Foxboro, MA. 1967.
    2. Benedict, R.P. Fundamentals of Temperature, Pressure, and Flow 
Measurements. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York, NY. 1969.
    3. Orifice Metering of Natural Gas. American Gas Association. 
Arlington, VA. Report No. 3. March 1978. 88 pp.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

Plant___________________________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Run No._________________________________________________________________
Sample location_________________________________________________________
Barometric pressure (mm Hg):
Start___________________________________________________________________
Finish__________________________________________________________________
Operators_______________________________________________________________
Metering device No._____________________________________________________
Calibration coefficient_________________________________________________
Calibration gas_________________________________________________________
Date to recalibrate_____________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                        Temperature
              Time                Flow rate  reading    Static Pressure  ---------------------------------------
                                                       [mm Hg (in. Hg)]     [deg]C ( [deg]F)    [deg]K ([deg]R)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 
---------------------------------
 Average
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

             Figure 2D-1. Volume Flow Rate Measurement Data

      Method 2E--Determination of Landfill Gas Production Flow Rate

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of at 
least the following additional test methods: Methods 2 and 3C.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Applicability. This method applies to the measurement of 
landfill gas (LFG) production flow rate from municipal solid waste 
landfills and is used to calculate the flow rate of nonmethane organic 
compounds (NMOC) from landfills.
    1.2 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Extraction wells are installed either in a cluster of three or 
at five dispersed locations in the landfill. A blower is used to extract 
LFG from the landfill. LFG composition, landfill pressures, and orifice 
pressure differentials from the wells are measured and the landfill gas 
production flow rate is calculated.

[[Page 39]]

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Since this method is complex, only experienced personnel should 
perform the test. Landfill gas contains methane, therefore explosive 
mixtures may exist at or near the landfill. It is advisable to take 
appropriate safety precautions when testing landfills, such as 
refraining from smoking and installing explosion-proof equipment.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Well Drilling Rig. Capable of boring a 0.61 m (24 in.) diameter 
hole into the landfill to a minimum of 75 percent of the landfill depth. 
The depth of the well shall not extend to the bottom of the landfill or 
the liquid level.
    6.2 Gravel. No fines. Gravel diameter should be appreciably larger 
than perforations stated in Sections 6.10 and 8.2.
    6.3 Bentonite.
    6.4 Backfill Material. Clay, soil, and sandy loam have been found to 
be acceptable.
    6.5 Extraction Well Pipe. Minimum diameter of 3 in., constructed of 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC), high density polyethylene (HDPE), fiberglass, 
stainless steel, or other suitable nonporous material capable of 
transporting landfill gas.
    6.6 Above Ground Well Assembly. Valve capable of adjusting gas flow, 
such as a gate, ball, or butterfly valve; sampling ports at the well 
head and outlet; and a flow measuring device, such as an in-line orifice 
meter or pitot tube. A schematic of the aboveground well head assembly 
is shown in Figure 2E-1.
    6.7 Cap. Constructed of PVC or HDPE.
    6.8 Header Piping. Constructed of PVC or HDPE.
    6.9 Auger. Capable of boring a 0.15-to 0.23-m (6-to 9-in.) diameter 
hole to a depth equal to the top of the perforated section of the 
extraction well, for pressure probe installation.
    6.10 Pressure Probe. Constructed of PVC or stainless steel (316), 
0.025-m (1-in.). Schedule 40 pipe. Perforate the bottom two-thirds. A 
minimum requirement for perforations is slots or holes with an open area 
equivalent to four 0.006-m (\1/4\-in.) diameter holes spaced 90[deg] 
apart every 0.15 m (6 in.).
    6.11 Blower and Flare Assembly. Explosion-proof blower, capable of 
extracting LFG at a flow rate of 8.5 m <SUP>3</SUP>/min (300 ft 
<SUP>3</SUP>/min), a water knockout, and flare or incinerator.
    6.12 Standard Pitot Tube and Differential Pressure Gauge for Flow 
Rate Calibration with Standard Pitot. Same as Method 2, Sections 6.7 and 
6.8.
    6.13 Orifice Meter. Orifice plate, pressure tabs, and pressure 
measuring device to measure the LFG flow rate.
    6.14 Barometer. Same as Method 4, Section 6.1.5.
    6.15 Differential Pressure Gauge. Water-filled U-tube manometer or 
equivalent, capable of measuring within 0.02 mm Hg (0.01 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O), for measuring the pressure of the pressure probes.

               7.0 Reagents and Standards. Not Applicable

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Placement of Extraction Wells. The landfill owner or operator 
may install a single cluster of three extraction wells in a test area or 
space five equal-volume wells over the landfill. The cluster wells are 
recommended but may be used only if the composition, age of the refuse, 
and the landfill depth of the test area can be determined.
    8.1.1 Cluster Wells. Consult landfill site records for the age of 
the refuse, depth, and composition of various sections of the landfill. 
Select an area near the perimeter of the landfill with a depth equal to 
or greater than the average depth of the landfill and with the average 
age of the refuse between 2 and 10 years old. Avoid areas known to 
contain nondecomposable materials, such as concrete and asbestos. Locate 
the cluster wells as shown in Figure 2E-2.
    8.1.1.1 The age of the refuse in a test area will not be uniform, so 
calculate a weighted average age of the refuse as shown in Section 12.2.
    8.1.2 Equal Volume Wells. Divide the sections of the landfill that 
are at least 2 years old into five areas representing equal volumes. 
Locate an extraction well near the center of each area.
    8.2 Installation of Extraction Wells. Use a well drilling rig to dig 
a 0.6 m (24 in.) diameter hole in the landfill to a minimum of 75 
percent of the landfill depth, not to extend to the bottom of the 
landfill or the liquid level. Perforate the bottom two thirds of the 
extraction well pipe. A minimum requirement for perforations is holes or 
slots with an open area equivalent to 0.01-m (0.5-in.) diameter holes 
spaced 90[deg] apart every 0.1 to 0.2 m (4 to 8 in.). Place the 
extraction well in the center of the hole and backfill with gravel to a 
level 0.30 m (1 ft) above the perforated section. Add a layer of 
backfill material 1.2 m (4 ft) thick. Add a layer of bentonite 0.9 m (3 
ft) thick, and backfill the remainder of the hole with cover material or 
material equal in permeability to the existing cover material. The 
specifications for extraction well installation are shown in Figure 2E-
3.
    8.3 Pressure Probes. Shallow pressure probes are used in the check 
for infiltration of air into the landfill, and deep pressure probes are 
use to determine the radius of influence. Locate pressure probes along 
three radial arms approximately 120[deg] apart at distances of 3, 15, 
30, and 45 m (10, 50, 100, and

[[Page 40]]

150 ft) from the extraction well. The tester has the option of locating 
additional pressure probes at distances every 15 m (50 feet) beyond 45 m 
(150 ft). Example placements of probes are shown in Figure 2E-4. The 15-
, 30-, and 45-m, (50-, 100-, and 150-ft) probes from each well, and any 
additional probes located along the three radial arms (deep probes), 
shall extend to a depth equal to the top of the perforated section of 
the extraction wells. All other probes (shallow probes) shall extend to 
a depth equal to half the depth of the deep probes.
    8.3.1 Use an auger to dig a hole, 0.15- to 0.23-m (6-to 9-in.) in 
diameter, for each pressure probe. Perforate the bottom two thirds of 
the pressure probe. A minimum requirement for perforations is holes or 
slots with an open area equivalent to four 0.006-m (0.25-in.) diameter 
holes spaced 90[deg] apart every 0.15 m (6 in.). Place the pressure 
probe in the center of the hole and backfill with gravel to a level 0.30 
m (1 ft) above the perforated section. Add a layer of backfill material 
at least 1.2 m (4 ft) thick. Add a layer of bentonite at least 0.3 m (1 
ft) thick, and backfill the remainder of the hole with cover material or 
material equal in permeability to the existing cover material. The 
specifications for pressure probe installation are shown in Figure 2E-5.
    8.4 LFG Flow Rate Measurement. Place the flow measurement device, 
such as an orifice meter, as shown in Figure 2E-1. Attach the wells to 
the blower and flare assembly. The individual wells may be ducted to a 
common header so that a single blower, flare assembly, and flow meter 
may be used. Use the procedures in Section 10.1 to calibrate the flow 
meter.
    8.5 Leak-Check. A leak-check of the above ground system is required 
for accurate flow rate measurements and for safety. Sample LFG at the 
well head sample port and at the outlet sample port. Use Method 3C to 
determine nitrogen (N<INF>2</INF>) concentrations. Determine the 
difference between the well head and outlet N<INF>2</INF> concentrations 
using the formula in Section 12.3. The system passes the leak-check if 
the difference is less than 10,000 ppmv.
    8.6 Static Testing. Close the control valves on the well heads 
during static testing. Measure the gauge pressure (P<INF>g</INF>) at 
each deep pressure probe and the barometric pressure (P<INF>bar</INF>) 
every 8 hours (hr) for 3 days. Convert the gauge pressure of each deep 
pressure probe to absolute pressure using the equation in Section 12.4. 
Record as P<INF>i</INF> (initial absolute pressure).
    8.6.1 For each probe, average all of the 8-hr deep pressure probe 
readings (P<INF>i</INF>) and record as P<INF>ia</INF> (average absolute 
pressure). P<INF>ia</INF> is used in Section 8.7.5 to determine the 
maximum radius of influence.
    8.6.2 Measure the static flow rate of each well once during static 
testing.
    8.7 Short-Term Testing. The purpose of short-term testing is to 
determine the maximum vacuum that can be applied to the wells without 
infiltration of ambient air into the landfill. The short-term testing is 
performed on one well at a time. Burn all LFG with a flare or 
incinerator.
    8.7.1 Use the blower to extract LFG from a single well at a rate at 
least twice the static flow rate of the respective well measured in 
Section 8.6.2. If using a single blower and flare assembly and a common 
header system, close the control valve on the wells not being measured. 
Allow 24 hr for the system to stabilize at this flow rate.
    8.7.2 Test for infiltration of air into the landfill by measuring 
the gauge pressures of the shallow pressure probes and using Method 3C 
to determine the LFG N<INF>2</INF> concentration. If the LFG 
N<INF>2</INF> concentration is less than 5 percent and all of the 
shallow probes have a positive gauge pressure, increase the blower 
vacuum by 3.7 mm Hg (2 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), wait 24 hr, and repeat the 
tests for infiltration. Continue the above steps of increasing blower 
vacuum by 3.7 mm Hg (2 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), waiting 24 hr, and testing 
for infiltration until the concentration of N<INF>2</INF> exceeds 5 
percent or any of the shallow probes have a negative gauge pressure. 
When this occurs,reduce the blower vacuum to the maximum setting at 
which the N<INF>2</INF> concentration was less than 5 percent and the 
gauge pressures of the shallow probes are positive.
    8.7.3 At this blower vacuum, measure atmospheric pressure 
(P<INF>bar</INF>) every 8 hr for 24 hr, and record the LFG flow rate 
(Q<INF>s</INF>) and the probe gauge pressures (P<INF>f</INF>) for all of 
the probes. Convert the gauge pressures of the deep probes to absolute 
pressures for each 8-hr reading at Q<INF>s</INF> as shown in Section 
12.4.
    8.7.4 For each probe, average the 8-hr deep pressure probe absolute 
pressure readings and record as P<INF>fa</INF> (the final average 
absolute pressure).
    8.7.5 For each probe, compare the initial average pressure 
(P<INF>ia</INF>) from Section 8.6.1 to the final average pressure 
(P<INF>fa</INF>). Determine the furthermost point from the well head 
along each radial arm where P<INF>fa</INF> <= P<INF>ia</INF>. This 
distance is the maximum radius of influence (R<INF>m</INF>), which is 
the distance from the well affected by the vacuum. Average these values 
to determine the average maximum radius of influence (R<INF>ma</INF>).
    8.7.6 Calculate the depth (D<INF>st</INF>) affected by the 
extraction well during the short term test as shown in Section 12.6. If 
the computed value of D<INF>st</INF> exceeds the depth of the landfill, 
set D<INF>st</INF> equal to the landfill depth.
    8.7.7 Calculate the void volume (V) for the extraction well as shown 
in Section 12.7.
    8.7.8 Repeat the procedures in Section 8.7 for each well.
    8.8 Calculate the total void volume of the test wells 
(V<INF>v</INF>) by summing the void volumes (V) of each well.

[[Page 41]]

    8.9 Long-Term Testing. The purpose of long-term testing is to 
extract two void volumes of LFG from the extraction wells. Use the 
blower to extract LFG from the wells. If a single Blower and flare 
assembly and common header system are used, open all control valves and 
set the blower vacuum equal to the highest stabilized blower vacuum 
demonstrated by any individual well in Section 8.7. Every 8 hr, sample 
the LFG from the well head sample port, measure the gauge pressures of 
the shallow pressure probes, the blower vacuum, the LFG flow rate, and 
use the criteria for infiltration in Section 8.7.2 and Method 3C to test 
for infiltration. If infiltration is detected, do not reduce the blower 
vacuum, instead reduce the LFG flow rate from the well by adjusting the 
control valve on the well head. Adjust each affected well individually. 
Continue until the equivalent of two total void volumes (V<INF>v</INF>) 
have been extracted, or until V<INF>t</INF>=2V<INF>v</INF>.
    8.9.1 Calculate V<INF>t</INF>, the total volume of LFG extracted 
from the wells, as shown in Section 12.8.
    8.9.2 Record the final stabilized flow rate as Q<INF>f</INF> and the 
gauge pressure for each deep probe. If, during the long term testing, 
the flow rate does not stabilize, calculate Q<INF>f</INF> by averaging 
the last 10 recorded flow rates.
    8.9.3 For each deep probe, convert each gauge pressure to absolute 
pressure as in Section 12.4. Average these values and record as 
P<INF>sa</INF>. For each probe, compare P<INF>ia</INF> to 
P<INF>sa</INF>. Determine the furthermost point from the well head along 
each radial arm where P<INF>sa</INF> <= P<INF>ia</INF>. This distance is 
the stabilized radius of influence. Average these values to determine 
the average stabilized radius of influence (R<INF>sa</INF>).
    8.10 Determine the NMOC mass emission rate using the procedures in 
Section 12.9 through 12.15.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1..........................  LFG flow rate      Ensures accurate
                                 meter              measurement of LFG
                                 calibration.       flow rate and sample
                                                    volume
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 LFG Flow Rate Meter (Orifice) Calibration Procedure. Locate a 
standard pitot tube in line with an orifice meter. Use the procedures in 
Section 8, 12.5, 12.6, and 12.7 of Method 2 to determine the average dry 
gas volumetric flow rate for at least five flow rates that bracket the 
expected LFG flow rates, except in Section 8.1, use a standard pitot 
tube rather than a Type S pitot tube. Method 3C may be used to determine 
the dry molecular weight. It may be necessary to calibrate more than one 
orifice meter in order to bracket the LFG flow rates. Construct a 
calibration curve by plotting the pressure drops across the orifice 
meter for each flow rate versus the average dry gas volumetric flow rate 
in m\3\/min of the gas.

                       11.0 Procedures [Reserved]

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.
A=Age of landfill, yr.
A<INF>avg</INF>=Average age of the refuse tested, yr.
A<INF>i</INF>=Age of refuse in the ith fraction, yr.
A<INF>r</INF>=Acceptance rate, Mg/yr.
C<INF>NMOC</INF>=NMOC concentration, ppmv as hexane 
(C<INF>NMOC</INF>=C<INF>t</INF>/6).
C<INF>o</INF>=Concentration of N<INF>2</INF> at the outlet, ppmv.
C<INF>t</INF>=NMOC concentration, ppmv (carbon equivalent) from Method 
25C.
C<INF>w</INF>=Concentration of N<INF>2</INF> at the wellhead, ppmv.
D=Depth affected by the test wells, m.
D<INF>st</INF>=Depth affected by the test wells in the short-term test, 
m.
e=Base number for natural logarithms (2.718).
f=Fraction of decomposable refuse in the landfill.
f<INF>i</INF>=Fraction of the refuse in the ith section.
k=Landfill gas generation constant, yr<SUP>-1</SUP>.
L<INF>o</INF>=Methane generation potential, m\3\/Mg.
L<INF>o</INF>'=Revised methane generation potential to account for the 
amount of nondecomposable material in the landfill, m\3\/Mg.
M<INF>i</INF>=Mass of refuse in the ith section, Mg.
M<INF>r</INF>=Mass of decomposable refuse affected by the test well, Mg.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Atmospheric pressure, mm Hg.
P<INF>f</INF>=Final absolute pressure of the deep pressure probes during 
short-term testing, mm Hg.
P<INF>fa</INF>=Average final absolute pressure of the deep pressure 
probes during short-term testing, mm Hg.
P<INF>gf</INF>=final gauge pressure of the deep pressure probes, mm Hg.
P<INF>gi</INF>=Initial gauge pressure of the deep pressure probes, mm 
Hg.
P<INF>i</INF>=Initial absolute pressure of the deep pressure probes 
during static testing, mm Hg.
P<INF>ia</INF>=Average initial absolute pressure of the deep pressure 
probes during static testing, mm Hg.
P<INF>s</INF>=Final absolute pressure of the deep pressure probes during 
long-term testing, mm Hg.

[[Page 42]]

P<INF>sa</INF>=Average final absolute pressure of the deep pressure 
probes during long-term testing, mm Hg.
Q<INF>f</INF>=Final stabilized flow rate, m\3\/min.
Q<INF>i</INF>=LFG flow rate measured at orifice meter during the ith 
interval, m\3\/min.
Q<INF>s</INF>=Maximum LFG flow rate at each well determined by short-
term test, m\3\/min.
Q<INF>t</INF>=NMOC mass emission rate, m\3\/min.
R<INF>m</INF>=Maximum radius of influence, m.
R<INF>ma</INF>=Average maximum radius of influence, m.
R<INF>s</INF>=Stabilized radius of influence for an individual well, m.
R<INF>sa</INF>=Average stabilized radius of influence, m.
t<INF>i</INF>=Age of section i, yr.
t<INF>t</INF>=Total time of long-term testing, yr.
t<INF>vi</INF>=Time of the ith interval (usually 8), hr.
V=Void volume of test well, m\3\.
V<INF>r</INF>=Volume of refuse affected by the test well, m\3\.
V<INF>t</INF>=Total volume of refuse affected by the long-term testing, 
m\3\.
V<INF>v</INF>=Total void volume affected by test wells, m\3\.
WD=Well depth, m.
[rho]=Refuse density, Mg/m\3\ (Assume 0.64 Mg/m\3\ if data are 
unavailable).

    12.2 Use the following equation to calculate a weighted average age 
of landfill refuse.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.071

    12.3 Use the following equation to determine the difference in 
N<INF>2</INF> concentrations (ppmv) at the well head and outlet 
location.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.072

    12.4 Use the following equation to convert the gauge pressure 
(P<INF>g</INF>) of each initial deep pressure probe to absolute pressure 
(P<INF>i</INF>).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.073

    12.5 Use the following equation to convert the gauge pressures of 
the deep probes to absolute pressures for each 8-hr reading at 
Q<INF>s</INF>.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.074

    12.6 Use the following equation to calculate the depth 
(D<INF>st</INF>) affected by the extraction well during the short-term 
test.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.075

    12.7 Use the following equation to calculate the void volume for the 
extraction well (V).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.076

    12.8 Use the following equation to calculate V<INF>t</INF>, the 
total volume of LFG extracted from the wells.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.077

    12.9 Use the following equation to calculate the depth affected by 
the test well. If using cluster wells, use the average depth of the 
wells for WD. If the value of D is greater than the depth of the 
landfill, set D equal to the landfill depth.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.078

    12.10 Use the following equation to calculate the volume of refuse 
affected by the test well.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.079

    12.11 Use the following equation to calculate the mass affected by 
the test well.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.080

    12.12 Modify L<INF>o</INF> to account for the nondecomposable refuse 
in the landfill.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.081

    12.13 In the following equation, solve for k (landfill gas 
generation constant) by iteration. A suggested procedure is to select a 
value for k, calculate the left side of the equation, and if not equal 
to zero, select another value for k. Continue this process until the 
left hand side of the equation equals zero, <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.001.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.082

    12.14 Use the following equation to determine landfill NMOC mass 
emission rate if the yearly acceptance rate of refuse has been 
consistent (10 percent) over the life of the landfill.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.083

    12.15 Use the following equation to determine landfill NMOC mass 
emission rate if the acceptance rate has not been consistent over the 
life of the landfill.

[[Page 43]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.084

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Same as Method 2, Appendix A, 40 CFR Part 60.
    2. Emcon Associates, Methane Generation and Recovery from Landfills. 
Ann Arbor Science, 1982.
    3. The Johns Hopkins University, Brown Station Road Landfill Gas 
Resource Assessment, Volume 1: Field Testing and Gas Recovery 
Projections. Laurel, Maryland: October 1982.
    4. Mandeville and Associates, Procedure Manual for Landfill Gases 
Emission Testing.
    5. Letter and attachments from Briggum, S., Waste Management of 
North America, to Thorneloe, S., EPA. Response to July 28, 1988 request 
for additional information. August 18, 1988.
    6. Letter and attachments from Briggum, S., Waste Management of 
North America, to Wyatt, S., EPA. Response to December 7, 1988 request 
for additional information. January 16, 1989.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 44]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.085


[[Page 45]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.086


[[Page 46]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.087


[[Page 47]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.088


[[Page 48]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.089

Method 2F--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity And Volumetric Flow Rate 
                      With Three-Dimensional Probes

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material has been incorporated from other methods in 
this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, those using this 
method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the following 
additional test methods: Methods 1, 2, 3 or 3A, and 4.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of yaw angle, pitch 
angle, axial velocity and the volumetric flow rate of a gas

[[Page 49]]

stream in a stack or duct using a three-dimensional (3-D) probe. This 
method may be used only when the average stack or duct gas velocity is 
greater than or equal to 20 ft/sec. When the above condition cannot be 
met, alternative procedures, approved by the Administrator, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, shall be used to make accurate flow 
rate determinations.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A 3-D probe is used to determine the velocity pressure and the 
yaw and pitch angles of the flow velocity vector in a stack or duct. The 
method determines the yaw angle directly by rotating the probe to null 
the pressure across a pair of symmetrically placed ports on the probe 
head. The pitch angle is calculated using probe-specific calibration 
curves. From these values and a determination of the stack gas density, 
the average axial velocity of the stack gas is calculated. The average 
gas volumetric flow rate in the stack or duct is then determined from 
the average axial velocity.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1. Angle-measuring Device Rotational Offset (RADO). The rotational 
position of an angle-measuring device relative to the reference scribe 
line, as determined during the pre-test rotational position check 
described in section 8.3.
    3.2 Axial Velocity. The velocity vector parallel to the axis of the 
stack or duct that accounts for the yaw and pitch angle components of 
gas flow. The term ``axial'' is used herein to indicate that the 
velocity and volumetric flow rate results account for the measured yaw 
and pitch components of flow at each measurement point.
    3.3 Calibration Pitot Tube. The standard (Prandtl type) pitot tube 
used as a reference when calibrating a 3-D probe under this method.
    3.4 Field Test. A set of measurements conducted at a specific unit 
or exhaust stack/duct to satisfy the applicable regulation (e.g., a 
three-run boiler performance test, a single-or multiple-load nine-run 
relative accuracy test).
    3.5 Full Scale of Pressure-measuring Device. Full scale refers to 
the upper limit of the measurement range displayed by the device. For 
bi-directional pressure gauges, full scale includes the entire pressure 
range from the lowest negative value to the highest positive value on 
the pressure scale.
    3.6 Main probe. Refers to the probe head and that section of probe 
sheath directly attached to the probe head. The main probe sheath is 
distinguished from probe extensions, which are sections of sheath added 
onto the main probe to extend its reach.
    3.7 ``May,'' ``Must,'' ``Shall,'' ``Should,'' and the imperative 
form of verbs.
    3.7.1 ``May'' is used to indicate that a provision of this method is 
optional.
    3.7.2 ``Must,'' ``Shall,'' and the imperative form of verbs (such as 
``record'' or ``enter'') are used to indicate that a provision of this 
method is mandatory.
    3.7.3 ``Should'' is used to indicate that a provision of this method 
is not mandatory, but is highly recommended as good practice.
    3.8 Method 1. Refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 1--
Sample and velocity traverses for stationary sources.''
    3.9 Method 2. Refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate (Type S 
pitot tube).''
    3.10 Method 2G. Refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2G--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with two-
dimensional probes.''
    3.11 Nominal Velocity. Refers to a wind tunnel velocity setting that 
approximates the actual wind tunnel velocity to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1.5 m/sec (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ft/sec).
    3.12 Pitch Angle. The angle between the axis of the stack or duct 
and the pitch component of flow, i.e., the component of the total 
velocity vector in a plane defined by the traverse line and the axis of 
the stack or duct. (Figure 2F-1 illustrates the ``pitch plane.'') From 
the standpoint of a tester facing a test port in a vertical stack, the 
pitch component of flow is the vector of flow moving from the center of 
the stack toward or away from that test port. The pitch angle is the 
angle described by this pitch component of flow and the vertical axis of 
the stack.
    3.13 Readability. For the purposes of this method, readability for 
an analog measurement device is one half of the smallest scale division. 
For a digital measurement device, it is the number of decimals displayed 
by the device.
    3.14 Reference Scribe Line. A line permanently inscribed on the main 
probe sheath (in accordance with section 6.1.6.1) to serve as a 
reference mark for determining yaw angles.
    3.15 Reference Scribe Line Rotational Offset (R<INF>SLO</INF>). The 
rotational position of a probe's reference scribe line relative to the 
probe's yaw-null position, as determined during the yaw angle 
calibration described in section 10.5.
    3.16 Response Time. The time required for the measurement system to 
fully respond to a change from zero differential pressure and ambient 
temperature to the stable stack or duct pressure and temperature 
readings at a traverse point.
    3.17 Tested Probe. A 3-D probe that is being calibrated.
    3.18 Three-dimensional (3-D) Probe. A directional probe used to 
determine the velocity pressure and yaw and pitch angles in a flowing 
gas stream.

[[Page 50]]

    3.19 Traverse Line. A diameter or axis extending across a stack or 
duct on which measurements of differential pressure and flow angles are 
made.
    3.20 Wind Tunnel Calibration Location. A point, line, area, or 
volume within the wind tunnel test section at, along, or within which 
probes are calibrated. At a particular wind tunnel velocity setting, the 
average velocity pressures at specified points at, along, or within the 
calibration location shall vary by no more than 2 percent or 0.3 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is less restrictive, 
from the average velocity pressure at the calibration pitot tube 
location. Air flow at this location shall be axial, i.e., yaw and pitch 
angles within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg]. Compliance with these flow 
criteria shall be demonstrated by performing the procedures prescribed 
in sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.2. For circular tunnels, no part of the 
calibration location may be closer to the tunnel wall than 10.2 cm (4 
in.) or 25 percent of the tunnel diameter, whichever is farther from the 
wall. For elliptical or rectangular tunnels, no part of the calibration 
location may be closer to the tunnel wall than 10.2 cm (4 in.) or 25 
percent of the applicable cross-sectional axis, whichever is farther 
from the wall.
    3.21 Wind Tunnel with Documented Axial Flow. A wind tunnel facility 
documented as meeting the provisions of sections 10.1.1 (velocity 
pressure cross-check) and 10.1.2 (axial flow verification) using the 
procedures described in these sections or alternative procedures 
determined to be technically equivalent.
    3.22 Yaw Angle. The angle between the axis of the stack or duct and 
the yaw component of flow, i.e., the component of the total velocity 
vector in a plane perpendicular to the traverse line at a particular 
traverse point. (Figure 2F-1 illustrates the ``yaw plane.'') From the 
standpoint of a tester facing a test port in a vertical stack, the yaw 
component of flow is the vector of flow moving to the left or right from 
the center of the stack as viewed by the tester. (This is sometimes 
referred to as ``vortex flow,'' i.e., flow around the centerline of a 
stack or duct.) The yaw angle is the angle described by this yaw 
component of flow and the vertical axis of the stack. The algebraic sign 
convention is illustrated in Figure 2F-2.
    3.23 Yaw Nulling. A procedure in which a probe is rotated about its 
axis in a stack or duct until a zero differential pressure reading 
(``yaw null'') is obtained. When a 3-D probe is yaw-nulled, its impact 
pressure port (P<INF>1</INF>) faces directly into the direction of flow 
in the stack or duct and the differential pressure between pressure 
ports P<INF>2</INF> and P<INF>3</INF> is zero.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This test method may involve hazardous operations and the use of 
hazardous materials or equipment. This method does not purport to 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish and implement appropriate safety 
and health practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory 
limitations before using this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Three-dimensional Probes. The 3-D probes as specified in 
subsections 6.1.1 through 6.1.3 below qualify for use based on 
comprehensive wind tunnel and field studies involving both inter-and 
intra-probe comparisons by multiple test teams. Other types of probes 
shall not be used unless approved by the Administrator. Each 3-D probe 
shall have a unique identification number or code permanently marked on 
the main probe sheath. The minimum recommended diameter of the sensing 
head of any probe used under this method is 2.5 cm (1 in.). Each probe 
shall be calibrated prior to use according to the procedures in section 
10. Manufacturer-supplied calibration data shall be used as example 
information only, except when the manufacturer calibrates the 3-D probe 
as specified in section 10 and provides complete documentation.
    6.1.1 Five-hole prism-shaped probe. This type of probe consists of 
five pressure taps in the flat facets of a prism-shaped sensing head. 
The pressure taps are numbered 1 through 5, with the pressures measured 
at each hole referred to as P<INF>1</INF>, P<INF>2</INF>, P<INF>3</INF>, 
P<INF>4</INF>, and P<INF>5</INF>, respectively. Figure 2F-3 is an 
illustration of the placement of pressure taps on a commonly available 
five-hole prism-shaped probe, the 2.5-cm (1-in.) DAT probe. (Note: 
Mention of trade names or specific products does not constitute 
endorsement by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.) The numbering 
arrangement for the prism-shaped sensing head presented in Figure 2F-3 
shall be followed for correct operation of the probe. A brief 
description of the probe measurements involved is as follows: the 
differential pressure P<INF>2</INF>-P<INF>3</INF> is used to yaw null 
the probe and determine the yaw angle; the differential pressure 
P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF> is a function of pitch angle; and the 
differential pressure P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF> is a function of total 
velocity.
    6.1.2 Five-hole spherical probe. This type of probe consists of five 
pressure taps in a spherical sensing head. As with the prism-shaped 
probe, the pressure taps are numbered 1 through 5, with the pressures 
measured at each hole referred to as P<INF>1</INF>, P<INF>2</INF>, 
P<INF>3</INF>, P<INF>4</INF>, and P<INF>5</INF>, respectively. However, 
the P<INF>4</INF> and P<INF>5</INF> pressure taps are in the reverse 
location

[[Page 51]]

from their respective positions on the prism-shaped probe head. The 
differential pressure P<INF>2</INF>-P<INF>3</INF> is used to yaw null 
the probe and determine the yaw angle; the differential pressure 
P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF> is a function of pitch angle; and the 
differential pressure P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF> is a function of total 
velocity. A diagram of a typical spherical probe sensing head is 
presented in Figure 2F-4. Typical probe dimensions are indicated in the 
illustration.
    6.1.3 A manual 3-D probe refers to a five-hole prism-shaped or 
spherical probe that is positioned at individual traverse points and yaw 
nulled manually by an operator. An automated 3-D probe refers to a 
system that uses a computer-controlled motorized mechanism to position 
the five-hole prism-shaped or spherical head at individual traverse 
points and perform yaw angle determinations.
    6.1.4 Other three-dimensional probes. [Reserved]
    6.1.5 Probe sheath. The probe shaft shall include an outer sheath 
to: (1) provide a surface for inscribing a permanent reference scribe 
line, (2) accommodate attachment of an angle-measuring device to the 
probe shaft, and (3) facilitate precise rotational movement of the probe 
for determining yaw angles. The sheath shall be rigidly attached to the 
probe assembly and shall enclose all pressure lines from the probe head 
to the farthest position away from the probe head where an angle-
measuring device may be attached during use in the field. The sheath of 
the fully assembled probe shall be sufficiently rigid and straight at 
all rotational positions such that, when one end of the probe shaft is 
held in a horizontal position, the fully extended probe meets the 
horizontal straightness specifications indicated in section 8.2 below.
    6.1.6 Scribe lines.
    6.1.6.1 Reference scribe line. A permanent line, no greater than 1.6 
mm (1/16 in.) in width, shall be inscribed on each manual probe that 
will be used to determine yaw angles of flow. This line shall be placed 
on the main probe sheath in accordance with the procedures described in 
section 10.4 and is used as a reference position for installation of the 
yaw angle-measuring device on the probe. At the discretion of the 
tester, the scribe line may be a single line segment placed at a 
particular position on the probe sheath (e.g., near the probe head), 
multiple line segments placed at various locations along the length of 
the probe sheath (e.g., at every position where a yaw angle-measuring 
device may be mounted), or a single continuous line extending along the 
full length of the probe sheath.
    6.1.6.2 Scribe line on probe extensions. A permanent line may also 
be inscribed on any probe extension that will be attached to the main 
probe in performing field testing. This allows a yaw angle-measuring 
device mounted on the extension to be readily aligned with the reference 
scribe line on the main probe sheath.
    6.1.6.3 Alignment specifications. This specification shall be met 
separately, using the procedures in section 10.4.1, on the main probe 
and on each probe extension. The rotational position of the scribe line 
or scribe line segments on the main probe or any probe extension must 
not vary by more than 2[deg]. That is, the difference between the 
minimum and maximum of all of the rotational angles that are measured 
along the full length of the main probe or the probe extension must not 
exceed 2[deg].
    6.1.7 Probe and system characteristics to ensure horizontal 
stability.
    6.1.7.1 For manual probes, it is recommended that the effective 
length of the probe (coupled with a probe extension, if necessary) be at 
least 0.9 m (3 ft.) longer than the farthest traverse point mark on the 
probe shaft away from the probe head. The operator should maintain the 
probe's horizontal stability when it is fully inserted into the stack or 
duct. If a shorter probe is used, the probe should be inserted through a 
bushing sleeve, similar to the one shown in Figure 2F-5, that is 
installed on the test port; such a bushing shall fit snugly around the 
probe and be secured to the stack or duct entry port in such a manner as 
to maintain the probe's horizontal stability when fully inserted into 
the stack or duct.
    6.1.7.2 An automated system that includes an external probe casing 
with a transport system shall have a mechanism for maintaining 
horizontal stability comparable to that obtained by manual probes 
following the provisions of this method. The automated probe assembly 
shall also be constructed to maintain the alignment and position of the 
pressure ports during sampling at each traverse point. The design of the 
probe casing and transport system shall allow the probe to be removed 
from the stack or duct and checked through direct physical measurement 
for angular position and insertion depth.
    6.1.8 The tubing that is used to connect the probe and the pressure-
measuring device should have an inside diameter of at least 3.2 mm (1/8 
in.), to reduce the time required for pressure equilibration, and should 
be as short as practicable.
    6.2 Yaw Angle-measuring Device. One of the following devices shall 
be used for measurement of the yaw angle of flow.
    6.2.1 Digital inclinometer. This refers to a digital device capable 
of measuring and displaying the rotational position of the probe to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]. The device shall be able to be 
locked into position on the probe sheath or probe extension, so that it 
indicates the probe's rotational position throughout the test. A 
rotational position collar block that can be attached to the probe 
sheath (similar

[[Page 52]]

to the collar shown in Figure 2F-6) may be required to lock the digital 
inclinometer into position on the probe sheath.
    6.2.2 Protractor wheel and pointer assembly. This apparatus, similar 
to that shown in Figure 2F-7, consists of the following components.
    6.2.2.1 A protractor wheel that can be attached to a port opening 
and set in a fixed rotational position to indicate the yaw angle 
position of the probe's scribe line relative to the longitudinal axis of 
the stack or duct. The protractor wheel must have a measurement ring on 
its face that is no less than 17.8 cm (7 in.) in diameter, shall be able 
to be rotated to any angle and then locked into position on the stack or 
duct port, and shall indicate angles to a resolution of 1[deg].
    6.2.2.2 A pointer assembly that includes an indicator needle mounted 
on a collar that can slide over the probe sheath and be locked into a 
fixed rotational position on the probe sheath. The pointer needle shall 
be of sufficient length, rigidity, and sharpness to allow the tester to 
determine the probe's angular position to within 1[deg] from the 
markings on the protractor wheel. Corresponding to the position of the 
pointer, the collar must have a scribe line to be used in aligning the 
pointer with the scribe line on the probe sheath.
    6.2.3 Other yaw angle-measuring devices. Other angle-measuring 
devices with a manufacturer's specified precision of 1[deg] or better 
may be used, if approved by the Administrator.
    6.3 Probe Supports and Stabilization Devices. When probes are used 
for determining flow angles, the probe head should be kept in a stable 
horizontal position. For probes longer than 3.0 m (10 ft.), the section 
of the probe that extends outside the test port shall be secured. Three 
alternative devices are suggested for maintaining the horizontal 
position and stability of the probe shaft during flow angle 
determinations and velocity pressure measurements: (1) Monorails 
installed above each port, (2) probe stands on which the probe shaft may 
be rested, or (3) bushing sleeves of sufficient length secured to the 
test ports to maintain probes in a horizontal position. Comparable 
provisions shall be made to ensure that automated systems maintain the 
horizontal position of the probe in the stack or duct. The physical 
characteristics of each test platform may dictate the most suitable type 
of stabilization device. Thus, the choice of a specific stabilization 
device is left to the judgment of the testers.
    6.4 Differential Pressure Gauges. The pressure ([Delta]P) measuring 
devices used during wind tunnel calibrations and field testing shall be 
either electronic manometers (e.g., pressure transducers), fluid 
manometers, or mechanical pressure gauges (e.g., 
Magnehelic<SUP>[Delta]</SUP> gauges). Use of electronic manometers is 
recommended. Under low velocity conditions, use of electronic manometers 
may be necessary to obtain acceptable measurements.
    6.4.1 Differential pressure-measuring device. This refers to a 
device capable of measuring pressure differentials and having a 
readability of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 percent of full scale. The device 
shall be capable of accurately measuring the maximum expected pressure 
differential. Such devices are used to determine the following pressure 
measurements: velocity pressure, static pressure, yaw-null pressure, and 
pitch-angle pressure. For an inclined-vertical manometer, the 
readability specification of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 percent shall be 
met separately using the respective full-scale upper limits of the 
inclined and vertical portions of the scales. To the extent practicable, 
the device shall be selected such that most of the pressure readings are 
between 10 and 90 percent of the device's full-scale measurement range 
(as defined in section 3.5). Typical velocity pressure (P<INF>1</INF>-
P<INF>2</INF>) ranges for both the prism-shaped probe and the spherical 
probe are 0 to 1.3 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (0 to 0.5 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), 0 to 
5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (0 to 2 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), and 0 to 12.7 cm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (0 to 5 in. H<INF>2</INF>O). The pitch angle 
(P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF>) pressure range is typically -6.4 to +6.4 
mm H<INF>2</INF>O (-0.25 to +0.25 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) or -12.7 to +12.7 
mm H<INF>2</INF>O (-0.5 to +0.5 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) for the prism-shaped 
probe, and -12.7 to +12.7 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (-0.5 to +0.5 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) or -5.1 to +5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (-2 to +2 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) for the spherical probe. The pressure range for the yaw 
null (P<INF>2</INF>-P<INF>3</INF>) readings is typically -12.7 to +12.7 
mm H<INF>2</INF>O (-0.5 to +0.5 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) for both probe 
types. In addition, pressure-measuring devices should be selected such 
that the zero does not drift by more than 5 percent of the average 
expected pressure readings to be encountered during the field test. This 
is particularly important under low pressure conditions.
    6.4.2 Gauge used for yaw nulling. The differential pressure-
measuring device chosen for yaw nulling the probe during the wind tunnel 
calibrations and field testing shall be bi-directional, i.e., capable of 
reading both positive and negative differential pressures. If a 
mechanical, bi-directional pressure gauge is chosen, it shall have a 
full-scale range no greater than 2.6 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (1 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) [i.e., -1.3 to +1.3 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (-0.5 in. to +0.5 
in.)].
    6.4.3 Devices for calibrating differential pressure-measuring 
devices. A precision manometer (e.g., a U-tube, inclined, or inclined-
vertical manometer, or micromanometer) or NIST (National Institute of 
Standards and Technology) traceable pressure source shall be used for 
calibrating differential pressure-measuring devices. The device shall be 
maintained under laboratory conditions or in a similar protected 
environment (e.g., a climate-controlled trailer). It shall not be used 
in field tests. The precision manometer shall have a scale gradation of 
0.3 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), or less, in the range 
of 0 to 5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (0 to 2 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) and 2.5 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (0.1 in. H<INF>2</INF>O),

[[Page 53]]

or less, in the range of 5.1 to 25.4 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (2 to 10 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O). The manometer shall have manufacturer's documentation 
that it meets an accuracy specification of at least 0.5 percent of full 
scale. The NIST-traceable pressure source shall be recertified annually.
    6.4.4 Devices used for post-test calibration check. A precision 
manometer meeting the specifications in section 6.4.3, a pressure-
measuring device or pressure source with a documented calibration 
traceable to NIST, or an equivalent device approved by the Administrator 
shall be used for the post-test calibration check. The pressure-
measuring device shall have a readability equivalent to or greater than 
the tested device. The pressure source shall be capable of generating 
pressures between 50 and 90 percent of the range of the tested device 
and known to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 percent of the full scale of 
the tested device. The pressure source shall be recertified annually.
    6.5 Data Display and Capture Devices. Electronic manometers (if 
used) shall be coupled with a data display device (such as a digital 
panel meter, personal computer display, or strip chart) that allows the 
tester to observe and validate the pressure measurements taken during 
testing. They shall also be connected to a data recorder (such as a data 
logger or a personal computer with data capture software) that has the 
ability to compute and retain the appropriate average value at each 
traverse point, identified by collection time and traverse point.
    6.6 Temperature Gauges. For field tests, a thermocouple or 
resistance temperature detector (RTD) capable of measuring temperature 
to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg]F) 
of the stack or duct temperature shall be used. The thermocouple shall 
be attached to the probe such that the sensor tip does not touch any 
metal and is located on the opposite side of the probe head from the 
pressure ports so as not to interfere with the gas flow around the probe 
head. The position of the thermocouple relative to the pressure port 
face openings shall be in the same configuration as used for the probe 
calibrations in the wind tunnel. Temperature gauges used for wind tunnel 
calibrations shall be capable of measuring temperature to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.6[deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]F) of the 
temperature of the flowing gas stream in the wind tunnel.
    6.7 Stack or Duct Static Pressure Measurement. The pressure-
measuring device used with the probe shall be as specified in section 
6.4 of this method. The static tap of a standard (Prandtl type) pitot 
tube or one leg of a Type S pitot tube with the face opening planes 
positioned parallel to the gas flow may be used for this measurement. 
Also acceptable is the pressure differential reading of P<INF>1</INF>-
P<INF>bar</INF> from a five-hole prism-shaped probe (e.g., Type DA or 
DAT probe) with the P<INF>1</INF> pressure port face opening positioned 
parallel to the gas flow in the same manner as the Type S probe. 
However, the spherical probe, as specified in section 6.1.2, is unable 
to provide this measurement and shall not be used to take static 
pressure measurements. Static pressure measurement is further described 
in section 8.11.
    6.8 Barometer. Same as Method 2, section 2.5.
    6.9 Gas Density Determination Equipment. Method 3 or 3A shall be 
used to determine the dry molecular weight of the stack gas. Method 4 
shall be used for moisture content determination and computation of 
stack gas wet molecular weight. Other methods may be used, if approved 
by the Administrator.
    6.10 Calibration Pitot Tube. Same as Method 2, section 2.7.
    6.11 Wind Tunnel for Probe Calibration. Wind tunnels used to 
calibrate velocity probes must meet the following design specifications.
    6.11.1 Test section cross-sectional area. The flowing gas stream 
shall be confined within a circular, rectangular, or elliptical duct. 
The cross-sectional area of the tunnel must be large enough to ensure 
fully developed flow in the presence of both the calibration pitot tube 
and the tested probe. The calibration site, or ``test section,'' of the 
wind tunnel shall have a minimum diameter of 30.5 cm (12 in.) for 
circular or elliptical duct cross-sections or a minimum width of 30.5 cm 
(12 in.) on the shorter side for rectangular cross-sections. Wind 
tunnels shall meet the probe blockage provisions of this section and the 
qualification requirements prescribed in section 10.1. The projected 
area of the portion of the probe head, shaft, and attached devices 
inside the wind tunnel during calibration shall represent no more than 4 
percent of the cross-sectional area of the tunnel. The projected area 
shall include the combined area of the calibration pitot tube and the 
tested probe if both probes are placed simultaneously in the same cross-
sectional plane in the wind tunnel, or the larger projected area of the 
two probes if they are placed alternately in the wind tunnel.
    6.11.2 Velocity range and stability. The wind tunnel should be 
capable of maintaining velocities between 6.1 m/sec and 30.5 m/sec (20 
ft/sec and 100 ft/sec). The wind tunnel shall produce fully developed 
flow patterns that are stable and parallel to the axis of the duct in 
the test section.
    6.11.3 Flow profile at the calibration location. The wind tunnel 
shall provide axial flow within the test section calibration location 
(as defined in section 3.20). Yaw and pitch angles in the calibration 
location shall be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. The 
procedure for determining that this requirement has been met is 
described in section 10.1.2.
    6.11.4 Entry ports in the wind tunnel test section.

[[Page 54]]

    6.11.4.1 Port for tested probe. A port shall be constructed for the 
tested probe. The port should have an elongated slot parallel to the 
axis of the duct at the test section. The elongated slot should be of 
sufficient length to allow attaining all the pitch angles at which the 
probe will be calibrated for use in the field. To facilitate alignment 
of the probe during calibration, the test section should include a 
window constructed of a transparent material to allow the tested probe 
to be viewed. This port shall be located to allow the head of the tested 
probe to be positioned within the calibration location (as defined in 
section 3.20) at all pitch angle settings.
    6.11.4.2 Port for verification of axial flow. Depending on the 
equipment selected to conduct the axial flow verification prescribed in 
section 10.1.2, a second port, located 90[deg] from the entry port for 
the tested probe, may be needed to allow verification that the gas flow 
is parallel to the central axis of the test section. This port should be 
located and constructed so as to allow one of the probes described in 
section 10.1.2.2 to access the same test point(s) that are accessible 
from the port described in section 6.11.4.1.
    6.11.4.3 Port for calibration pitot tube. The calibration pitot tube 
shall be used in the port for the tested probe or a separate entry port. 
In either case, all measurements with the calibration pitot tube shall 
be made at the same point within the wind tunnel over the course of a 
probe calibration. The measurement point for the calibration pitot tube 
shall meet the same specifications for distance from the wall and for 
axial flow as described in section 3.20 for the wind tunnel calibration 
location.
    6.11.5 Pitch angle protractor plate. A protractor plate shall be 
attached directly under the port used with the tested probe and set in a 
fixed position to indicate the pitch angle position of the probe 
relative to the longitudinal axis of the wind tunnel duct (similar to 
Figure 2F-8). The protractor plate shall indicate angles in 5[deg] 
increments with a minimum resolution of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg]. 
The tested probe shall be able to be locked into position at the desired 
pitch angle delineated on the protractor. The probe head position shall 
be maintained within the calibration location (as defined in section 
3.20) in the test section of the wind tunnel during all tests across the 
range of pitch angles.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Equipment Inspection and Set-Up
    8.1.1 All probes, differential pressure-measuring devices, yaw 
angle-measuring devices, thermocouples, and barometers shall have a 
current, valid calibration before being used in a field test. (See 
sections 10.3.3, 10.3.4, and 10.5 through10.10 for the applicable 
calibration requirements.)
    8.1.2 Before each field use of a 3-D probe, perform a visual 
inspection to verify the physical condition of the probe head according 
to the procedures in section 10.2. Record the inspection results on a 
form similar to Table 2F-1. If there is visible damage to the 3-D probe, 
the probe shall not be used until it is recalibrated.
    8.1.3 After verifying that the physical condition of the probe head 
is acceptable, set up the apparatus using lengths of flexible tubing 
that are as short as practicable. Surge tanks installed between the 
probe and pressure-measuring device may be used to dampen pressure 
fluctuations provided that an adequate measurement response time (see 
section 8.8) is maintained.
    8.2 Horizontal Straightness Check. A horizontal straightness check 
shall be performed before the start of each field test, except as 
otherwise specified in this section. Secure the fully assembled probe 
(including the probe head and all probe shaft extensions) in a 
horizontal position using a stationary support at a point along the 
probe shaft approximating the location of the stack or duct entry port 
when the probe is sampling at the farthest traverse point from the stack 
or duct wall. The probe shall be rotated to detect bends. Use an angle-
measuring device or trigonometry to determine the bend or sag between 
the probe head and the secured end. (See Figure 2F-9.) Probes that are 
bent or sag by more than 5[deg] shall not be used. Although this check 
does not apply when the probe is used for a vertical traverse, care 
should be taken to avoid the use of bent probes when conducting vertical 
traverses. If the probe is constructed of a rigid steel material and 
consists of a main probe without probe extensions, this check need only 
be performed before the initial field use of the probe, when the probe 
is recalibrated, when a change is made to the design or material of the 
probe assembly, and when the probe becomes bent. With such probes, a 
visual inspection shall be made of the fully assembled probe before each 
field test to determine if a bend is visible. The probe shall be rotated 
to detect bends. The inspection results shall be documented in the field 
test report. If a bend in the probe is visible, the horizontal 
straightness check shall be performed before the probe is used.
    8.3 Rotational Position Check. Before each field test, and each time 
an extension is added to the probe during a field test, a rotational 
position check shall be performed on all manually operated probes 
(except as noted in section 8.3.5, below) to ensure that, throughout 
testing, the angle-measuring device is either: aligned to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] of the rotational position of the reference 
scribe line; or is affixed to the probe such that the rotational offset 
of the device from the reference scribe line is known to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]. This check shall consist of direct measurements 
of the

[[Page 55]]

rotational positions of the reference scribe line and angle-measuring 
device sufficient to verify that these specifications are met. Annex A 
in section 18 of this method gives recommended procedures for performing 
the rotational position check, and Table 2F-2 gives an example data 
form. Procedures other than those recommended in Annex A in section 18 
may be used, provided they demonstrate whether the alignment 
specification is met and are explained in detail in the field test 
report.
    8.3.1 Angle-measuring device rotational offset. The tester shall 
maintain a record of the angle-measuring device rotational offset, 
R<INF>ADO</INF>, as defined in section 3.1. Note that R<INF>ADO</INF> is 
assigned a value of 0[deg] when the angle-measuring device is aligned to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] of the rotational position of the 
reference scribe line. The R<INF>ADO</INF> shall be used to determine 
the yaw angle of flow in accordance with section 8.9.4.
    8.3.2 Sign of angle-measuring device rotational offset. The sign of 
R<INF>ADO</INF> is positive when the angle-measuring device (as viewed 
from the ``tail'' end of the probe) is positioned in a clockwise 
direction from the reference scribe line and negative when the device is 
positioned in a counterclockwise direction from the reference scribe 
line.
    8.3.3 Angle-measuring devices that can be independently adjusted 
(e.g., by means of a set screw), after being locked into position on the 
probe sheath, may be used. However, the R<INF>ADO</INF> must also take 
into account this adjustment.
    8.3.4 Post-test check. If probe extensions remain attached to the 
main probe throughout the field test, the rotational position check 
shall be repeated, at a minimum, at the completion of the field test to 
ensure that the angle-measuring device has remained within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of its rotational position established prior to 
testing. At the discretion of the tester, additional checks may be 
conducted after completion of testing at any sample port or after any 
test run. If the <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] specification is not met, 
all measurements made since the last successful rotational position 
check must be repeated. Section 18.1.1.3 of Annex A provides an example 
procedure for performing the post-test check.
    8.3.5 Exceptions.
    8.3.5.1 A rotational position check need not be performed if, for 
measurements taken at all velocity traverse points, the yaw angle-
measuring device is mounted and aligned directly on the reference scribe 
line specified in sections 6.1.6.1 and 6.1.6.3 and no independent 
adjustments, as described in section 8.3.3, are made to the device's 
rotational position.
    8.3.5.2 If extensions are detached and re-attached to the probe 
during a field test, a rotational position check need only be performed 
the first time an extension is added to the probe, rather than each time 
the extension is re-attached, if the probe extension is designed to be 
locked into a mechanically fixed rotational position (e.g., through use 
of interlocking grooves) that can re-establish the initial rotational 
position to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg].
    8.4 Leak Checks. A pre-test leak check shall be conducted before 
each field test. A post-test check shall be performed at the end of the 
field test, but additional leak checks may be conducted after any test 
run or group of test runs. The post-test check may also serve as the 
pre-test check for the next group of test runs. If any leak check is 
failed, all runs since the last passed leak check are invalid. While 
performing the leak check procedures, also check each pressure device's 
responsiveness to the changes in pressure.
    8.4.1 To perform the leak check, pressurize the probe's 
P<INF>1</INF> pressure port until at least 7.6 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (3 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) pressure, or a pressure corresponding to approximately 
75 percent of the pressure-measuring device's measurement scale, 
whichever is less, registers on the device; then, close off the pressure 
port. The pressure shall remain stable [<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 in. H<INF>2</INF>O)] for at 
least 15 seconds. Check the P<INF>2</INF>, P<INF>3</INF>, P<INF>4</INF>, 
and P<INF>5</INF> pressure ports in the same fashion. Other leak-check 
procedures may be used, if approved by the Administrator.
    8.5 Zeroing the Differential Pressure-measuring Device. Zero each 
differential pressure-measuring device, including the device used for 
yaw nulling, before each field test. At a minimum, check the zero after 
each field test. A zero check may also be performed after any test run 
or group of test runs. For fluid manometers and mechanical pressure 
gauges (e.g., Magnehelic<SUP>[Delta]</SUP> gauges), the zero reading 
shall not deviate from zero by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.03 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) or one 
minor scale division, whichever is greater, between checks. For 
electronic manometers, the zero reading shall not deviate from zero 
between checks by more than: <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 mm H<INF>2</INF>O 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), for full scales less 
than or equal to 5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (2.0 in. H<INF>2</INF>O); or 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.03 
in. H<INF>2</INF>O), for full scales greater than 5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O 
(2.0 in. H<INF>2</INF>O). (Note: If negative zero drift is not directly 
readable, estimate the reading based on the position of the gauge oil in 
the manometer or of the needle on the pressure gauge.) In addition, for 
all pressure-measuring devices except those used exclusively for yaw 
nulling, the zero reading shall not deviate from zero by more than 5 
percent of the average measured differential pressure at any distinct 
process condition or load level. If any zero check is failed at a 
specific process condition or load level, all runs conducted at that 
process condition or load level since the last passed zero check are 
invalid.
    8.6 Traverse Point Verification. The number and location of the 
traverse points shall be selected based on Method 1 guidelines.

[[Page 56]]

The stack or duct diameter and port nipple lengths, including any 
extension of the port nipples into stack or duct, shall be verified the 
first time the test is performed; retain and use this information for 
subsequent field tests, updating it as required. Physically measure the 
stack or duct dimensions or use a calibrated laser device; do not use 
engineering drawings of the stack or duct. The probe length necessary to 
reach each traverse point shall be recorded to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>6.4 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1/4 in.) and, for manual 
probes, marked on the probe sheath. In determining these lengths, the 
tester shall take into account both the distance that the port flange 
projects outside of the stack and the depth that any port nipple extends 
into the gas stream. The resulting point positions shall reflect the 
true distances from the inside wall of the stack or duct, so that when 
the tester aligns any of the markings with the outside face of the stack 
port, the probe's impact port shall be located at the appropriate 
distance from the inside wall for the respective Method 1 traverse 
point. Before beginning testing at a particular location, an out-of-
stack or duct verification shall be performed on each probe that will be 
used to ensure that these position markings are correct. The distances 
measured during the verification must agree with the previously 
calculated distances to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1/4 in. For manual 
probes, the traverse point positions shall be verified by measuring the 
distance of each mark from the probe's P<INF>1</INF> pressure port. A 
comparable out-of-stack test shall be performed on automated probe 
systems. The probe shall be extended to each of the prescribed traverse 
point positions. Then, the accuracy of the positioning for each traverse 
point shall be verified by measuring the distance between the port 
flange and the probe's P<INF>1</INF> pressure port.
    8.7 Probe Installation. Insert the probe into the test port. A solid 
material shall be used to seal the port.
    8.8 System Response Time. Determine the response time of the probe 
measurement system. Insert and position the ``cold'' probe (at ambient 
temperature and pressure) at any Method 1 traverse point. Read and 
record the probe's P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF> differential pressure, 
temperature, and elapsed time at 15-second intervals until stable 
readings for both pressure and temperature are achieved. The response 
time is the longer of these two elapsed times. Record the response time.
    8.9 Sampling.
    8.9.1 Yaw angle measurement protocol. With manual probes, yaw angle 
measurements may be obtained in two alternative ways during the field 
test, either by using a yaw angle-measuring device (e.g., digital 
inclinometer) affixed to the probe, or using a protractor wheel and 
pointer assembly. For horizontal traversing, either approach may be 
used. For vertical traversing, i.e., when measuring from on top or into 
the bottom of a horizontal duct, only the protractor wheel and pointer 
assembly may be used. With automated probes, curve-fitting protocols may 
be used to obtain yaw-angle measurements.
    8.9.1.1 If a yaw angle-measuring device affixed to the probe is to 
be used, lock the device on the probe sheath, aligning it either on the 
reference scribe line or in the rotational offset position established 
under section 8.3.1.
    8.9.1.2 If a protractor wheel and pointer assembly is to be used, 
follow the procedures in Annex B of this method.
    8.9.1.3 Other yaw angle-determination procedures. If approved by the 
Administrator, other procedures for determining yaw angle may be used, 
provided that they are verified in a wind tunnel to be able to perform 
the yaw angle calibration procedure as described in section 10.5.
    8.9.2 Sampling strategy. At each traverse point, first yaw-null the 
probe, as described in section 8.9.3, below. Then, with the probe 
oriented into the direction of flow, measure and record the yaw angle, 
the differential pressures and the temperature at the traverse point, 
after stable readings are achieved, in accordance with sections 8.9.4 
and 8.9.5. At the start of testing in each port (i.e., after a probe has 
been inserted into the flue gas stream), allow at least the response 
time to elapse before beginning to take measurements at the first 
traverse point accessed from that port. Provided that the probe is not 
removed from the flue gas stream, measurements may be taken at 
subsequent traverse points accessed from the same test port without 
waiting again for the response time to elapse.
    8.9.3 Yaw-nulling procedure. In preparation for yaw angle 
determination, the probe must first be yaw nulled. After positioning the 
probe at the appropriate traverse point, perform the following 
procedures.
    8.9.3.1 Rotate the probe until a null differential pressure reading 
(the difference in pressures across the P<INF>2</INF> and P<INF>3</INF> 
pressure ports is zero, i.e., P<INF>2</INF>=P<INF>3</INF>) is indicated 
by the yaw angle pressure gauge. Read and record the angle displayed by 
the angle-measuring device.
    8.9.3.2 Sign of the measured angle. The angle displayed on the 
angle-measuring device is considered positive when the probe's impact 
pressure port (as viewed from the ``tail'' end of the probe) is oriented 
in a clockwise rotational position relative to the stack or duct axis 
and is considered negative when the probe's impact pressure port is 
oriented in a counterclockwise rotational position (see Figure 2F-10).
    8.9.4 Yaw angle determination. After performing the yaw-nulling 
procedure in section

[[Page 57]]

8.9.3, determine the yaw angle of flow according to one of the following 
procedures. Special care must be observed to take into account the signs 
of the recorded angle and all offsets.
    8.9.4.1 Direct-reading. If all rotational offsets are zero or if the 
angle-measuring device rotational offset (R<INF>ADO</INF>) determined in 
section 8.3 exactly compensates for the scribe line rotational offset 
(R<INF>SLO</INF>) determined in section 10.5, then the magnitude of the 
yaw angle is equal to the displayed angle-measuring device reading from 
section 8.9.3.1. The algebraic sign of the yaw angle is determined in 
accordance with section 8.9.3.2.

    Note: Under certain circumstances (e.g., testing of horizontal 
ducts), a 90[deg] adjustment to the angle-measuring device readings may 
be necessary to obtain the correct yaw angles.

    8.9.4.2 Compensation for rotational offsets during data reduction. 
When the angle-measuring device rotational offset does not compensate 
for reference scribe line rotational offset, the following procedure 
shall be used to determine the yaw angle:
    (a) Enter the reading indicated by the angle-measuring device from 
section 8.9.3.1.
    (b) Associate the proper algebraic sign from section 8.9.3.2 with 
the reading in step (a).
    (c) Subtract the reference scribe line rotational offset, 
R<INF>SLO</INF>, from the reading in step (b).
    (d) Subtract the angle-measuring device rotational offset, 
R<INF>ADO</INF>, if any, from the result obtained in step (c).
    (e) The final result obtained in step (d) is the yaw angle of flow.

    Note: It may be necessary to first apply a 90[deg] adjustment to the 
reading in step (a), in order to obtain the correct yaw angle.

    8.9.4.3 Record the yaw angle measurements on a form similar to Table 
2F-3.
    8.9.5 Velocity determination. Maintain the probe rotational position 
established during the yaw angle determination. Then, begin recording 
the pressure-measuring device readings for the impact pressure 
(P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF>) and pitch angle pressure (P<INF>4</INF>-
P<INF>5</INF>). These pressure measurements shall be taken over a 
sampling period of sufficiently long duration to ensure representative 
readings at each traverse point. If the pressure measurements are 
determined from visual readings of the pressure device or display, allow 
sufficient time to observe the pulsation in the readings to obtain a 
sight-weighted average, which is then recorded manually. If an automated 
data acquisition system (e.g., data logger, computer-based data 
recorder, strip chart recorder) is used to record the pressure 
measurements, obtain an integrated average of all pressure readings at 
the traverse point. Stack or duct gas temperature measurements shall be 
recorded, at a minimum, once at each traverse point. Record all 
necessary data as shown in the example field data form (Table 2F-3).
    8.9.6 Alignment check. For manually operated probes, after the 
required yaw angle and differential pressure and temperature 
measurements have been made at each traverse point, verify (e.g., by 
visual inspection) that the yaw angle-measuring device has remained in 
proper alignment with the reference scribe line or with the rotational 
offset position established in section 8.3. If, for a particular 
traverse point, the angle-measuring device is found to be in proper 
alignment, proceed to the next traverse point; otherwise, re-align the 
device and repeat the angle and differential pressure measurements at 
the traverse point. In the course of a traverse, if a mark used to 
properly align the angle-measuring device (e.g., as described in section 
18.1.1.1) cannot be located, re-establish the alignment mark before 
proceeding with the traverse.
    8.10 Probe Plugging. Periodically check for plugging of the pressure 
ports by observing the responses on pressure differential readouts. 
Plugging causes erratic results or sluggish responses. Rotate the probe 
to determine whether the readouts respond in the expected direction. If 
plugging is detected, correct the problem and repeat the affected 
measurements.
    8.11 Static Pressure. Measure the static pressure in the stack or 
duct using the equipment described in section 6.7.
    8.11.1 If a Type DA or DAT probe is used for this measurement, 
position the probe at or between any traverse point(s) and rotate the 
probe until a null differential pressure reading is obtained at 
P<INF>2</INF>-P<INF>3</INF>. Rotate the probe 90[deg]. Disconnect the 
P<INF>2</INF> pressure side of the probe and read the pressure 
P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>bar</INF> and record as the static pressure. (Note: 
The spherical probe, specified in section 6.1.2, is unable to provide 
this measurement and shall not be used to take static pressure 
measurements.)
    8.11.2 If a Type S probe is used for this measurement, position the 
probe at or between any traverse point(s) and rotate the probe until a 
null differential pressure reading is obtained. Disconnect the tubing 
from one of the pressure ports; read and record the [Delta]P. For 
pressure devices with one-directional scales, if a deflection in the 
positive direction is noted with the negative side disconnected, then 
the static pressure is positive. Likewise, if a deflection in the 
positive direction is noted with the positive side disconnected, then 
the static pressure is negative.
    8.12 Atmospheric Pressure. Determine the atmospheric pressure at the 
sampling elevation during each test run following the procedure 
described in section 2.5 of Method 2.

[[Page 58]]

    8.13 Molecular Weight. Determine the stack gas dry molecular weight. 
For combustion processes or processes that emit essentially 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, CO, and N<INF>2</INF>, use Method 3 or 
3A. For processes emitting essentially air, an analysis need not be 
conducted; use a dry molecular weight of 29.0. Other methods may be 
used, if approved by the Administrator.
    8.14 Moisture. Determine the moisture content of the stack gas using 
Method 4 or equivalent.
    8.15 Data Recording and Calculations. Record all required data on a 
form similar to Table 2F-3.
    8.15.1 Selection of appropriate calibration curves. Choose the 
appropriate pair of F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch angle 
calibration curves, created as described in section 10.6.
    8.15.2 Pitch angle derivation. Use the appropriate calculation 
procedures in section 12.2 to find the pitch angle ratios that are 
applicable at each traverse point. Then, find the pitch angles 
corresponding to these pitch angle ratios on the ``F<INF>1</INF> versus 
pitch angle'' curve for the probe.
    8.15.3 Velocity calibration coefficient derivation. Use the pitch 
angle obtained following the procedures described in section 8.15.2 to 
find the corresponding velocity calibration coefficients from the 
``F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch angle'' calibration curve for the probe.
    8.15.4 Calculations. Calculate the axial velocity at each traverse 
point using the equations presented in section 12.2 to account for the 
yaw and pitch angles of flow. Calculate the test run average stack gas 
velocity by finding the arithmetic average of the point velocity results 
in accordance with sections 12.3 and 12.4, and calculate the stack gas 
volumetric flow rate in accordance with section 12.5 or 12.6, as 
applicable.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Quality Control Activities. In conjunction with the yaw angle 
determination and the pressure and temperature measurements specified in 
section 8.9, the following quality control checks should be performed.
    9.1.1 Range of the differential pressure gauge. In accordance with 
the specifications in section 6.4, ensure that the proper differential 
pressure gauge is being used for the range of [Delta]P values 
encountered. If it is necessary to change to a more sensitive gauge, 
replace the gauge with a gauge calibrated according to section 10.3.3, 
perform the leak check described in section 8.4 and the zero check 
described in section 8.5, and repeat the differential pressure and 
temperature readings at each traverse point.
    9.1.2 Horizontal stability check. For horizontal traverses of a 
stack or duct, visually check that the probe shaft is maintained in a 
horizontal position prior to taking a pressure reading. Periodically, 
during a test run, the probe's horizontal stability should be verified 
by placing a carpenter's level, a digital inclinometer, or other angle-
measuring device on the portion of the probe sheath that extends outside 
of the test port. A comparable check should be performed by automated 
systems.

                            10.0 Calibration

    10.1 Wind Tunnel Qualification Checks. To qualify for use in 
calibrating probes, a wind tunnel shall have the design features 
specified in section 6.11 and satisfy the following qualification 
criteria. The velocity pressure cross-check in section 10.1.1 and axial 
flow verification in section 10.1.2 shall be performed before the 
initial use of the wind tunnel and repeated immediately after any 
alteration occurs in the wind tunnel's configuration, fans, interior 
surfaces, straightening vanes, controls, or other properties that could 
reasonably be expected to alter the flow pattern or velocity stability 
in the tunnel. The owner or operator of a wind tunnel used to calibrate 
probes according to this method shall maintain records documenting that 
the wind tunnel meets the requirements of sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 and 
shall provide these records to the Administrator upon request.
    10.1.1 Velocity pressure cross-check. To verify that the wind tunnel 
produces the same velocity at the tested probe head as at the 
calibration pitot tube impact port, perform the following cross-check. 
Take three differential pressure measurements at the fixed calibration 
pitot tube location, using the calibration pitot tube specified in 
section 6.10, and take three measurements with the calibration pitot 
tube at the wind tunnel calibration location, as defined in section 
3.20. Alternate the measurements between the two positions. Perform this 
procedure at the lowest and highest velocity settings at which the 
probes will be calibrated. Record the values on a form similar to Table 
2F-4. At each velocity setting, the average velocity pressure obtained 
at the wind tunnel calibration location shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent or 2.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.01 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is less restrictive, of the average velocity 
pressure obtained at the fixed calibration pitot tube location. This 
comparative check shall be performed at 2.5-cm (1-in.), or smaller, 
intervals across the full length, width, and depth (if applicable) of 
the wind tunnel calibration location. If the criteria are not met at 
every tested point, the wind tunnel calibration location must be 
redefined, so that acceptable results are obtained at every point. 
Include the results of the velocity pressure cross-check in the 
calibration data section of the field test report. (See section 16.1.4.)
    10.1.2 Axial flow verification. The following procedures shall be 
performed to demonstrate that there is fully developed axial flow within 
the calibration location

[[Page 59]]

and at the calibration pitot tube location. Two testing options are 
available to conduct this check.
    10.1.2.1 Using a calibrated 3-D probe. A 3-D probe that has been 
previously calibrated in a wind tunnel with documented axial flow (as 
defined in section 3.21) may be used to conduct this check. Insert the 
calibrated 3-D probe into the wind tunnel test section using the tested 
probe port. Following the procedures in sections 8.9 and 12.2 of this 
method, determine the yaw and pitch angles at all the point(s) in the 
test section where the velocity pressure cross-check, as specified in 
section 10.1.1, is performed. This includes all the points in the 
calibration location and the point where the calibration pitot tube will 
be located. Determine the yaw and pitch angles at each point. Repeat 
these measurements at the highest and lowest velocities at which the 
probes will be calibrated. Record the values on a form similar to Table 
2F-5. Each measured yaw and pitch angle shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. Exceeding the limits indicates 
unacceptable flow in the test section. Until the problem is corrected 
and acceptable flow is verified by repetition of this procedure, the 
wind tunnel shall not be used for calibration of probes. Include the 
results of the axial flow verification in the calibration data section 
of the field test report. (See section 16.1.4.)
    10.1.2.2 Using alternative probes. Axial flow verification may be 
performed using an uncalibrated prism-shaped 3-D probe (e.g., DA or DAT 
probe) or an uncalibrated wedge probe. (Figure 2F-11 illustrates a 
typical wedge probe.) This approach requires use of two ports: the 
tested probe port and a second port located 90[deg] from the tested 
probe port. Each port shall provide access to all the points within the 
wind tunnel test section where the velocity pressure cross-check, as 
specified in section 10.1.1, is conducted. The probe setup shall include 
establishing a reference yaw-null position on the probe sheath to serve 
as the location for installing the angle-measuring device. Physical 
design features of the DA, DAT, and wedge probes are relied on to 
determine the reference position. For the DA or DAT probe, this 
reference position can be determined by setting a digital inclinometer 
on the flat facet where the P<INF>1</INF> pressure port is located and 
then identifying the rotational position on the probe sheath where a 
second angle-measuring device would give the same angle reading. The 
reference position on a wedge probe shaft can be determined either 
geometrically or by placing a digital inclinometer on each side of the 
wedge and rotating the probe until equivalent readings are obtained. 
With the latter approach, the reference position is the rotational 
position on the probe sheath where an angle-measuring device would give 
a reading of 0[deg]. After installing the angle-measuring device in the 
reference yaw-null position on the probe sheath, determine the yaw angle 
from the tested port. Repeat this measurement using the 90[deg] offset 
port, which provides the pitch angle of flow. Determine the yaw and 
pitch angles at all the point(s) in the test section where the velocity 
pressure cross-check, as specified in section 10.1.1, is performed. This 
includes all the points in the wind tunnel calibration location and the 
point where the calibration pitot tube will be located. Perform this 
check at the highest and lowest velocities at which the probes will be 
calibrated. Record the values on a form similar to Table 2F-5. Each 
measured yaw and pitch angle shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. Exceeding the limits indicates 
unacceptable flow in the test section. Until the problem is corrected 
and acceptable flow is verified by repetition of this procedure, the 
wind tunnel shall not be used for calibration of probes. Include the 
results in the probe calibration report.
    10.1.3 Wind tunnel audits.
    10.1.3.1 Procedure. Upon the request of the Administrator, the owner 
or operator of a wind tunnel shall calibrate a 3-D audit probe in 
accordance with the procedures described in sections 10.3 through 10.6. 
The calibration shall be performed at two velocities and over a pitch 
angle range that encompasses the velocities and pitch angles typically 
used for this method at the facility. The resulting calibration data and 
curves shall be submitted to the Agency in an audit test report. These 
results shall be compared by the Agency to reference calibrations of the 
audit probe at the same velocity and pitch angle settings obtained at 
two different wind tunnels.
    10.1.3.2 Acceptance criteria. The audited tunnel's calibration is 
acceptable if all of the following conditions are satisfied at each 
velocity and pitch setting for the reference calibration obtained from 
at least one of the wind tunnels. For pitch angle settings between -
15[deg] and +15[deg], no velocity calibration coefficient (i.e., 
F<INF>2</INF>) may differ from the corresponding reference value by more 
than 3 percent. For pitch angle settings outside of this range (i.e., 
less than -15[deg] and greater than +15[deg]), no velocity calibration 
coefficient may differ by more than 5 percent from the corresponding 
reference value. If the acceptance criteria are not met, the audited 
wind tunnel shall not be used to calibrate probes for use under this 
method until the problems are resolved and acceptable results are 
obtained upon completion of a subsequent audit.
    10.2 Probe Inspection. Before each calibration of a 3-D probe, 
carefully examine the physical condition of the probe head. Particular 
attention shall be paid to the edges of the pressure ports and the 
surfaces surrounding these ports. Any dents, scratches, or asymmetries 
on the edges of the pressure ports and any scratches or indentations on

[[Page 60]]

the surfaces surrounding the pressure ports shall be noted because of 
the potential effect on the probe's pressure readings. If the probe has 
been previously calibrated, compare the current condition of the probe's 
pressure ports and surfaces to the results of the inspection performed 
during the probe's most recent wind tunnel calibration. Record the 
results of this inspection on a form and in diagrams similar to Table 
2F-1. The information in Table 2F-1 will be used as the basis for 
comparison during the probe head inspections performed before each 
subsequent field use.
    10.3 Pre-Calibration Procedures. Prior to calibration, a scribe line 
shall have been placed on the probe in accordance with section 10.4. The 
yaw angle and velocity calibration procedures shall not begin until the 
pre-test requirements in sections 10.3.1 through 10.3.4 have been met.
    10.3.1 Perform the horizontal straightness check described in 
section 8.2 on the probe assembly that will be calibrated in the wind 
tunnel.
    10.3.2 Perform a leak check in accordance with section 8.4.
    10.3.3 Except as noted in section 10.3.3.3, calibrate all 
differential pressure-measuring devices to be used in the probe 
calibrations, using the following procedures. At a minimum, calibrate 
these devices on each day that probe calibrations are performed.
    10.3.3.1 Procedure. Before each wind tunnel use, all differential 
pressure-measuring devices shall be calibrated against the reference 
device specified in section 6.4.3 using a common pressure source. 
Perform the calibration at three reference pressures representing 30, 
60, and 90 percent of the full-scale range of the pressure-measuring 
device being calibrated. For an inclined-vertical manometer, perform 
separate calibrations on the inclined and vertical portions of the 
measurement scale, considering each portion of the scale to be a 
separate full-scale range. [For example, for a manometer with a 0- to 
2.5-cm H<INF>2</INF>O (0- to 1-in. H<INF>2</INF>O) inclined scale and a 
2.5- to 12.7-cm H<INF>2</INF>O (1- to 5-in. H<INF>2</INF>O) vertical 
scale, calibrate the inclined portion at 7.6, 15.2, and 22.9 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), and calibrate the 
vertical portion at 3.8, 7.6, and 11.4 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (1.5, 3.0, and 
4.5 in. H<INF>2</INF>O).] Alternatively, for the vertical portion of the 
scale, use three evenly spaced reference pressures, one of which is 
equal to or higher than the highest differential pressure expected in 
field applications.
    10.3.3.2 Acceptance criteria. At each pressure setting, the two 
pressure readings made using the reference device and the pressure-
measuring device being calibrated shall agree to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of full scale of the device being calibrated 
or 0.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.02 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is less 
restrictive. For an inclined-vertical manometer, these requirements 
shall be met separately using the respective full-scale upper limits of 
the inclined and vertical portions of the scale. Differential pressure-
measuring devices not meeting the <greek-i>2 percent of full scale or 
0.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.02 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) calibration requirement 
shall not be used.
    10.3.3.3 Exceptions. Any precision manometer that meets the 
specifications for a reference device in section 6.4.3 and that is not 
used for field testing does not require calibration, but must be leveled 
and zeroed before each wind tunnel use. Any pressure device used 
exclusively for yaw nulling does not require calibration, but shall be 
checked for responsiveness to rotation of the probe prior to each wind 
tunnel use.
    10.3.4 Calibrate digital inclinometers on each day of wind tunnel or 
field testing (prior to beginning testing) using the following 
procedures. Calibrate the inclinometer according to the manufacturer's 
calibration procedures. In addition, use a triangular block (illustrated 
in Figure 2F-12) with a known angle, [theta] independently determined 
using a protractor or equivalent device, between two adjacent sides to 
verify the inclinometer readings.

    Note: If other angle-measuring devices meeting the provisions of 
section 6.2.3 are used in place of a digital inclinometer, comparable 
calibration procedures shall be performed on such devices.)

Secure the triangular block in a fixed position. Place the inclinometer 
on one side of the block (side A) to measure the angle of inclination 
(R<INF>1</INF>). Repeat this measurement on the adjacent side of the 
block (side B) using the inclinometer to obtain a second angle reading 
(R<INF>2</INF>). The difference of the sum of the two readings from 
180[deg] (i.e., 180[deg] -R<INF>1</INF> -R<INF>2</INF>) shall be within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of the known angle, [Theta]
    10.4 Placement of Reference Scribe Line. Prior to the first 
calibration of a probe, a line shall be permanently inscribed on the 
main probe sheath to serve as a reference mark for determining yaw 
angles. Annex C in section 18 of this method gives a guideline for 
placement of the reference scribe line.
    10.4.1 This reference scribe line shall meet the specifications in 
sections 6.1.6.1 and 6.1.6.3 of this method. To verify that the 
alignment specification in section 6.1.6.3 is met, secure the probe in a 
horizontal position and measure the rotational angle of each scribe line 
and scribe line segment using an angle-measuring device that meets the 
specifications in section 6.2.1 or 6.2.3. For any scribe line that is 
longer than 30.5 cm (12 in.), check the line's rotational position at 
30.5-cm (12-in.) intervals. For each line segment that is 30.5 cm (12 
in.) or less in length, check the rotational position at the two 
endpoints of the segment. To meet the alignment specification in section 
6.1.6.3, the minimum and maximum of all of the rotational angles that 
are measured along the full

[[Page 61]]

length of the main probe must not differ by more than 2[deg].

    Note: A short reference scribe line segment [e.g., 15.2 cm (6 in.) 
or less in length] meeting the alignment specifications in section 
6.1.6.3 is fully acceptable under this method. See section 18.1.1.1 of 
Annex A for an example of a probe marking procedure, suitable for use 
with a short reference scribe line.

    10.4.2 The scribe line should be placed on the probe first and then 
its offset from the yaw-null position established (as specified in 
section 10.5). The rotational position of the reference scribe line 
relative to the yaw-null position of the probe, as determined by the yaw 
angle calibration procedure in section 10.5, is defined as the reference 
scribe line rotational offset, R<INF>SLO</INF>. The reference scribe 
line rotational offset shall be recorded and retained as part of the 
probe's calibration record.
    10.4.3 Scribe line for automated probes. A scribe line may not be 
necessary for an automated probe system if a reference rotational 
position of the probe is built into the probe system design. For such 
systems, a ``flat'' (or comparable, clearly identifiable physical 
characteristic) should be provided on the probe casing or flange plate 
to ensure that the reference position of the probe assembly remains in a 
vertical or horizontal position. The rotational offset of the flat (or 
comparable, clearly identifiable physical characteristic) needed to 
orient the reference position of the probe assembly shall be recorded 
and maintained as part of the automated probe system's specifications.
    10.5 Yaw Angle Calibration Procedure. For each probe used to measure 
yaw angles with this method, a calibration procedure shall be performed 
in a wind tunnel meeting the specifications in section 10.1 to determine 
the rotational position of the reference scribe line relative to the 
probe's yaw-null position. This procedure shall be performed on the main 
probe with all devices that will be attached to the main probe in the 
field [such as thermocouples or resistance temperature detectors (RTDs)] 
that may affect the flow around the probe head. Probe shaft extensions 
that do not affect flow around the probe head need not be attached 
during calibration. At a minimum, this procedure shall include the 
following steps.
    10.5.1 Align and lock the angle-measuring device on the reference 
scribe line. If a marking procedure (such as that described in section 
18.1.1.1) is used, align the angle-measuring device on a mark within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] of the rotational position of the reference 
scribe line. Lock the angle-measuring device onto the probe sheath at 
this position.
    10.5.2 Zero the pressure-measuring device used for yaw nulling.
    10.5.3 Insert the probe assembly into the wind tunnel through the 
entry port, positioning the probe's impact port at the calibration 
location. Check the responsiveness of the pressure-measurement device to 
probe rotation, taking corrective action if the response is 
unacceptable.
    10.5.4 Ensure that the probe is in a horizontal position, using a 
carpenter's level.
    10.5.5 Rotate the probe either clockwise or counterclockwise until a 
yaw null (P<INF>2</INF>=P<INF>3</INF>) is obtained.
    10.5.6 Use the reading displayed by the angle-measuring device at 
the yaw-null position to determine the magnitude of the reference scribe 
line rotational offset, R<INF>SLO</INF>, as defined in section 3.15. 
Annex D in section 18 of this method provides a recommended procedure 
for determining the magnitude of R<INF>SLO</INF> with a digital 
inclinometer and a second procedure for determining the magnitude of 
R<INF>SLO</INF> with a protractor wheel and pointer device. Table 2F-6 
presents an example data form and Table 2F-7 is a look-up table with the 
recommended procedure. Procedures other than those recommended in Annex 
D in section 18 may be used, if they can determine R<INF>SLO</INF> to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] and are explained in detail in the 
field test report. The algebraic sign of R<INF>SLO</INF> will either be 
positive, if the rotational position of the reference scribe line (as 
viewed from the ``tail'' end of the probe) is clockwise, or negative, if 
counterclockwise with respect to the probe's yaw-null position. (This is 
illustrated in Figure 2F-13.)
    10.5.7 The steps in sections 10.5.3 through 10.5.6 shall be 
performed twice at each of the velocities at which the probe will be 
calibrated (in accordance with section 10.6). Record the values of 
R<INF>SLO</INF>.
    10.5.8 The average of all of the R<INF>SLO</INF> values shall be 
documented as the reference scribe line rotational offset for the probe.
    10.5.9 Use of reference scribe line offset. The reference scribe 
line rotational offset shall be used to determine the yaw angle of flow 
in accordance with section 8.9.4.
    10.6 Pitch Angle and Velocity Pressure Calibrations. Use the 
procedures in sections 10.6.1 through 10.6.16 to generate an appropriate 
set (or sets) of pitch angle and velocity pressure calibration curves 
for each probe. The calibration procedure shall be performed on the main 
probe and all devices that will be attached to the main probe in the 
field (e.g., thermocouple or RTDs) that may affect the flow around the 
probe head. Probe shaft extensions that do not affect flow around the 
probe head need not be attached during calibration. (Note: If a sampling 
nozzle is part of the assembly, a wind tunnel demonstration shall be 
performed that shows the probe's ability to measure velocity and yaw 
null is not impaired when the nozzle is drawing a sample.) The 
calibration

[[Page 62]]

procedure involves generating two calibration curves, F<INF>1</INF> 
versus pitch angle and F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch angle. To generate 
these two curves, F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> shall be derived using 
Equations 2F-1 and 2F-2, below. Table 2F-8 provides an example wind 
tunnel calibration data sheet, used to log the measurements needed to 
derive these two calibration curves.
    10.6.1 Calibration velocities. The tester may calibrate the probe at 
two nominal wind tunnel velocity settings of 18.3 m/sec and 27.4 m/sec 
(60 ft/sec and 90 ft/sec) and average the results of these calibrations, 
as described in section 10.6.16.1, in order to generate a set of 
calibration curves. If this option is selected, this single set of 
calibration curves may be used for all field applications over the 
entire velocity range allowed by the method. Alternatively, the tester 
may customize the probe calibration for a particular field test 
application (or for a series of applications), based on the expected 
average velocity(ies) at the test site(s). If this option is selected, 
generate each set of calibration curves by calibrating the probe at two 
nominal wind tunnel velocity settings, at least one of which is greater 
than or equal to the expected average velocity(ies) for the field 
application(s), and average the results as described in section 
10.6.16.1. Whichever calibration option is selected, the probe 
calibration coefficients (F<INF>2</INF> values) obtained at the two 
nominal calibration velocities shall, for the same pitch angle setting, 
meet the conditions specified in section 10.6.16.
    10.6.2 Pitch angle calibration curve (F<INF>1</INF> versus pitch 
angle). The pitch angle calibration involves generating a calibration 
curve of calculated F<INF>1</INF> values versus tested pitch angles, 
where F<INF>1</INF> is the ratio of the pitch pressure to the velocity 
pressure, i.e.,
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.049

See Figure 2F-14 for an example F<INF>1</INF> versus pitch angle 
calibration curve.
    10.6.3 Velocity calibration curve (F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch 
angle). The velocity calibration involves generating a calibration curve 
of the 3-D probe's F<INF>2</INF> coefficient against the tested pitch 
angles, where
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.050

and
C<INF>p</INF>=calibration pitot tube coefficient, and
[Delta]P<INF>std</INF>=velocity pressure from the calibration pitot 
tube.

See Figure 2F-15 for an example F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch angle 
calibration curve.
    10.6.4 Connect the tested probe and calibration pitot probe to their 
respective pressure-measuring devices. Zero the pressure-measuring 
devices. Inspect and leak-check all pitot lines; repair or replace, if 
necessary. Turn on the fan, and allow the wind tunnel air flow to 
stabilize at the first of the two selected nominal velocity settings.
    10.6.5 Position the calibration pitot tube at its measurement 
location (determined as outlined in section 6.11.4.3), and align the 
tube so that its tip is pointed directly into the flow. Ensure that the 
entry port surrounding the tube is properly sealed. The calibration 
pitot tube may either remain in the wind tunnel throughout the 
calibration, or be removed from the wind tunnel while measurements are 
taken with the probe being calibrated.
    10.6.6 Set up the pitch protractor plate on the tested probe's entry 
port to establish the pitch angle positions of the probe to within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg].
    10.6.7 Check the zero setting of each pressure-measuring device.
    10.6.8 Insert the tested probe into the wind tunnel and align it so 
that its P<INF>1</INF> pressure port is pointed directly into the flow 
and is positioned within the calibration location (as defined in section 
3.20). Secure the probe at the 0[deg] pitch angle position. Ensure that 
the entry port surrounding the probe is properly sealed.
    10.6.9 Read the differential pressure from the calibration pitot 
tube ([Delta]P<INF>std</INF>), and record its value. Read the barometric 
pressure to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm Hg (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in. Hg) and the temperature in the wind tunnel to 
within 0.6[deg]C (1[deg]F). Record these values on a data form similar 
to Table 2F-8.
    10.6.10 After the tested probe's differential pressure gauges have 
had sufficient time to stabilize, yaw null the probe, then obtain 
differential pressure readings for (P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF>) and 
(P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF>). Record the yaw angle and differential 
pressure readings. After taking these readings, ensure that the tested 
probe has remained at the yaw-null position.
    10.6.11 Either take paired differential pressure measurements with 
both the calibration pitot tube and tested probe (according to sections 
10.6.9 and 10.6.10) or take readings only with the tested probe 
(according to section 10.6.10) in 5[deg] increments over the pitch-angle 
range for which the probe is to be calibrated. The calibration pitch-
angle range shall be symmetric around 0[deg] and shall exceed the 
largest pitch angle expected in the field by 5[deg]. At a minimum, 
probes shall be calibrated over the range of -15[deg] to +15[deg]. If 
paired calibration pitot tube and tested probe measurements are not 
taken at each pitch angle setting, the differential pressure from the 
calibration pitot tube shall be read, at a minimum, before taking the 
tested probe's differential pressure reading at the first pitch angle 
setting and after taking the tested probe's differential pressure 
readings

[[Page 63]]

at the last pitch angle setting in each replicate.
    10.6.12 Perform a second replicate of the procedures in sections 
10.6.5 through 10.6.11 at the same nominal velocity setting.
    10.6.13 For each replicate, calculate the F<INF>1</INF> and 
F<INF>2</INF> values at each pitch angle. At each pitch angle, calculate 
the percent difference between the two F<INF>2</INF> values using 
Equation 2F-3.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.051

    If the percent difference is less than or equal to 2 percent, 
calculate an average F<INF>1</INF> value and an average F<INF>2</INF> 
value at that pitch angle. If the percent difference is greater than 2 
percent and less than or equal to 5 percent, perform a third repetition 
at that angle and calculate an average F<INF>1</INF> value and an 
average F<INF>2</INF> value using all three repetitions. If the percent 
difference is greater than 5 percent, perform four additional 
repetitions at that angle and calculate an average F<INF>1</INF> value 
and an average F<INF>2</INF> value using all six repetitions. When 
additional repetitions are required at any pitch angle, move the probe 
by at least 5[deg] and then return to the specified pitch angle before 
taking the next measurement. Record the average values on a form similar 
to Table 2F-9.
    10.6.14 Repeat the calibration procedures in sections 10.6.5 through 
10.6.13 at the second selected nominal wind tunnel velocity setting.
    10.6.15 Velocity drift check. The following check shall be 
performed, except when paired calibration pitot tube and tested probe 
pressure measurements are taken at each pitch angle setting. At each 
velocity setting, calculate the percent difference between consecutive 
differential pressure measurements made with the calibration pitot tube. 
If a measurement differs from the previous measurement by more than 2 
percent or 0.25 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever 
is less restrictive, the calibration data collected between these 
calibration pitot tube measurements may not be used, and the 
measurements shall be repeated.
    10.6.16 Compare the averaged F<INF>2</INF> coefficients obtained 
from the calibrations at the two selected nominal velocities, as 
follows. At each pitch angle setting, use Equation 2F-3 to calculate the 
difference between the corresponding average F<INF>2</INF> values at the 
two calibration velocities. At each pitch angle in the -15[deg] to 
+15[deg] range, the percent difference between the average F<INF>2</INF> 
values shall not exceed 3.0 percent. For pitch angles outside this range 
(i.e., less than -15[deg]0 and greater than +15[deg]), the percent 
difference shall not exceed 5.0 percent.
    10.6.16.1 If the applicable specification in section 10.6.16 is met 
at each pitch angle setting, average the results obtained at the two 
nominal calibration velocities to produce a calibration record of 
F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> at each pitch angle tested. Record these 
values on a form similar to Table 2F-9. From these values, generate one 
calibration curve representing F<INF>1</INF> versus pitch angle and a 
second curve representing F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch angle. Computer 
spreadsheet programs may be used to graph the calibration data and to 
develop polynomial equations that can be used to calculate pitch angles 
and axial velocities.
    10.6.16.2 If the applicable specification in section 10.6.16 is 
exceeded at any pitch angle setting, the probe shall not be used unless: 
(1) the calibration is repeated at that pitch angle and acceptable 
results are obtained or (2) values of F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> 
are obtained at two nominal velocities for which the specifications in 
section 10.6.16 are met across the entire pitch angle range.
    10.7 Recalibration. Recalibrate the probe using the procedures in 
section 10 either within 12 months of its first field use after its most 
recent calibration or after 10 field tests (as defined in section 3.4), 
whichever occurs later. In addition, whenever there is visible damage to 
the 3-D head, the probe shall be recalibrated before it is used again.
    10.8 Calibration of pressure-measuring devices used in field tests. 
Before its initial use in a field test, calibrate each pressure-
measuring device (except those used exclusively for yaw nulling) using 
the three-point calibration procedure described in section 10.3.3. The 
device shall be recalibrated according to the procedure in section 
10.3.3 no later than 90 days after its first field use following its 
most recent calibration. At the discretion of the tester, more frequent 
calibrations (e.g., after a field test) may be performed. No 
adjustments, other than adjustments to the zero setting, shall be made 
to the device between calibrations.
    10.8.1 Post-test calibration check. A single-point calibration check 
shall be performed on each pressure-measuring device after completion of 
each field test. At the discretion of the tester, more frequent single-
point calibration checks (e.g., after one or more field test runs) may 
be performed. It is recommended that the post-test check be performed 
before leaving the field test site. The check shall be performed at a 
pressure between 50 and 90 percent of full scale by taking a common 
pressure reading with the tested device and a reference pressure-
measuring device (as described in section 6.4.4) or by challenging the 
tested device with a reference pressure source (as described in section 
6.4.4) or by performing an equivalent check using a reference device 
approved by the Administrator.
    10.8.2 Acceptance criterion. At the selected pressure setting, the 
pressure readings made using the reference device and the tested device 
shall agree to within 3 percent of

[[Page 64]]

full scale of the tested device or 0.8 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.03 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is less restrictive. If this specification is 
met, the test data collected during the field test are valid. If the 
specification is not met, all test data collected since the last 
successful calibration or calibration check are invalid and shall be 
repeated using a pressure-measuring device with a current, valid 
calibration. Any device that fails the calibration check shall not be 
used in a field test until a successful recalibration is performed 
according to the procedures in section 10.3.3.
    10.9 Temperature Gauges. Same as Method 2, section 4.3. The 
alternative thermocouple calibration procedures outlined in Emission 
Measurement Center (EMC) Approved Alternative Method (ALT-011) 
``Alternative Method 2 Thermocouple Calibration Procedure'' may be 
performed. Temperature gauges shall be calibrated no more than 30 days 
prior to the start of a field test or series of field tests and 
recalibrated no more than 30 days after completion of a field test or 
series of field tests.
    10.10 Barometer. Same as Method 2, section 4.4. The barometer shall 
be calibrated no more than 30 days prior to the start of a field test or 
series of field tests.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    These calculations use the measured yaw angle, derived pitch angle, 
and the differential pressure and temperature measurements at individual 
traverse points to derive the axial flue gas velocity (v<INF>a(i)</INF>) 
at each of those points. The axial velocity values at all traverse 
points that comprise a full stack or duct traverse are then averaged to 
obtain the average axial flue gas velocity (v<INF>a (avg)</INF>). Round 
off figures only in the final calculation of reported values.
    12.1 Nomenclature

A=Cross-sectional area of stack or duct, m \2\ (ft \2\).
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream (from Method 4 or 
alternative), proportion by volume.
K<INF>p</INF> Conversion factor (a constant),
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.052

for the metric system, and
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.053

for the English system.

M<INF>d</INF>=Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, dry basis (see 
section 8.13), g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
M<INF>s</INF>=Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, wet basis, g/g-mole 
(lb/lb-mole).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.054

P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at measurement site, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>g</INF>=Stack or duct static pressure, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O).
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute stack or duct pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg),
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.055

P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
13.6=Conversion from mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O) to mm Hg 
(in. Hg).
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Average dry-basis volumetric stack or duct gas flow rate 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm/hr (dscf/hr).
Q<INF>sw</INF>=Average wet-basis volumetric stack or duct gas flow rate 
corrected to standard conditions, wscm/hr (wscf/hr).
T<INF>s(avg)</INF>=Average absolute stack or duct gas temperature across 
all traverse points.
t<INF>s(i)</INF>=Stack or duct gas temperature, C (F), at traverse point 
i.
T<INF>s(i)</INF>=Absolute stack or duct gas temperature, K (R), at 
traverse point i,
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.056

for the metric system, and
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.057

for the English system.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293[deg]K (528[deg]R).
F<INF>1(i)</INF>=Pitch angle ratio, applicable at traverse point i, 
dimensionless.
F<INF>2(i)</INF>=3-D probe velocity calibration coefficient, applicable 
at traverse point i, dimensionless.
(P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF>)<INF>i</INF>=Pitch differential pressure of 
stack or duct gas flow, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O), at 
traverse point i.
(P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF>)<INF>i</INF>=Velocity head (differential 
pressure) of stack or duct gas flow, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O), at traverse point i.
v<INF>a(i)</INF>=Reported stack or duct gas axial velocity, m/sec (ft/
sec), at traverse point i.
v<INF>a(avg)</INF>=Average stack or duct gas axial velocity, m/sec (ft/
sec), across all traverse points.
3,600=Conversion factor, sec/hr.
18.0=Molecular weight of water, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
[theta]<INF>y(i)</INF>=Yaw angle, degrees, at traverse point i.
[theta]<INF>p(i)</INF>=Pitch angle, degrees, at traverse point i.
n=Number of traverse points.

    12.2 Traverse Point Velocity Calculations. Perform the following 
calculations from the

[[Page 65]]

measurements obtained at each traverse point.
    12.2.1 Selection of calibration curves. Select calibration curves as 
described in section 10.6.1.
    12.2.2 Traverse point pitch angle ratio. Use Equation 2F-1, as 
described in section 10.6.2, to calculate the pitch angle ratio, 
F<INF>1(i)</INF>, at each traverse point.
    12.2.3 Pitch angle. Use the pitch angle ratio, F<INF>1(i)</INF>, to 
derive the pitch angle, [theta]<INF>p(i)</INF>, at traverse point i from 
the F<INF>1</INF> versus pitch angle calibration curve generated under 
section 10.6.16.1.
    12.2.4 Velocity calibration coefficient. Use the pitch angle, 
[theta]<INF>p(i)</INF>, to obtain the probe velocity calibration 
coefficient, F<INF>2(i)</INF>, at traverse point i from the ``velocity 
pressure calibration curve,'' i.e., the F<INF>2</INF> versus pitch angle 
calibration curve generated under section 10.6.16.1.
    12.2.5 Axial velocity. Use the following equation to calculate the 
axial velocity, v<INF>a(i)</INF>, from the differential pressure 
(P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF>)<INF>i</INF> and yaw angle, 
[theta]<INF>y(i)</INF>, measured at traverse point i and the previously 
calculated values for the velocity calibration coefficient, 
F<INF>2(i)</INF>, absolute stack or duct standard temperature, 
T<INF>s(i)</INF>, absolute stack or duct pressure, P<INF>s</INF>, 
molecular weight, M<INF>s</INF>, and pitch angle, 
``[theta]<INF>p(i)</INF>.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.058

    12.2.6 Handling multiple measurements at a traverse point. For 
pressure or temperature devices that take multiple measurements at a 
traverse point, the multiple measurements (or where applicable, their 
square roots) may first be averaged and the resulting average values 
used in the equations above. Alternatively, the individual measurements 
may be used in the equations above and the resulting multiple calculated 
values may then be averaged to obtain a single traverse point value. 
With either approach, all of the individual measurements recorded at a 
traverse point must be used in calculating the applicable traverse point 
value.
    12.3 Average Axial Velocity in Stack or Duct. Use the reported 
traverse point axial velocity in the following equation.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.059

    12.4 Acceptability of Results. The test results are acceptable and 
the calculated value of v<INF>a(avg)</INF> may be reported as the 
average axial velocity for the test run if the conditions in either 
section 12.4.1 or 12.4.2 are met.
    12.4.1 The calibration curves were generated at nominal velocities 
of 18.3 m/sec and 27.4 m/sec (60 ft/sec and 90 ft/sec).
    12.4.2 The calibration curves were generated at nominal velocities 
other than 18.3 m/sec and 27.4 m/sec (60 ft/sec and 90 ft/sec), and the 
value of v<INF>a(avg)</INF> obtained using Equation 2F-9 is less than or 
equal to at least one of the nominal velocities used to derive the 
F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> calibration curves.
    12.4.3 If the conditions in neither section 12.4.1 nor section 
12.4.2 are met, the test results obtained in Equation 2F-9 are not 
acceptable, and the steps in sections 12.2 and 12.3 must be repeated 
using a set of F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> calibration curves that 
satisfies the conditions specified in section 12.4.1 or 12.4.2.
    12.5 Average Gas Wet Volumetric Flow Rate in Stack or Duct. Use the 
following equation to compute the average volumetric flow rate on a wet 
basis.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.060

    12.6 Average Gas Dry Volumetric Flow Rate in Stack or Duct. Use the 
following equation to compute the average volumetric flow rate on a dry 
basis.

[[Page 66]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.061

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 Reporting

    16.1 Field Test Reports. Field test reports shall be submitted to 
the Agency according to applicable regulatory requirements. Field test 
reports should, at a minimum, include the following elements.
    16.1.1 Description of the source. This should include the name and 
location of the test site, descriptions of the process tested, a 
description of the combustion source, an accurate diagram of stack or 
duct cross-sectional area at the test site showing the dimensions of the 
stack or duct, the location of the test ports, and traverse point 
locations and identification numbers or codes. It should also include a 
description and diagram of the stack or duct layout, showing the 
distance of the test location from the nearest upstream and downstream 
disturbances and all structural elements (including breachings, baffles, 
fans, straighteners, etc.) affecting the flow pattern. If the source and 
test location descriptions have been previously submitted to the Agency 
in a document (e.g., a monitoring plan or test plan), referencing the 
document in lieu of including this information in the field test report 
is acceptable.
    16.1.2 Field test procedures. These should include a description of 
test equipment and test procedures. Testing conventions, such as 
traverse point numbering and measurement sequence (e.g., sampling from 
center to wall, or wall to center), should be clearly stated. Test port 
identification and directional reference for each test port should be 
included on the appropriate field test data sheets.
    16.1.3 Field test data.
    16.1.3.1 Summary of results. This summary should include the dates 
and times of testing and the average axial gas velocity and the average 
flue gas volumetric flow results for each run and tested condition.
    16.1.3.2 Test data. The following values for each traverse point 
should be recorded and reported:

    (a) P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF> and P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF> 
differential pressures
    (b) Stack or duct gas temperature at traverse point i 
(t<INF>s(i)</INF>)
    (c) Absolute stack or duct gas temperature at traverse point i 
(T<INF>s(i)</INF>)
    (d) Yaw angle at each traverse point i ([theta]<INF>y(i)</INF>)
    (e) Pitch angle at each traverse point i ([theta]<INF>p(i)</INF>)
    (f) Stack or duct gas axial velocity at traverse point i 
(v<INF>a(i)</INF>)

    16.1.3.3 The following values should be reported once per run:

    (a) Water vapor in the gas stream (from Method 4 or alternative), 
proportion by volume (B<INF>ws</INF>), measured at the frequency 
specified in the applicable regulation
    (b) Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, dry basis (M<INF>d</INF>)
    (c) Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, wet basis (M<INF>s</INF>)
    (d) Stack or duct static pressure (P<INF>g</INF>)
    (e) Absolute stack or duct pressure (P<INF>s</INF>)
    (f) Carbon dioxide concentration in the flue gas, dry basis (\0/
0\<INF>d</INF> CO<INF>2</INF>)
    (g) Oxygen concentration in the flue gas, dry basis (\0/
0\<INF>d</INF> O<INF>2</INF>)
    (h) Average axial stack or duct gas velocity (v<INF>a(avg)</INF>) 
across all traverse points
    (i) Gas volumetric flow rate corrected to standard conditions, dry 
or wet basis as required by the applicable regulation (Q<INF>sd</INF> or 
Q<INF>sw</INF>)

16.1.3.4 The following should be reported once per complete set of test 
runs:

    (a) Cross-sectional area of stack or duct at the test location (A)
    (b) Measurement system response time (sec)
    (c) Barometric pressure at measurement site (P<INF>bar</INF>)

    16.1.4 Calibration data. The field test report should include 
calibration data for all probes and test equipment used in the field 
test. At a minimum, the probe calibration data reported to the Agency 
should include the following:

    (a) Date of calibration
    (b) Probe type
    (c) Probe identification number(s) or code(s)
    (d) Probe inspection sheets
    (e) Pressure measurements and intermediate calculations of 
F<INF>1</INF> and F<INF>2</INF> at each pitch angle used to obtain 
calibration curves in accordance with section 10.6 of this method
    (f) Calibration curves (in graphic or equation format) obtained in 
accordance with sections 10.6.11 of this method
    (g) Description and diagram of wind tunnel used for the calibration, 
including dimensions of cross-sectional area and position and size of 
the test section
    (h) Documentation of wind tunnel qualification tests performed in 
accordance with section 10.1 of this method


[[Page 67]]


    16.1.5 Quality Assurance. Specific quality assurance and quality 
control procedures used during the test should be described.

                            17.0 Bibliography

    (1) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 1--Sample and velocity 
traverses for stationary sources.
    (2) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2H--Determination of stack 
gas velocity taking into account velocity decay near the stack wall.
    (3) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2--Determination of stack gas 
velocity and volumetric flow rate (Type S pitot tube).
    (4) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 3--Gas analysis for carbon 
dioxide, oxygen, excess air, and dry molecular weight.
    (5) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 3A--Determination of oxygen 
and carbon dioxide concentrations in emissions from stationary sources 
(instrumental analyzer procedure).
    (6) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 4--Determination of moisture 
content in stack gases.
    (7) Emission Measurement Center (EMC) Approved Alternative Method 
(ALT-011) ``Alternative Method 2 Thermocouple Calibration Procedure.''
    (8) Electric Power Research Institute, Interim Report EPRI TR-
106698, ``Flue Gas Flow Rate Measurement Errors,'' June 1996.
    (9) Electric Power Research Institute, Final Report EPRI TR-108110, 
``Evaluation of Heat Rate Discrepancy from Continuous Emission 
Monitoring Systems,'' August 1997.
    (10) Fossil Energy Research Corporation, Final Report, ``Velocity 
Probe Tests in Non-axial Flow Fields,'' November 1998, Prepared for the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
    (11) Fossil Energy Research Corporation, ``Additional Swirl Tunnel 
Tests: E-DAT and T-DAT Probes,'' February 24, 1999, Technical Memorandum 
Prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, P.O. No. 7W-1193-
NALX.
    (12) Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Report WBWT-TR-1317, 
``Calibration of Eight Wind Speed Probes Over a Reynolds Number Range of 
46,000 to 725,000 Per Foot, Text and Summary Plots,'' Plus appendices, 
October 15, 1998, Prepared for The Cadmus Group, Inc.
    (13) National Institute of Standards and Technology, Special 
Publication 250, ``NIST Calibration Services Users Guide 1991,'' Revised 
October 1991, U.S. Department of Commerce, p. 2.
    (14) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Four Prandtl Probes, Four 
S-Type Probes, Four French Probes, Four Modified Kiel Probes,'' Prepared 
for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (15) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Five Autoprobes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (16) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Eight Spherical Probes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (17) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Four DAT Probes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (18) Norfleet, S.K., ``An Evaluation of Wall Effects on Stack Flow 
Velocities and Related Overestimation Bias in EPA's Stack Flow Reference 
Methods,'' EPRI CEMS User's Group Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana, May 
13-15, 1998.
    (19) Page, J.J., E.A. Potts, and R.T. Shigehara, ``3-D Pitot Tube 
Calibration Study,'' EPA Contract No. 68-D1-0009, Work Assignment No. I-
121, March 11, 1993.
    (20) Shigehara, R.T., W.F. Todd, and W.S. Smith, ``Significance of 
Errors in Stack Sampling Measurements,'' Presented at the Annual Meeting 
of the Air Pollution Control Association, St. Louis, Missouri, June 14-
19, 1970.
    (21) The Cadmus Group, Inc., May 1999, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Findings Report,'' EPA/430-R-99-009.
    (22) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Texas Utilities, DeCordova Steam 
Electric Station, Volume I: Test Description and Appendix A (Data 
Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-015a.
    (23) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Texas Utilities, Lake Hubbard Steam 
Electric Station, Volume I: Test Description and Appendix A (Data 
Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-017a.
    (24) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Pennsylvania Electric Co., G.P.U. 
Genco Homer City Station: Unit 1, Volume I: Test Description and 
Appendix A (Data Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-018a.
    (25) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1997, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Wind Tunnel Experimental Results,'' EPA/430-R-97-
013.

                              18.0 Annexes

    Annex A, C, and D describe recommended procedures for meeting 
certain provisions in sections 8.3, 10.4, and 10.5 of this method. Annex 
B describes procedures to be followed

[[Page 68]]

when using the protractor wheel and pointer assembly to measure yaw 
angles, as provided under section 8.9.1.
    18.1 Annex A--Rotational Position Check. The following are 
recommended procedures that may be used to satisfy the rotational 
position check requirements of section 8.3 of this method and to 
determine the angle-measuring device rotational offset R<INF>ADO</INF>.
    18.1.1 Rotational position check with probe outside stack. Where 
physical constraints at the sampling location allow full assembly of the 
probe outside the stack and insertion into the test port, the following 
procedures should be performed before the start of testing. Two angle-
measuring devices that meet the specifications in section 6.2.1 or 6.2.3 
are required for the rotational position check. An angle measuring 
device whose position can be independently adjusted (e.g., by means of a 
set screw) after being locked into position on the probe sheath shall 
not be used for this check unless the independent adjustment is set so 
that the device performs exactly like a device without the capability 
for independent adjustment. That is, when aligned on the probe such a 
device must give the same reading as a device that does not have the 
capability of being independently adjusted. With the fully assembled 
probe (including probe shaft extensions, if any) secured in a horizontal 
position, affix one yaw angle-measuring device to the probe sheath and 
lock it into position on the reference scribe line specified in section 
6.1.6.1. Position the second angle-measuring device using the procedure 
in section 18.1.1.1 or 18.1.1.2.
    18.1.1.1 Marking procedure. The procedures in this section should be 
performed at each location on the fully assembled probe where the yaw 
angle-measuring device will be mounted during the velocity traverse. 
Place the second yaw angle-measuring device on the main probe sheath (or 
extension) at the position where a yaw angle will be measured during the 
velocity traverse. Adjust the position of the second angle-measuring 
device until it indicates the same angle (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]) 
as the reference device, and affix the second device to the probe sheath 
(or extension). Record the angles indicated by the two angle-measuring 
devices on a form similar to Table 2F-2. In this position, the second 
angle-measuring device is considered to be properly positioned for yaw 
angle measurement. Make a mark, no wider than 1.6 mm (1/16 in.), on the 
probe sheath (or extension), such that the yaw angle-measuring device 
can be re-affixed at this same properly aligned position during the 
velocity traverse.
    18.1.1.2 Procedure for probe extensions with scribe lines. If, 
during a velocity traverse the angle-measuring device will be affixed to 
a probe extension having a scribe line as specified in section 6.1.6.2, 
the following procedure may be used to align the extension's scribe line 
with the reference scribe line instead of marking the extension as 
described in section 18.1.1.1. Attach the probe extension to the main 
probe. Align and lock the second angle-measuring device on the probe 
extension's scribe line. Then, rotate the extension until both measuring 
devices indicate the same angle (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]). Lock the 
extension at this rotational position. Record the angles indicated by 
the two angle-measuring devices on a form similar to Table 2F-2. An 
angle-measuring device may be aligned at any position on this scribe 
line during the velocity traverse, if the scribe line meets the 
alignment specification in section 6.1.6.3.
    18.1.1.3 Post-test rotational position check. If the fully assembled 
probe includes one or more extensions, the following check should be 
performed immediately after the completion of a velocity traverse. At 
the discretion of the tester, additional checks may be conducted after 
completion of testing at any sample port. Without altering the alignment 
of any of the components of the probe assembly used in the velocity 
traverse, secure the fully assembled probe in a horizontal position. 
Affix an angle-measuring device at the reference scribe line specified 
in section 6.1.6.1. Use the other angle-measuring device to check the 
angle at each location where the device was checked prior to testing. 
Record the readings from the two angle-measuring devices.
    18.1.2 Rotational position check with probe in stack. This section 
applies only to probes that, due to physical constraints, cannot be 
inserted into the test port as fully assembled with all necessary 
extensions needed to reach the inner-most traverse point(s).
    18.1.2.1 Perform the out-of-stack procedure in section 18.1.1 on the 
main probe and any attached extensions that will be initially inserted 
into the test port.
    18.1.2.2 Use the following procedures to perform additional 
rotational position check(s) with the probe in the stack, each time a 
probe extension is added. Two angle-measuring devices are required. The 
first of these is the device that was used to measure yaw angles at the 
preceding traverse point, left in its properly aligned measurement 
position. The second angle-measuring device is positioned on the added 
probe extension. Use the applicable procedures in section 18.1.1.1 or 
18.1.1.2 to align, adjust, lock, and mark (if necessary) the position of 
the second angle-measuring device to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] 
of the first device. Record the readings of the two devices on a form 
similar to Table 2F-2.
    18.1.2.3 The procedure in section 18.1.2.2 should be performed at 
the first port where measurements are taken. The procedure should be 
repeated each time a probe extension is re-attached at a subsequent 
port, unless the probe extensions are designed to be locked into a 
mechanically fixed rotational

[[Page 69]]

position (e.g., through use of interlocking grooves), which can be 
reproduced from port to port as specified in section 8.3.5.2.
    18.2 Annex B--Angle Measurement Protocol for Protractor Wheel and 
Pointer Device. The following procedure shall be used when a protractor 
wheel and pointer assembly, such as the one described in section 6.2.2 
and illustrated in Figure 2F-7 is used to measure the yaw angle of flow. 
With each move to a new traverse point, unlock, re-align, and re-lock 
the probe, angle-pointer collar, and protractor wheel to each other. At 
each such move, particular attention is required to ensure that the 
scribe line on the angle pointer collar is either aligned with the 
reference scribe line on the main probe sheath or is at the rotational 
offset position established under section 8.3.1. The procedure consists 
of the following steps:
    18.2.1 Affix a protractor wheel to the entry port for the test probe 
in the stack or duct.
    18.2.2 Orient the protractor wheel so that the 0[deg] mark 
corresponds to the longitudinal axis of the stack or duct. For stacks, 
vertical ducts, or ports on the side of horizontal ducts, use a digital 
inclinometer meeting the specifications in section 6.2.1 to locate the 
0[deg] orientation. For ports on the top or bottom of horizontal ducts, 
identify the longitudinal axis at each test port and permanently mark 
the duct to indicate the 0[deg] orientation. Once the protractor wheel 
is properly aligned, lock it into position on the test port.
    18.2.3 Move the pointer assembly along the probe sheath to the 
position needed to take measurements at the first traverse point. Align 
the scribe line on the pointer collar with the reference scribe line or 
at the rotational offset position established under section 8.3.1. 
Maintaining this rotational alignment, lock the pointer device onto the 
probe sheath. Insert the probe into the entry port to the depth needed 
to take measurements at the first traverse point.
    18.2.4 Perform the yaw angle determination as specified in sections 
8.9.3 and 8.9.4 and record the angle as shown by the pointer on the 
protractor wheel. Then, take velocity pressure and temperature 
measurements in accordance with the procedure in section 8.9.5. Perform 
the alignment check described in section 8.9.6.
    18.2.5 After taking velocity pressure measurements at that traverse 
point, unlock the probe from the collar and slide the probe through the 
collar to the depth needed to reach the next traverse point.
    18.2.6 Align the scribe line on the pointer collar with the 
reference scribe line on the main probe or at the rotational offset 
position established under section 8.3.1. Lock the collar onto the 
probe.
    18.2.7 Repeat the steps in sections 18.2.4 through 18.2.6 at the 
remaining traverse points accessed from the current stack or duct entry 
port.
    18.2.8 After completing the measurement at the last traverse point 
accessed from a port, verify that the orientation of the protractor 
wheel on the test port has not changed over the course of the traverse 
at that port. For stacks, vertical ducts, or ports on the side of 
horizontal ducts, use a digital inclinometer meeting the specifications 
in section 6.2.1 to check the rotational position of the 0[deg] mark on 
the protractor wheel. For ports on the top or bottom of horizontal 
ducts, observe the alignment of the angle wheel 0[deg] mark relative to 
the permanent 0[deg] mark on the duct at that test port. If these 
observed comparisons exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of 0[deg], all 
angle and pressure measurements taken at that port since the protractor 
wheel was last locked into position on the port shall be repeated.
    18.2.9 Move to the next stack or duct entry port and repeat the 
steps in sections 18.2.1 through 18.2.8.
    18.3 Annex C--Guideline for Reference Scribe Line Placement. Use of 
the following guideline is recommended to satisfy the requirements of 
section 10.4 of this method. The rotational position of the reference 
scribe line should be either 90[deg] or 180[deg] from the probe's impact 
pressure port.
    18.4 Annex D--Determination of Reference Scribe Line Rotational 
Offset. The following procedures are recommended for determining the 
magnitude and sign of a probe's reference scribe line rotational offset, 
R<INF>SLO</INF>. Separate procedures are provided for two types of 
angle-measuring devices: digital inclinometers and protractor wheel and 
pointer assemblies.
    18.4.1 Perform the following procedures on the main probe with all 
devices that will be attached to the main probe in the field [such as 
thermocouples or resistance temperature detectors (RTDs)] that may 
affect the flow around the probe head. Probe shaft extensions that do 
not affect flow around the probe head need not be attached during 
calibration.
    18.4.2 The procedures below assume that the wind tunnel duct used 
for probe calibration is horizontal and that the flow in the calibration 
wind tunnel is axial as determined by the axial flow verification check 
described in section 10.1.2. Angle-measuring devices are assumed to 
display angles in alternating 0[deg] to 90[deg] and 90[deg] to 0[deg] 
intervals. If angle-measuring devices with other readout conventions are 
used or if other calibration wind tunnel duct configurations are used, 
make the appropriate calculational corrections.
    18.4.2.1 Position the angle-measuring device in accordance with one 
of the following procedures.
    18.4.2.1.1 If using a digital inclinometer, affix the calibrated 
digital inclinometer to

[[Page 70]]

the probe. If the digital inclinometer can be independently adjusted 
after being locked into position on the probe sheath (e.g., by means of 
a set screw), the independent adjustment must be set so that the device 
performs exactly like a device without the capability for independent 
adjustment. That is, when aligned on the probe the device must give the 
same readings as a device that does not have the capability of being 
independently adjusted. Either align it directly on the reference scribe 
line or on a mark aligned with the scribe line determined according to 
the procedures in section 18.1.1.1. Maintaining this rotational 
alignment, lock the digital inclinometer onto the probe sheath.
    18.4.2.1.2 If using a protractor wheel and pointer device, orient 
the protractor wheel on the test port so that the 0[deg] mark is aligned 
with the longitudinal axis of the wind tunnel duct. Maintaining this 
alignment, lock the wheel into place on the wind tunnel test port. Align 
the scribe line on the pointer collar with the reference scribe line or 
with a mark aligned with the reference scribe line, as determined under 
section 18.1.1.1. Maintaining this rotational alignment, lock the 
pointer device onto the probe sheath.
    18.4.2.2 Zero the pressure-measuring device used for yaw nulling.
    18.4.2.3 Insert the probe assembly into the wind tunnel through the 
entry port, positioning the probe's impact port at the calibration 
location. Check the responsiveness of the pressure-measuring device to 
probe rotation, taking corrective action if the response is 
unacceptable.
    18.4.2.4 Ensure that the probe is in a horizontal position using a 
carpenter's level.
    18.4.2.5 Rotate the probe either clockwise or counterclockwise until 
a yaw null (P<INF>2</INF>=P<INF>3</INF>) is obtained.
    18.4.2.6 Read and record the value of [theta]<INF>null</INF>, the 
angle indicated by the angle-measuring device at the yaw-null position. 
Record the angle reading on a form similar to Table 2F-6. Do not 
associate an algebraic sign with this reading.
    18.4.2.7 Determine the magnitude and algebraic sign of the reference 
scribe line rotational offset, R<INF>SLO</INF>. The magnitude of 
R<INF>SLO</INF> will be equal to either [theta]<INF>null</INF> or 
(90[deg]-[theta]<INF>null</INF>), depending on the angle-measuring 
device used. (See Table 2F-7 for a summary.) The algebraic sign of 
R<INF>SLO</INF> will either be positive, if the rotational position of 
the reference scribe line is clockwise, or negative, if counterclockwise 
with respect to the probe's yaw-null position. Figure 2F-13 illustrates 
how the magnitude and sign of R<INF>SLO</INF> are determined.
    18.4.2.8 Perform the steps in sections 18.4.2.3 through 18.4.2.7 
twice at each of the two calibration velocities selected for the probe 
under section 10.6. Record the values of R<INF>SLO</INF> in a form 
similar to Table 2F-6.
    18.4.2.9 The average of all R<INF>SLO</INF> values is the reference 
scribe line rotational offset for the probe.

[[Page 71]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.000


[[Page 72]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.001


[[Page 73]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.002


[[Page 74]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.003


[[Page 75]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.004


[[Page 76]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.005


[[Page 77]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.006


[[Page 78]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.007


[[Page 79]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.008


[[Page 80]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.009


[[Page 81]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.010


[[Page 82]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.011


[[Page 83]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.012


[[Page 84]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.013


[[Page 85]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.014


[[Page 86]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.015


[[Page 87]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.017


[[Page 88]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.018


[[Page 89]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.019


[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-1, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 90]]

           Appendix A-2 to Part 60--Test Methods 2G through 3C

Method 2G--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate 
With Two-Dimensional Probes
Method 2H--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity Taking Into Account 
Velocity Decay Near the Stack Wall
Method 3--Gas analysis for the determination of dry molecular weight
Method 3A--Determination of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Concentrations in 
Emissions From Stationary Sources (Instrumental Analyzer Procedure)
Method 3B--Gas analysis for the determination of emission rate 
correction factor or excess air
Method 3C--Determination of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrogen, and 
oxygen from stationary sources
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining to 
any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are 
properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

Method 2G--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate 
                       With Two-Dimensional Probes

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material has been incorporated from other methods in 
this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, those using this 
method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the following

[[Page 91]]

additional test methods: Methods 1, 2, 3 or 3A, and 4.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 This method is applicable for the determination of yaw angle, 
near-axial velocity, and the volumetric flow rate of a gas stream in a 
stack or duct using a two-dimensional (2-D) probe.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

2.1 A 2-D probe is used to measure the velocity pressure and the yaw 
angle of the flow velocity vector in a stack or duct. Alternatively, 
these measurements may be made by operating one of the three-dimensional 
(3-D) probes described in Method 2F, in yaw determination mode only. 
From these measurements and a determination of the stack gas density, 
the average near-axial velocity of the stack gas is calculated. The 
near-axial velocity accounts for the yaw, but not the pitch, component 
of flow. The average gas volumetric flow rate in the stack or duct is 
then determined from the average near-axial velocity.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1. Angle-measuring Device Rotational Offset (RADO). The rotational 
position of an angle-measuring device relative to the reference scribe 
line, as determined during the pre-test rotational position check 
described in section 8.3.
    3.2 Calibration Pitot Tube. The standard (Prandtl type) pitot tube 
used as a reference when calibrating a probe under this method.
    3.3 Field Test. A set of measurements conducted at a specific unit 
or exhaust stack/duct to satisfy the applicable regulation (e.g., a 
three-run boiler performance test, a single-or multiple-load nine-run 
relative accuracy test).
    3.4 Full Scale of Pressure-measuring Device. Full scale refers to 
the upper limit of the measurement range displayed by the device. For 
bi-directional pressure gauges, full scale includes the entire pressure 
range from the lowest negative value to the highest positive value on 
the pressure scale.
    3.5 Main probe. Refers to the probe head and that section of probe 
sheath directly attached to the probe head. The main probe sheath is 
distinguished from probe extensions, which are sections of sheath added 
onto the main probe to extend its reach.
    3.6 ``May,'' ``Must,'' ``Shall,'' ``Should,'' and the imperative 
form of verbs.
    3.6.1 ``May'' is used to indicate that a provision of this method is 
optional.
    3.6.2 ``Must,'' ``Shall,'' and the imperative form of verbs (such as 
``record'' or ``enter'') are used to indicate that a provision of this 
method is mandatory.
    3.6.3 ``Should'' is used to indicate that a provision of this method 
is not mandatory, but is highly recommended as good practice.
    3.7 Method 1. Refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 1--
Sample and velocity traverses for stationary sources.''
    3.8 Method 2. Refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate (Type S 
pitot tube).''
    3.9 Method 2F. Refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2F--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with three-
dimensional probes.''
    3.10 Near-axial Velocity. The velocity vector parallel to the axis 
of the stack or duct that accounts for the yaw angle component of gas 
flow. The term ``near-axial'' is used herein to indicate that the 
velocity and volumetric flow rate results account for the measured yaw 
angle component of flow at each measurement point.
    3.11 Nominal Velocity. Refers to a wind tunnel velocity setting that 
approximates the actual wind tunnel velocity to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1.5 m/sec (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ft/sec).
    3.12 Pitch Angle. The angle between the axis of the stack or duct 
and the pitch component of flow, i.e., the component of the total 
velocity vector in a plane defined by the traverse line and the axis of 
the stack or duct. (Figure 2G-1 illustrates the ``pitch plane.'') From 
the standpoint of a tester facing a test port in a vertical stack, the 
pitch component of flow is the vector of flow moving from the center of 
the stack toward or away from that test port. The pitch angle is the 
angle described by this pitch component of flow and the vertical axis of 
the stack.
    3.13 Readability. For the purposes of this method, readability for 
an analog measurement device is one half of the smallest scale division. 
For a digital measurement device, it is the number of decimals displayed 
by the device.
    3.14 Reference Scribe Line. A line permanently inscribed on the main 
probe sheath (in accordance with section 6.1.5.1) to serve as a 
reference mark for determining yaw angles.
    3.15 Reference Scribe Line Rotational Offset (RSLO). The rotational 
position of a probe's reference scribe line relative to the probe's yaw-
null position, as determined during the yaw angle calibration described 
in section 10.5.
    3.16 Response Time. The time required for the measurement system to 
fully respond to a change from zero differential pressure and ambient 
temperature to the stable stack or duct pressure and temperature 
readings at a traverse point.
    3.17 Tested Probe. A probe that is being calibrated.
    3.18 Three-dimensional (3-D) Probe. A directional probe used to 
determine the velocity

[[Page 92]]

pressure and the yaw and pitch angles in a flowing gas stream.
    3.19 Two-dimensional (2-D) Probe. A directional probe used to 
measure velocity pressure and yaw angle in a flowing gas stream.
    3.20 Traverse Line. A diameter or axis extending across a stack or 
duct on which measurements of velocity pressure and flow angles are 
made.
    3.21 Wind Tunnel Calibration Location. A point, line, area, or 
volume within the wind tunnel test section at, along, or within which 
probes are calibrated. At a particular wind tunnel velocity setting, the 
average velocity pressures at specified points at, along, or within the 
calibration location shall vary by no more than 2 percent or 0.3 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>0 (0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is less restrictive, 
from the average velocity pressure at the calibration pitot tube 
location. Air flow at this location shall be axial, i.e., yaw and pitch 
angles within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. Compliance with 
these flow criteria shall be demonstrated by performing the procedures 
prescribed in sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.2. For circular tunnels, no part 
of the calibration location may be closer to the tunnel wall than 10.2 
cm (4 in.) or 25 percent of the tunnel diameter, whichever is farther 
from the wall. For elliptical or rectangular tunnels, no part of the 
calibration location may be closer to the tunnel wall than 10.2 cm (4 
in.) or 25 percent of the applicable cross-sectional axis, whichever is 
farther from the wall.
    3.22 Wind Tunnel with Documented Axial Flow. A wind tunnel facility 
documented as meeting the provisions of sections 10.1.1 (velocity 
pressure cross-check) and 10.1.2 (axial flow verification) using the 
procedures described in these sections or alternative procedures 
determined to be technically equivalent.
    3.23 Yaw Angle. The angle between the axis of the stack or duct and 
the yaw component of flow, i.e., the component of the total velocity 
vector in a plane perpendicular to the traverse line at a particular 
traverse point. (Figure 2G-1 illustrates the ``yaw plane.'') From the 
standpoint of a tester facing a test port in a vertical stack, the yaw 
component of flow is the vector of flow moving to the left or right from 
the center of the stack as viewed by the tester. (This is sometimes 
referred to as ``vortex flow,'' i.e., flow around the centerline of a 
stack or duct.) The yaw angle is the angle described by this yaw 
component of flow and the vertical axis of the stack. The algebraic sign 
convention is illustrated in Figure 2G-2.
    3.24 Yaw Nulling. A procedure in which a Type-S pitot tube or a 3-D 
probe is rotated about its axis in a stack or duct until a zero 
differential pressure reading (``yaw null'') is obtained. When a Type S 
probe is yaw-nulled, the rotational position of its impact port is 
90[deg] from the direction of flow in the stack or duct and the [Delta]P 
reading is zero. When a 3-D probe is yaw-nulled, its impact pressure 
port (P<INF>1</INF>) faces directly into the direction of flow in the 
stack or duct and the differential pressure between pressure ports 
P<INF>2</INF> and P<INF>3</INF> is zero.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This test method may involve hazardous operations and the use of 
hazardous materials or equipment. This method does not purport to 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish and implement appropriate safety 
and health practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory 
limitations before using this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Two-dimensional Probes. Probes that provide both the velocity 
pressure and the yaw angle of the flow vector in a stack or duct, as 
listed in sections 6.1.1 and 6.1.2, qualify for use based on 
comprehensive wind tunnel and field studies involving both inter-and 
intra-probe comparisons by multiple test teams. Each 2-D probe shall 
have a unique identification number or code permanently marked on the 
main probe sheath. Each probe shall be calibrated prior to use according 
to the procedures in section 10. Manufacturer-supplied calibration data 
shall be used as example information only, except when the manufacturer 
calibrates the probe as specified in section 10 and provides complete 
documentation.
    6.1.1 Type S (Stausscheibe or reverse type) pitot tube. This is the 
same as specified in Method 2, section 2.1, except for the following 
additional specifications that enable the pitot tube to accurately 
determine the yaw component of flow. For the purposes of this method, 
the external diameter of the tubing used to construct the Type S pitot 
tube (dimension D<INF>t</INF> in Figure 2-2 of Method 2) shall be no 
less than 9.5 mm (3/8 in.). The pitot tube shall also meet the following 
alignment specifications. The angles [alpha]<INF>1</INF>, 
[alpha]<INF>2</INF>, [beta]<INF>1</INF>, and [beta]<INF>2</INF>, as 
shown in Method 2, Figure 2-3, shall not exceed <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg]. The dimensions w and z, shown in Method 2, 
Figure 2-3 shall not exceed 0.5 mm (0.02 in.).
    6.1.1.1 Manual Type S probe. This refers to a Type S probe that is 
positioned at individual traverse points and yaw nulled manually by an 
operator.
    6.1.1.2 Automated Type S probe. This refers to a system that uses a 
computer-controlled motorized mechanism to position the Type S pitot 
head at individual traverse points and perform yaw angle determinations.
    6.1.2 Three-dimensional probes used in 2-D mode. A 3-D probe, as 
specified in sections 6.1.1 through 6.1.3 of Method 2F, may, for the

[[Page 93]]

purposes of this method, be used in a two-dimensional mode (i.e., 
measuring yaw angle, but not pitch angle). When the 3-D probe is used as 
a 2-D probe, only the velocity pressure and yaw-null pressure are 
obtained using the pressure taps referred to as P<INF>1</INF>, 
P<INF>2</INF>, and P<INF>3</INF>. The differential pressure 
P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF> is a function of total velocity and 
corresponds to the [Delta]P obtained using the Type S probe. The 
differential pressure P<INF>2</INF>-P<INF>3</INF> is used to yaw null 
the probe and determine the yaw angle. The differential pressure 
P<INF>4</INF>-P<INF>5</INF>, which is a function of pitch angle, is not 
measured when the 3-D probe is used in 2-D mode.
    6.1.3 Other probes. [Reserved]
    6.1.4 Probe sheath. The probe shaft shall include an outer sheath 
to: (1) provide a surface for inscribing a permanent reference scribe 
line, (2) accommodate attachment of an angle-measuring device to the 
probe shaft, and (3) facilitate precise rotational movement of the probe 
for determining yaw angles. The sheath shall be rigidly attached to the 
probe assembly and shall enclose all pressure lines from the probe head 
to the farthest position away from the probe head where an angle-
measuring device may be attached during use in the field. The sheath of 
the fully assembled probe shall be sufficiently rigid and straight at 
all rotational positions such that, when one end of the probe shaft is 
held in a horizontal position, the fully extended probe meets the 
horizontal straightness specifications indicated in section 8.2 below.
    6.1.5 Scribe lines.
    6.1.5.1 Reference scribe line. A permanent line, no greater than 1.6 
mm (1/16 in.) in width, shall be inscribed on each manual probe that 
will be used to determine yaw angles of flow. This line shall be placed 
on the main probe sheath in accordance with the procedures described in 
section 10.4 and is used as a reference position for installation of the 
yaw angle-measuring device on the probe. At the discretion of the 
tester, the scribe line may be a single line segment placed at a 
particular position on the probe sheath (e.g., near the probe head), 
multiple line segments placed at various locations along the length of 
the probe sheath (e.g., at every position where a yaw angle-measuring 
device may be mounted), or a single continuous line extending along the 
full length of the probe sheath.
    6.1.5.2 Scribe line on probe extensions. A permanent line may also 
be inscribed on any probe extension that will be attached to the main 
probe in performing field testing. This allows a yaw angle-measuring 
device mounted on the extension to be readily aligned with the reference 
scribe line on the main probe sheath.
    6.1.5.3 Alignment specifications. This specification shall be met 
separately, using the procedures in section 10.4.1, on the main probe 
and on each probe extension. The rotational position of the scribe line 
or scribe line segments on the main probe or any probe extension must 
not vary by more than 2[deg]. That is, the difference between the 
minimum and maximum of all of the rotational angles that are measured 
along the full length of the main probe or the probe extension must not 
exceed 2[deg].
    6.1.6 Probe and system characteristics to ensure horizontal 
stability.
    6.1.6.1 For manual probes, it is recommended that the effective 
length of the probe (coupled with a probe extension, if necessary) be at 
least 0.9 m (3 ft.) longer than the farthest traverse point mark on the 
probe shaft away from the probe head. The operator should maintain the 
probe's horizontal stability when it is fully inserted into the stack or 
duct. If a shorter probe is used, the probe should be inserted through a 
bushing sleeve, similar to the one shown in Figure 2G-3, that is 
installed on the test port; such a bushing shall fit snugly around the 
probe and be secured to the stack or duct entry port in such a manner as 
to maintain the probe's horizontal stability when fully inserted into 
the stack or duct.
    6.1.6.2 An automated system that includes an external probe casing 
with a transport system shall have a mechanism for maintaining 
horizontal stability comparable to that obtained by manual probes 
following the provisions of this method. The automated probe assembly 
shall also be constructed to maintain the alignment and position of the 
pressure ports during sampling at each traverse point. The design of the 
probe casing and transport system shall allow the probe to be removed 
from the stack or duct and checked through direct physical measurement 
for angular position and insertion depth.
    6.1.7 The tubing that is used to connect the probe and the pressure-
measuring device should have an inside diameter of at least 3.2 mm (\1/
8\ in.), to reduce the time required for pressure equilibration, and 
should be as short as practicable.
    6.1.8 If a detachable probe head without a sheath [e.g., a pitot 
tube, typically 15.2 to 30.5 cm (6 to 12 in.) in length] is coupled with 
a probe sheath and calibrated in a wind tunnel in accordance with the 
yaw angle calibration procedure in section 10.5, the probe head shall 
remain attached to the probe sheath during field testing in the same 
configuration and orientation as calibrated. Once the detachable probe 
head is uncoupled or re-oriented, the yaw angle calibration of the probe 
is no longer valid and must be repeated before using the probe in 
subsequent field tests.
    6.2 Yaw Angle-measuring Device. One of the following devices shall 
be used for measurement of the yaw angle of flow.

[[Page 94]]

    6.2.1 Digital inclinometer. This refers to a digital device capable 
of measuring and displaying the rotational position of the probe to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]. The device shall be able to be 
locked into position on the probe sheath or probe extension, so that it 
indicates the probe's rotational position throughout the test. A 
rotational position collar block that can be attached to the probe 
sheath (similar to the collar shown in Figure 2G-4) may be required to 
lock the digital inclinometer into position on the probe sheath.
    6.2.2 Protractor wheel and pointer assembly. This apparatus, similar 
to that shown in Figure 2G-5, consists of the following components.
    6.2.2.1 A protractor wheel that can be attached to a port opening 
and set in a fixed rotational position to indicate the yaw angle 
position of the probe's scribe line relative to the longitudinal axis of 
the stack or duct. The protractor wheel must have a measurement ring on 
its face that is no less than 17.8 cm (7 in.) in diameter, shall be able 
to be rotated to any angle and then locked into position on the stack or 
duct test port, and shall indicate angles to a resolution of 1[deg].
    6.2.2.2 A pointer assembly that includes an indicator needle mounted 
on a collar that can slide over the probe sheath and be locked into a 
fixed rotational position on the probe sheath. The pointer needle shall 
be of sufficient length, rigidity, and sharpness to allow the tester to 
determine the probe's angular position to within 1[deg] from the 
markings on the protractor wheel. Corresponding to the position of the 
pointer, the collar must have a scribe line to be used in aligning the 
pointer with the scribe line on the probe sheath.
    6.2.3 Other yaw angle-measuring devices. Other angle-measuring 
devices with a manufacturer's specified precision of 1[deg] or better 
may be used, if approved by the Administrator.
    6.3 Probe Supports and Stabilization Devices. When probes are used 
for determining flow angles, the probe head should be kept in a stable 
horizontal position. For probes longer than 3.0 m (10 ft.), the section 
of the probe that extends outside the test port shall be secured. Three 
alternative devices are suggested for maintaining the horizontal 
position and stability of the probe shaft during flow angle 
determinations and velocity pressure measurements: (1) monorails 
installed above each port, (2) probe stands on which the probe shaft may 
be rested, or (3) bushing sleeves of sufficient length secured to the 
test ports to maintain probes in a horizontal position. Comparable 
provisions shall be made to ensure that automated systems maintain the 
horizontal position of the probe in the stack or duct. The physical 
characteristics of each test platform may dictate the most suitable type 
of stabilization device. Thus, the choice of a specific stabilization 
device is left to the judgement of the testers.
    6.4 Differential Pressure Gauges. The velocity pressure ([Delta]P) 
measuring devices used during wind tunnel calibrations and field testing 
shall be either electronic manometers (e.g., pressure transducers), 
fluid manometers, or mechanical pressure gauges (e.g., 
Magnehelic<SUP>[Delta]</SUP> gauges). Use of electronic manometers is 
recommended. Under low velocity conditions, use of electronic manometers 
may be necessary to obtain acceptable measurements.
    6.4.1 Differential pressure-measuring device. This refers to a 
device capable of measuring pressure differentials and having a 
readability of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 percent of full scale. The device 
shall be capable of accurately measuring the maximum expected pressure 
differential. Such devices are used to determine the following pressure 
measurements: velocity pressure, static pressure, and yaw-null pressure. 
For an inclined-vertical manometer, the readability specification of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 percent shall be met separately using the 
respective full-scale upper limits of the inclined anvertical portions 
of the scales. To the extent practicable, the device shall be selected 
such that most of the pressure readings are between 10 and 90 percent of 
the device's full-scale measurement range (as defined in section 3.4). 
In addition, pressure-measuring devices should be selected such that the 
zero does not drift by more than 5 percent of the average expected 
pressure readings to be encountered during the field test. This is 
particularly important under low pressure conditions.
    6.4.2 Gauge used for yaw nulling. The differential pressure-
measuring device chosen for yaw nulling the probe during the wind tunnel 
calibrations and field testing shall be bi-directional, i.e., capable of 
reading both positive and negative differential pressures. If a 
mechanical, bi-directional pressure gauge is chosen, it shall have a 
full-scale range no greater than 2.6 cm (i.e., -1.3 to +1.3 cm) [1 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O (i.e., -0.5 in. to +0.5 in.)].
    6.4.3 Devices for calibrating differential pressure-measuring 
devices. A precision manometer (e.g., a U-tube, inclined, or inclined-
vertical manometer, or micromanometer) or NIST (National Institute of 
Standards and Technology) traceable pressure source shall be used for 
calibrating differential pressure-measuring devices. The device shall be 
maintained under laboratory conditions or in a similar protected 
environment (e.g., a climate-controlled trailer). It shall not be used 
in field tests. The precision manometer shall have a scale gradation of 
0.3 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), or less, in the range 
of 0 to 5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (0 to 2 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) and 2.5 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (0.1 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), or less, in the range of 5.1 to 
25.4 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (2 to 10 in. H<INF>2</INF>O). The manometer shall 
have manufacturer's documentation that it meets an accuracy 
specification of at least 0.5 percent of full scale. The NIST-traceable 
pressure source shall be recertified annually.

[[Page 95]]

    6.4.4 Devices used for post-test calibration check. A precision 
manometer meeting the specifications in section 6.4.3, a pressure-
measuring device or pressure source with a documented calibration 
traceable to NIST, or an equivalent device approved by the Administrator 
shall be used for the post-test calibration check. The pressure-
measuring device shall have a readability equivalent to or greater than 
the tested device. The pressure source shall be capable of generating 
pressures between 50 and 90 percent of the range of the tested device 
and known to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 percent of the full scale of 
the tested device. The pressure source shall be recertified annually.
    6.5 Data Display and Capture Devices. Electronic manometers (if 
used) shall be coupled with a data display device (such as a digital 
panel meter, personal computer display, or strip chart) that allows the 
tester to observe and validate the pressure measurements taken during 
testing. They shall also be connected to a data recorder (such as a data 
logger or a personal computer with data capture software) that has the 
ability to compute and retain the appropriate average value at each 
traverse point, identified by collection time and traverse point.
    6.6 Temperature Gauges. For field tests, a thermocouple or 
resistance temperature detector (RTD) capable of measuring temperature 
to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg]F) 
of the stack or duct temperature shall be used. The thermocouple shall 
be attached to the probe such that the sensor tip does not touch any 
metal. The position of the thermocouple relative to the pressure port 
face openings shall be in the same configuration as used for the probe 
calibrations in the wind tunnel. Temperature gauges used for wind tunnel 
calibrations shall be capable of measuring temperature to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.6[deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]F) of the 
temperature of the flowing gas stream in the wind tunnel.
    6.7 Stack or Duct Static Pressure Measurement. The pressure-
measuring device used with the probe shall be as specified in section 
6.4 of this method. The static tap of a standard (Prandtl type) pitot 
tube or one leg of a Type S pitot tube with the face opening planes 
positioned parallel to the gas flow may be used for this measurement. 
Also acceptable is the pressure differential reading of P<INF>1</INF>-
P<INF>bar</INF> from a five-hole prism-shaped 3-D probe, as specified in 
section 6.1.1 of Method 2F (such as the Type DA or DAT probe), with the 
P<INF>1</INF> pressure port face opening positioned parallel to the gas 
flow in the same manner as the Type S probe. However, the 3-D spherical 
probe, as specified in section 6.1.2 of Method 2F, is unable to provide 
this measurement and shall not be used to take static pressure 
measurements. Static pressure measurement is further described in 
section 8.11.
    6.8 Barometer. Same as Method 2, section 2.5.
    6.9 Gas Density Determination Equipment. Method 3 or 3A shall be 
used to determine the dry molecular weight of the stack or duct gas. 
Method 4 shall be used for moisture content determination and 
computation of stack or duct gas wet molecular weight. Other methods may 
be used, if approved by the Administrator.
    6.10 Calibration Pitot Tube. Same as Method 2, section 2.7.
    6.11 Wind Tunnel for Probe Calibration. Wind tunnels used to 
calibrate velocity probes must meet the following design specifications.
    6.11.1 Test section cross-sectional area. The flowing gas stream 
shall be confined within a circular, rectangular, or elliptical duct. 
The cross-sectional area of the tunnel must be large enough to ensure 
fully developed flow in the presence of both the calibration pitot tube 
and the tested probe. The calibration site, or ``test section,'' of the 
wind tunnel shall have a minimum diameter of 30.5 cm (12 in.) for 
circular or elliptical duct cross-sections or a minimum width of 30.5 cm 
(12 in.) on the shorter side for rectangular cross-sections. Wind 
tunnels shall meet the probe blockage provisions of this section and the 
qualification requirements prescribed in section 10.1. The projected 
area of the portion of the probe head, shaft, and attached devices 
inside the wind tunnel during calibration shall represent no more than 4 
percent of the cross-sectional area of the tunnel. The projected area 
shall include the combined area of the calibration pitot tube and the 
tested probe if both probes are placed simultaneously in the same cross-
sectional plane in the wind tunnel, or the larger projected area of the 
two probes if they are placed alternately in the wind tunnel.
    6.11.2 Velocity range and stability. The wind tunnel should be 
capable of maintaining velocities between 6.1 m/sec and 30.5 m/sec (20 
ft/sec and 100 ft/sec). The wind tunnel shall produce fully developed 
flow patterns that are stable and parallel to the axis of the duct in 
the test section.
    6.11.3 Flow profile at the calibration location. The wind tunnel 
shall provide axial flow within the test section calibration location 
(as defined in section 3.21). Yaw and pitch angles in the calibration 
location shall be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. The 
procedure for determining that this requirement has been met is 
described in section 10.1.2.
    6.11.4 Entry ports in the wind tunnel test section.
    6.11.4.1 Port for tested probe. A port shall be constructed for the 
tested probe. This port shall be located to allow the head of the tested 
probe to be positioned within the wind tunnel calibration location (as 
defined in section 3.21). The tested probe shall be able to be locked 
into the 0[deg] pitch angle position. To facilitate alignment of the 
probe during calibration, the test section should include a

[[Page 96]]

window constructed of a transparent material to allow the tested probe 
to be viewed.
    6.11.4.2 Port for verification of axial flow. Depending on the 
equipment selected to conduct the axial flow verification prescribed in 
section 10.1.2, a second port, located 90[deg] from the entry port for 
the tested probe, may be needed to allow verification that the gas flow 
is parallel to the central axis of the test section. This port should be 
located and constructed so as to allow one of the probes described in 
section 10.1.2.2 to access the same test point(s) that are accessible 
from the port described in section 6.11.4.1.
    6.11.4.3 Port for calibration pitot tube. The calibration pitot tube 
shall be used in the port for the tested probe or in a separate entry 
port. In either case, all measurements with the calibration pitot tube 
shall be made at the same point within the wind tunnel over the course 
of a probe calibration. The measurement point for the calibration pitot 
tube shall meet the same specifications for distance from the wall and 
for axial flow as described in section 3.21 for the wind tunnel 
calibration location.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Equipment Inspection and Set Up
    8.1.1 All 2-D and 3-D probes, differential pressure-measuring 
devices, yaw angle-measuring devices, thermocouples, and barometers 
shall have a current, valid calibration before being used in a field 
test. (See sections 10.3.3, 10.3.4, and 10.5 through 10.10 for the 
applicable calibration requirements.)
    8.1.2 Before each field use of a Type S probe, perform a visual 
inspection to verify the physical condition of the pitot tube. Record 
the results of the inspection. If the face openings are noticeably 
misaligned or there is visible damage to the face openings, the probe 
shall not be used until repaired, the dimensional specifications 
verified (according to the procedures in section 10.2.1), and the probe 
recalibrated.
    8.1.3 Before each field use of a 3-D probe, perform a visual 
inspection to verify the physical condition of the probe head according 
to the procedures in section 10.2 of Method 2F. Record the inspection 
results on a form similar to Table 2F-1 presented in Method 2F. If there 
is visible damage to the 3-D probe, the probe shall not be used until it 
is recalibrated.
    8.1.4 After verifying that the physical condition of the probe head 
is acceptable, set up the apparatus using lengths of flexible tubing 
that are as short as practicable. Surge tanks installed between the 
probe and pressure-measuring device may be used to dampen pressure 
fluctuations provided that an adequate measurement system response time 
(see section 8.8) is maintained.
    8.2 Horizontal Straightness Check. A horizontal straightness check 
shall be performed before the start of each field test, except as 
otherwise specified in this section. Secure the fully assembled probe 
(including the probe head and all probe shaft extensions) in a 
horizontal position using a stationary support at a point along the 
probe shaft approximating the location of the stack or duct entry port 
when the probe is sampling at the farthest traverse point from the stack 
or duct wall. The probe shall be rotated to detect bends. Use an angle-
measuring device or trigonometry to determine the bend or sag between 
the probe head and the secured end. (See Figure 2G-6.) Probes that are 
bent or sag by more than 5[deg] shall not be used. Although this check 
does not apply when the probe is used for a vertical traverse, care 
should be taken to avoid the use of bent probes when conducting vertical 
traverses. If the probe is constructed of a rigid steel material and 
consists of a main probe without probe extensions, this check need only 
be performed before the initial field use of the probe, when the probe 
is recalibrated, when a change is made to the design or material of the 
probe assembly, and when the probe becomes bent. With such probes, a 
visual inspection shall be made of the fully assembled probe before each 
field test to determine if a bend is visible. The probe shall be rotated 
to detect bends. The inspection results shall be documented in the field 
test report. If a bend in the probe is visible, the horizontal 
straightness check shall be performed before the probe is used.
    8.3 Rotational Position Check. Before each field test, and each time 
an extension is added to the probe during a field test, a rotational 
position check shall be performed on all manually operated probes 
(except as noted in section 8.3.5 below) to ensure that, throughout 
testing, the angle-measuring device is either: aligned to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] of the rotational position of the reference 
scribe line; or is affixed to the probe such that the rotational offset 
of the device from the reference scribe line is known to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]. This check shall consist of direct measurements 
of the rotational positions of the reference scribe line and angle-
measuring device sufficient to verify that these specifications are met. 
Annex A in section 18 of this method gives recommended procedures for 
performing the rotational position check, and Table 2G-2 gives an 
example data form. Procedures other than those recommended in Annex A in 
section 18 may be used, provided they demonstrate whether the alignment 
specification is met and are explained in detail in the field test 
report.
    8.3.1 Angle-measuring device rotational offset. The tester shall 
maintain a record of the angle-measuring device rotational offset, 
R<INF>ADO</INF>, as defined in section 3.1. Note that R<INF>ADO</INF> is 
assigned a value of 0[deg] when the angle-

[[Page 97]]

measuring device is aligned to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] of 
the rotational position of the reference scribe line. The 
R<INF>ADO</INF> shall be used to determine the yaw angle of flow in 
accordance with section 8.9.4.
    8.3.2 Sign of angle-measuring device rotational offset. The sign of 
R<INF>ADO</INF> is positive when the angle-measuring device (as viewed 
from the ``tail'' end of the probe) is positioned in a clockwise 
direction from the reference scribe line and negative when the device is 
positioned in a counterclockwise direction from the reference scribe 
line.
    8.3.3 Angle-measuring devices that can be independently adjusted 
(e.g., by means of a set screw), after being locked into position on the 
probe sheath, may be used. However, the R<INF>ADO</INF> must also take 
into account this adjustment.
    8.3.4 Post-test check. If probe extensions remain attached to the 
main probe throughout the field test, the rotational position check 
shall be repeated, at a minimum, at the completion of the field test to 
ensure that the angle-measuring device has remained within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of its rotational position established prior to 
testing. At the discretion of the tester, additional checks may be 
conducted after completion of testing at any sample port or after any 
test run. If the <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] specification is not met, 
all measurements made since the last successful rotational position 
check must be repeated. Section 18.1.1.3 of Annex A provides an example 
procedure for performing the post-test check.
    8.3.5 Exceptions.
    8.3.5.1 A rotational position check need not be performed if, for 
measurements taken at all velocity traverse points, the yaw angle-
measuring device is mounted and aligned directly on the reference scribe 
line specified in sections 6.1.5.1 and 6.1.5.3 and no independent 
adjustments, as described in section 8.3.3, are made to device's 
rotational position.
    8.3.5.2 If extensions are detached and re-attached to the probe 
during a field test, a rotational position check need only be performed 
the first time an extension is added to the probe, rather than each time 
the extension is re-attached, if the probe extension is designed to be 
locked into a mechanically fixed rotational position (e.g., through the 
use of interlocking grooves), that can re-establish the initial 
rotational position to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg].
    8.4 Leak Checks. A pre-test leak check shall be conducted before 
each field test. A post-test check shall be performed at the end of the 
field test, but additional leak checks may be conducted after any test 
run or group of test runs. The post-test check may also serve as the 
pre-test check for the next group of test runs. If any leak check is 
failed, all runs since the last passed leak check are invalid. While 
performing the leak check procedures, also check each pressure device's 
responsiveness to changes in pressure.
    8.4.1 To perform the leak check on a Type S pitot tube, pressurize 
the pitot impact opening until at least 7.6 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (3 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) velocity pressure, or a pressure corresponding to 
approximately 75 percent of the pressure device's measurement scale, 
whichever is less, registers on the pressure device; then, close off the 
impact opening. The pressure shall remain stable (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O, <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) for at least 15 seconds. Repeat this procedure for the 
static pressure side, except use suction to obtain the required 
pressure. Other leak-check procedures may be used, if approved by the 
Administrator.
    8.4.2 To perform the leak check on a 3-D probe, pressurize the 
probe's impact (P<INF>1</INF>) opening until at least 7.6 cm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (3 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) velocity pressure, or a pressure 
corresponding to approximately 75 percent of the pressure device's 
measurement scale, whichever is less, registers on the pressure device; 
then, close off the impact opening. The pressure shall remain stable 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O, <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 
in. H<INF>2</INF>O) for at least 15 seconds. Check the P<INF>2</INF> and 
P<INF>3</INF> pressure ports in the same fashion. Other leak-check 
procedures may be used, if approved by the Administrator.
    8.5 Zeroing the Differential Pressure-measuring Device. Zero each 
differential pressure-measuring device, including the device used for 
yaw nulling, before each field test. At a minimum, check the zero after 
each field test. A zero check may also be performed after any test run 
or group of test runs. For fluid manometers and mechanical pressure 
gauges (e.g., Magnehelic<SUP>[Delta]</SUP> gauges), the zero reading 
shall not deviate from zero by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.03 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) or one 
minor scale division, whichever is greater, between checks. For 
electronic manometers, the zero reading shall not deviate from zero 
between checks by more than: <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 mm H<INF>2</INF>O 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), for full scales less 
than or equal to 5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (2.0 in. H<INF>2</INF>O); or 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.03 
in. H<INF>2</INF>O), for full scales greater than 5.1 cm H<INF>2</INF>O 
(2.0 in. H<INF>2</INF>O). (Note: If negative zero drift is not directly 
readable, estimate the reading based on the position of the gauge oil in 
the manometer or of the needle on the pressure gauge.) In addition, for 
all pressure-measuring devices except those used exclusively for yaw 
nulling, the zero reading shall not deviate from zero by more than 5 
percent of the average measured differential pressure at any distinct 
process condition or load level. If any zero check is failed at a 
specific process condition or load level, all runs conducted at that 
process condition or load level since the last passed zero check are 
invalid.
    8.6 Traverse Point Verification. The number and location of the 
traverse points shall be selected based on Method 1 guidelines.

[[Page 98]]

The stack or duct diameter and port nipple lengths, including any 
extension of the port nipples into the stack or duct, shall be verified 
the first time the test is performed; retain and use this information 
for subsequent field tests, updating it as required. Physically measure 
the stack or duct dimensions or use a calibrated laser device; do not 
use engineering drawings of the stack or duct. The probe length 
necessary to reach each traverse point shall be recorded to within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6.4 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ in.) and, for 
manual probes, marked on the probe sheath. In determining these lengths, 
the tester shall take into account both the distance that the port 
flange projects outside of the stack and the depth that any port nipple 
extends into the gas stream. The resulting point positions shall reflect 
the true distances from the inside wall of the stack or duct, so that 
when the tester aligns any of the markings with the outside face of the 
stack port, the probe's impact port shall be located at the appropriate 
distance from the inside wall for the respective Method 1 traverse 
point. Before beginning testing at a particular location, an out-of-
stack or duct verification shall be performed on each probe that will be 
used to ensure that these position markings are correct. The distances 
measured during the verification must agree with the previously 
calculated distances to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ in. For 
manual probes, the traverse point positions shall be verified by 
measuring the distance of each mark from the probe's impact pressure 
port (the P<INF>1</INF> port for a 3-D probe). A comparable out-of-stack 
test shall be performed on automated probe systems. The probe shall be 
extended to each of the prescribed traverse point positions. Then, the 
accuracy of the positioning for each traverse point shall be verified by 
measuring the distance between the port flange and the probe's impact 
pressure port.
    8.7 Probe Installation. Insert the probe into the test port. A solid 
material shall be used to seal the port.
    8.8 System Response Time. Determine the response time of the probe 
measurement system. Insert and position the ``cold'' probe (at ambient 
temperature and pressure) at any Method 1 traverse point. Read and 
record the probe differential pressure, temperature, and elapsed time at 
15-second intervals until stable readings for both pressure and 
temperature are achieved. The response time is the longer of these two 
elapsed times. Record the response time.
    8.9 Sampling.
    8.9.1 Yaw angle measurement protocol. With manual probes, yaw angle 
measurements may be obtained in two alternative ways during the field 
test, either by using a yaw angle-measuring device (e.g., digital 
inclinometer) affixed to the probe, or using a protractor wheel and 
pointer assembly. For horizontal traversing, either approach may be 
used. For vertical traversing, i.e., when measuring from on top or into 
the bottom of a horizontal duct, only the protractor wheel and pointer 
assembly may be used. With automated probes, curve-fitting protocols may 
be used to obtain yaw-angle measurements.
    8.9.1.1 If a yaw angle-measuring device affixed to the probe is to 
be used, lock the device on the probe sheath, aligning it either on the 
reference scribe line or in the rotational offset position established 
under section 8.3.1.
    8.9.1.2 If a protractor wheel and pointer assembly is to be used, 
follow the procedures in Annex B of this method.
    8.9.1.3 Curve-fitting procedures. Curve-fitting routines sweep 
through a range of yaw angles to create curves correlating pressure to 
yaw position. To find the zero yaw position and the yaw angle of flow, 
the curve found in the stack is computationally compared to a similar 
curve that was previously generated under controlled conditions in a 
wind tunnel. A probe system that uses a curve-fitting routine for 
determining the yaw-null position of the probe head may be used, 
provided that it is verified in a wind tunnel to be able to determine 
the yaw angle of flow to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg].
    8.9.1.4 Other yaw angle determination procedures. If approved by the 
Administrator, other procedures for determining yaw angle may be used, 
provided that they are verified in a wind tunnel to be able to perform 
the yaw angle calibration procedure as described in section 10.5.
    8.9.2 Sampling strategy. At each traverse point, first yaw-null the 
probe, as described in section 8.9.3, below. Then, with the probe 
oriented into the direction of flow, measure and record the yaw angle, 
the differential pressure and the temperature at the traverse point, 
after stable readings are achieved, in accordance with sections 8.9.4 
and 8.9.5. At the start of testing in each port (i.e., after a probe has 
been inserted into the flue gas stream), allow at least the response 
time to elapse before beginning to take measurements at the first 
traverse point accessed from that port. Provided that the probe is not 
removed from the flue gas stream, measurements may be taken at 
subsequent traverse points accessed from the same test port without 
waiting again for the response time to elapse.
    8.9.3 Yaw-nulling procedure. In preparation for yaw angle 
determination, the probe must first be yaw nulled. After positioning the 
probe at the appropriate traverse point, perform the following 
procedures.
    8.9.3.1 For Type S probes, rotate the probe until a null 
differential pressure reading is obtained. The direction of the probe 
rotation shall be such that the thermocouple is located downstream of 
the probe pressure ports at the yaw-null position. Rotate the

[[Page 99]]

probe 90[deg] back from the yaw-null position to orient the impact 
pressure port into the direction of flow. Read and record the angle 
displayed by the angle-measuring device.
    8.9.3.2 For 3-D probes, rotate the probe until a null differential 
pressure reading (the difference in pressures across the P<INF>2</INF> 
and P<INF>3</INF> pressure ports is zero, i.e., 
P<INF>2</INF>=P<INF>3</INF>) is indicated by the yaw angle pressure 
gauge. Read and record the angle displayed by the angle-measuring 
device.
    8.9.3.3 Sign of the measured angle. The angle displayed on the 
angle-measuring device is considered positive when the probe's impact 
pressure port (as viewed from the ``tail'' end of the probe) is oriented 
in a clockwise rotational position relative to the stack or duct axis 
and is considered negative when the probe's impact pressure port is 
oriented in a counterclockwise rotational position (see Figure 2G-7).
    8.9.4 Yaw angle determination. After performing the applicable yaw-
nulling procedure in section 8.9.3, determine the yaw angle of flow 
according to one of the following procedures. Special care must be 
observed to take into account the signs of the recorded angle reading 
and all offsets.
    8.9.4.1 Direct-reading. If all rotational offsets are zero or if the 
angle-measuring device rotational offset (R<INF>ADO</INF>) determined in 
section 8.3 exactly compensates for the scribe line rotational offset 
(R<INF>SLO</INF>) determined in section 10.5, then the magnitude of the 
yaw angle is equal to the displayed angle-measuring device reading from 
section 8.9.3.1 or 8.9.3.2. The algebraic sign of the yaw angle is 
determined in accordance with section 8.9.3.3. [Note: Under certain 
circumstances (e.g., testing of horizontal ducts) a 90[deg] adjustment 
to the angle-measuring device readings may be necessary to obtain the 
correct yaw angles.]
    8.9.4.2 Compensation for rotational offsets during data reduction. 
When the angle-measuring device rotational offset does not compensate 
for reference scribe line rotational offset, the following procedure 
shall be used to determine the yaw angle:
    (a) Enter the reading indicated by the angle-measuring device from 
section 8.9.3.1 or 8.9.3.2.
    (b) Associate the proper algebraic sign from section 8.9.3.3 with 
the reading in step (a).
    (c) Subtract the reference scribe line rotational offset, 
R<INF>SLO</INF>, from the reading in step (b).
    (d) Subtract the angle-measuring device rotational offset, 
R<INF>ADO</INF>, if any, from the result obtained in step (c).
    (e) The final result obtained in step (d) is the yaw angle of flow.

    [Note: It may be necessary to first apply a 90[deg] adjustment to 
the reading in step (a), in order to obtain the correct yaw angle.]

    8.9.4.3 Record the yaw angle measurements on a form similar to Table 
2G-3.
    8.9.5 Impact velocity determination. Maintain the probe rotational 
position established during the yaw angle determination. Then, begin 
recording the pressure-measuring device readings. These pressure 
measurements shall be taken over a sampling period of sufficiently long 
duration to ensure representative readings at each traverse point. If 
the pressure measurements are determined from visual readings of the 
pressure device or display, allow sufficient time to observe the 
pulsation in the readings to obtain a sight-weighted average, which is 
then recorded manually. If an automated data acquisition system (e.g., 
data logger, computer-based data recorder, strip chart recorder) is used 
to record the pressure measurements, obtain an integrated average of all 
pressure readings at the traverse point. Stack or duct gas temperature 
measurements shall be recorded, at a minimum, once at each traverse 
point. Record all necessary data as shown in the example field data form 
(Table 2G-3).
    8.9.6 Alignment check. For manually operated probes, after the 
required yaw angle and differential pressure and temperature 
measurements have been made at each traverse point, verify (e.g., by 
visual inspection) that the yaw angle-measuring device has remained in 
proper alignment with the reference scribe line or with the rotational 
offset position established in section 8.3. If, for a particular 
traverse point, the angle-measuring device is found to be in proper 
alignment, proceed to the next traverse point; otherwise, re-align the 
device and repeat the angle and differential pressure measurements at 
the traverse point. In the course of a traverse, if a mark used to 
properly align the angle-measuring device (e.g., as described in section 
18.1.1.1) cannot be located, re-establish the alignment mark before 
proceeding with the traverse.
    8.10 Probe Plugging. Periodically check for plugging of the pressure 
ports by observing the responses on the pressure differential readouts. 
Plugging causes erratic results or sluggish responses. Rotate the probe 
to determine whether the readouts respond in the expected direction. If 
plugging is detected, correct the problem and repeat the affected 
measurements.
    8.11 Static Pressure. Measure the static pressure in the stack or 
duct using the equipment described in section 6.7.
    8.11.1 If a Type S probe is used for this measurement, position the 
probe at or between any traverse point(s) and rotate the probe until a 
null differential pressure reading is obtained. Disconnect the tubing 
from one of the pressure ports; read and record the [Delta]P. For 
pressure devices with one-directional

[[Page 100]]

scales, if a deflection in the positive direction is noted with the 
negative side disconnected, then the static pressure is positive. 
Likewise, if a deflection in the positive direction is noted with the 
positive side disconnected, then the static pressure is negative.
    8.11.2 If a 3-D probe is used for this measurement, position the 
probe at or between any traverse point(s) and rotate the probe until a 
null differential pressure reading is obtained at P<INF>2</INF>-
P<INF>3</INF>. Rotate the probe 90[deg]. Disconnect the P<INF>2</INF> 
pressure side of the probe and read the pressure P<INF>1</INF>-
P<INF>bar</INF> and record as the static pressure. (Note: The spherical 
probe, specified in section 6.1.2 of Method 2F, is unable to provide 
this measurement and shall not be used to take static pressure 
measurements.)
    8.12 Atmospheric Pressure. Determine the atmospheric pressure at the 
sampling elevation during each test run following the procedure 
described in section 2.5 of Method 2.
    8.13 Molecular Weight. Determine the stack or duct gas dry molecular 
weight. For combustion processes or processes that emit essentially 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, CO, and N<INF>2</INF>, use Method 3 or 
3A. For processes emitting essentially air, an analysis need not be 
conducted; use a dry molecular weight of 29.0. Other methods may be 
used, if approved by the Administrator.
    8.14 Moisture. Determine the moisture content of the stack gas using 
Method 4 or equivalent.
    8.15 Data Recording and Calculations. Record all required data on a 
form similar to Table 2G-3.
    8.15.1 2-D probe calibration coefficient. When a Type S pitot tube 
is used in the field, the appropriate calibration coefficient as 
determined in section 10.6 shall be used to perform velocity 
calculations. For calibrated Type S pitot tubes, the A-side coefficient 
shall be used when the A-side of the tube faces the flow, and the B-side 
coefficient shall be used when the B-side faces the flow.
    8.15.2 3-D calibration coefficient. When a 3-D probe is used to 
collect data with this method, follow the provisions for the calibration 
of 3-D probes in section 10.6 of Method 2F to obtain the appropriate 
velocity calibration coefficient (F<INF>2</INF> as derived using 
Equation 2F-2 in Method 2F) corresponding to a pitch angle position of 
0[deg].
    8.15.3 Calculations. Calculate the yaw-adjusted velocity at each 
traverse point using the equations presented in section 12.2. Calculate 
the test run average stack gas velocity by finding the arithmetic 
average of the point velocity results in accordance with sections 12.3 
and 12.4, and calculate the stack gas volumetric flow rate in accordance 
with section 12.5 or 12.6, as applicable.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Quality Control Activities. In conjunction with the yaw angle 
determination and the pressure and temperature measurements specified in 
section 8.9, the following quality control checks should be performed.
    9.1.1 Range of the differential pressure gauge. In accordance with 
the specifications in section 6.4, ensure that the proper differential 
pressure gauge is being used for the range of [Delta]P values 
encountered. If it is necessary to change to a more sensitive gauge, 
replace the gauge with a gauge calibrated according to section 10.3.3, 
perform the leak check described in section 8.4 and the zero check 
described in section 8.5, and repeat the differential pressure and 
temperature readings at each traverse point.
    9.1.2 Horizontal stability check. For horizontal traverses of a 
stack or duct, visually check that the probe shaft is maintained in a 
horizontal position prior to taking a pressure reading. Periodically, 
during a test run, the probe's horizontal stability should be verified 
by placing a carpenter's level, a digital inclinometer, or other angle-
measuring device on the portion of the probe sheath that extends outside 
of the test port. A comparable check should be performed by automated 
systems.

                            10.0 Calibration

    10.1 Wind Tunnel Qualification Checks. To qualify for use in 
calibrating probes, a wind tunnel shall have the design features 
specified in section 6.11 and satisfy the following qualification 
criteria. The velocity pressure cross-check in section 10.1.1 and axial 
flow verification in section 10.1.2 shall be performed before the 
initial use of the wind tunnel and repeated immediately after any 
alteration occurs in the wind tunnel's configuration, fans, interior 
surfaces, straightening vanes, controls, or other properties that could 
reasonably be expected to alter the flow pattern or velocity stability 
in the tunnel. The owner or operator of a wind tunnel used to calibrate 
probes according to this method shall maintain records documenting that 
the wind tunnel meets the requirements of sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 and 
shall provide these records to the Administrator upon request.
    10.1.1 Velocity pressure cross-check. To verify that the wind tunnel 
produces the same velocity at the tested probe head as at the 
calibration pitot tube impact port, perform the following cross-check. 
Take three differential pressure measurements at the fixed calibration 
pitot tube location, using the calibration pitot tube specified in 
section 6.10, and take three measurements with the calibration pitot 
tube at the wind tunnel calibration location, as defined in section 
3.21. Alternate the measurements between the two positions. Perform this 
procedure at

[[Page 101]]

the lowest and highest velocity settings at which the probes will be 
calibrated. Record the values on a form similar to Table 2G-4. At each 
velocity setting, the average velocity pressure obtained at the wind 
tunnel calibration location shall be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
percent or 2.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.01 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is 
less restrictive, of the average velocity pressure obtained at the fixed 
calibration pitot tube location. This comparative check shall be 
performed at 2.5-cm (1-in.), or smaller, intervals across the full 
length, width, and depth (if applicable) of the wind tunnel calibration 
location. If the criteria are not met at every tested point, the wind 
tunnel calibration location must be redefined, so that acceptable 
results are obtained at every point. Include the results of the velocity 
pressure cross-check in the calibration data section of the field test 
report. (See section 16.1.4.)
    10.1.2 Axial flow verification. The following procedures shall be 
performed to demonstrate that there is fully developed axial flow within 
the wind tunnel calibration location and at the calibration pitot tube 
location. Two options are available to conduct this check.
    10.1.2.1 Using a calibrated 3-D probe. A probe that has been 
previously calibrated in a wind tunnel with documented axial flow (as 
defined in section 3.22) may be used to conduct this check. Insert the 
calibrated 3-D probe into the wind tunnel test section using the tested 
probe port. Following the procedures in sections 8.9 and 12.2 of Method 
2F, determine the yaw and pitch angles at all the point(s) in the test 
section where the velocity pressure cross-check, as specified in section 
10.1.1, is performed. This includes all the points in the calibration 
location and the point where the calibration pitot tube will be located. 
Determine the yaw and pitch angles at each point. Repeat these 
measurements at the highest and lowest velocities at which the probes 
will be calibrated. Record the values on a form similar to Table 2G-5. 
Each measured yaw and pitch angle shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. Exceeding the limits indicates 
unacceptable flow in the test section. Until the problem is corrected 
and acceptable flow is verified by repetition of this procedure, the 
wind tunnel shall not be used for calibration of probes. Include the 
results of the axial flow verification in the calibration data section 
of the field test report. (See section 16.1.4.)
    10.1.2.2 Using alternative probes. Axial flow verification may be 
performed using an uncalibrated prism-shaped 3-D probe (e.g., DA or DAT 
probe) or an uncalibrated wedge probe. (Figure 2G-8 illustrates a 
typical wedge probe.) This approach requires use of two ports: the 
tested probe port and a second port located 90[deg] from the tested 
probe port. Each port shall provide access to all the points within the 
wind tunnel test section where the velocity pressure cross-check, as 
specified in section 10.1.1, is conducted. The probe setup shall include 
establishing a reference yaw-null position on the probe sheath to serve 
as the location for installing the angle-measuring device. Physical 
design features of the DA, DAT, and wedge probes are relied on to 
determine the reference position. For the DA or DAT probe, this 
reference position can be determined by setting a digital inclinometer 
on the flat facet where the P<INF>1</INF> pressure port is located and 
then identifying the rotational position on the probe sheath where a 
second angle-measuring device would give the same angle reading. The 
reference position on a wedge probe shaft can be determined either 
geometrically or by placing a digital inclinometer on each side of the 
wedge and rotating the probe until equivalent readings are obtained. 
With the latter approach, the reference position is the rotational 
position on the probe sheath where an angle-measuring device would give 
a reading of 0[deg]. After installation of the angle-measuring device in 
the reference yaw-null position on the probe sheath, determine the yaw 
angle from the tested port. Repeat this measurement using the 90[deg] 
offset port, which provides the pitch angle of flow. Determine the yaw 
and pitch angles at all the point(s) in the test section where the 
velocity pressure cross-check, as specified in section 10.1.1, is 
performed. This includes all the points in the wind tunnel calibration 
location and the point where the calibration pitot tube will be located. 
Perform this check at the highest and lowest velocities at which the 
probes will be calibrated. Record the values on a form similar to Table 
2G-5. Each measured yaw and pitch angle shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3[deg] of 0[deg]. Exceeding the limits indicates 
unacceptable flow in the test section. Until the problem is corrected 
and acceptable flow is verified by repetition of this procedure, the 
wind tunnel shall not be used for calibration of probes. Include the 
results in the probe calibration report.
    10.1.3 Wind tunnel audits.
    10.1.3.1 Procedure. Upon the request of the Administrator, the owner 
or operator of a wind tunnel shall calibrate a 2-D audit probe in 
accordance with the procedures described in sections 10.3 through 10.6. 
The calibration shall be performed at two velocities that encompass the 
velocities typically used for this method at the facility. The resulting 
calibration data shall be submitted to the Agency in an audit test 
report. These results shall be compared by the Agency to reference 
calibrations of the audit probe at the same velocity settings obtained 
at two different wind tunnels.
    10.1.3.2 Acceptance criterion. The audited tunnel's calibration 
coefficient is acceptable if it is within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
percent of the reference calibrations obtained at each velocity setting 
by

[[Page 102]]

one (or both) of the wind tunnels. If the acceptance criterion is not 
met at each calibration velocity setting, the audited wind tunnel shall 
not be used to calibrate probes for use under this method until the 
problems are resolved and acceptable results are obtained upon 
completion of a subsequent audit.
    10.2 Probe Inspection.
    10.2.1 Type S probe. Before each calibration of a Type S probe, 
verify that one leg of the tube is permanently marked A, and the other, 
B. Carefully examine the pitot tube from the top, side, and ends. 
Measure the angles ([alpha]<INF>1</INF>, [alpha]<INF>2</INF>, 
[beta]<INF>1</INF>, and [beta]<INF>2</INF>) and the dimensions (w and z) 
illustrated in Figures 2-2 and 2-3 in Method 2. Also measure the 
dimension A, as shown in the diagram in Table 2G-1, and the external 
tubing diameter (dimension D<INF>t</INF>, Figure 2-2b in Method 2). For 
the purposes of this method, D<INF>t</INF> shall be no less than 9.5 mm 
(\3/8\ in.). The base-to-opening plane distances P<INF>A</INF> and 
P<INF>B</INF> in Figure 2-3 of Method 2 shall be equal, and the 
dimension A in Table 2G-1 should be between 2.10D<INF>t</INF> and 
3.00D<INF>t</INF>. Record the inspection findings and probe measurements 
on a form similar to Table CD2-1 of the ``Quality Assurance Handbook for 
Air Pollution Measurement Systems: Volume III, Stationary Source-
Specific Methods'' (EPA/600/R-94/038c, September 1994). For reference, 
this form is reproduced herein as Table 2G-1. The pitot tube shall not 
be used under this method if it fails to meet the specifications in this 
section and the alignment specifications in section 6.1.1. All Type S 
probes used to collect data with this method shall be calibrated 
according to the procedures outlined in sections 10.3 through 10.6 
below. During calibration, each Type S pitot tube shall be configured in 
the same manner as used, or planned to be used, during the field test, 
including all components in the probe assembly (e.g., thermocouple, 
probe sheath, sampling nozzle). Probe shaft extensions that do not 
affect flow around the probe head need not be attached during 
calibration.
    10.2.2 3-D probe. If a 3-D probe is used to collect data with this 
method, perform the pre-calibration inspection according to procedures 
in Method 2F, section 10.2.
    10.3 Pre-Calibration Procedures. Prior to calibration, a scribe line 
shall have been placed on the probe in accordance with section 10.4. The 
yaw angle and velocity calibration procedures shall not begin until the 
pre-test requirements in sections 10.3.1 through 10.3.4 have been met.
    10.3.1 Perform the horizontal straightness check described in 
section 8.2 on the probe assembly that will be calibrated in the wind 
tunnel.
    10.3.2 Perform a leak check in accordance with section 8.4.
    10.3.3 Except as noted in section 10.3.3.3, calibrate all 
differential pressure-measuring devices to be used in the probe 
calibrations, using the following procedures. At a minimum, calibrate 
these devices on each day that probe calibrations are performed.
    10.3.3.1 Procedure. Before each wind tunnel use, all differential 
pressure-measuring devices shall be calibrated against the reference 
device specified in section 6.4.3 using a common pressure source. 
Perform the calibration at three reference pressures representing 30, 
60, and 90 percent of the full-scale range of the pressure-measuring 
device being calibrated. For an inclined-vertical manometer, perform 
separate calibrations on the inclined and vertical portions of the 
measurement scale, considering each portion of the scale to be a 
separate full-scale range. [For example, for a manometer with a 0-to 
2.5-cm H<INF>2</INF>O (0-to 1-in. H<INF>2</INF>O) inclined scale and a 
2.5-to 12.7-cm H<INF>2</INF>O (1-to 5-in. H<INF>2</INF>O) vertical 
scale, calibrate the inclined portion at 7.6, 15.2, and 22.9 mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), and calibrate the 
vertical portion at 3.8, 7.6, and 11.4 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (1.5, 3.0, and 
4.5 in. H<INF>2</INF>O).] Alternatively, for the vertical portion of the 
scale, use three evenly spaced reference pressures, one of which is 
equal to or higher than the highest differential pressure expected in 
field applications.
    10.3.3.2 Acceptance criteria. At each pressure setting, the two 
pressure readings made using the reference device and the pressure-
measuring device being calibrated shall agree to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of full scale of the device being calibrated 
or 0.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.02 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), whichever is less 
restrictive. For an inclined-vertical manometer, these requirements 
shall be met separately using the respective full-scale upper limits of 
the inclined and vertical portions of the scale. Differential pressure-
measuring devices not meeting the <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of 
full scale or 0.5 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.02 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) 
calibration requirement shall not be used.
    10.3.3.3 Exceptions. Any precision manometer that meets the 
specifications for a reference device in section 6.4.3 and that is not 
used for field testing does not require calibration, but must be leveled 
and zeroed before each wind tunnel use. Any pressure device used 
exclusively for yaw nulling does not require calibration, but shall be 
checked for responsiveness to rotation of the probe prior to each wind 
tunnel use.
    10.3.4 Calibrate digital inclinometers on each day of wind tunnel or 
field testing (prior to beginning testing) using the following 
procedures. Calibrate the inclinometer according to the manufacturer's 
calibration procedures. In addition, use a triangular block (illustrated 
in Figure 2G-9) with a known angle [theta], independently determined 
using a protractor or equivalent device, between two adjacent sides to 
verify the inclinometer readings. (Note: If other angle-measuring 
devices meeting the provisions of

[[Page 103]]

section 6.2.3 are used in place of a digital inclinometer, comparable 
calibration procedures shall be performed on such devices.) Secure the 
triangular block in a fixed position. Place the inclinometer on one side 
of the block (side A) to measure the angle of inclination 
(R<INF>1</INF>). Repeat this measurement on the adjacent side of the 
block (side B) using the inclinometer to obtain a second angle reading 
(R<INF>2</INF>). The difference of the sum of the two readings from 
180[deg] (i.e., 180[deg]-R<INF>1</INF>-R<INF>2</INF>) shall be within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of the known angle, [theta].
    10.4 Placement of Reference Scribe Line. Prior to the first 
calibration of a probe, a line shall be permanently inscribed on the 
main probe sheath to serve as a reference mark for determining yaw 
angles. Annex C in section 18 of this method gives a guideline for 
placement of the reference scribe line.
    10.4.1 This reference scribe line shall meet the specifications in 
sections 6.1.5.1 and 6.1.5.3 of this method. To verify that the 
alignment specification in section 6.1.5.3 is met, secure the probe in a 
horizontal position and measure the rotational angle of each scribe line 
and scribe line segment using an angle-measuring device that meets the 
specifications in section 6.2.1 or 6.2.3. For any scribe line that is 
longer than 30.5 cm (12 in.), check the line's rotational position at 
30.5-cm (12-in.) intervals. For each line segment that is 12 in. or less 
in length, check the rotational position at the two endpoints of the 
segment. To meet the alignment specification in section 6.1.5.3, the 
minimum and maximum of all of the rotational angles that are measured 
along the full length of main probe must not differ by more than 2[deg]. 
(Note: A short reference scribe line segment [e.g., 15.2 cm (6 in.) or 
less in length] meeting the alignment specifications in section 6.1.5.3 
is fully acceptable under this method. See section 18.1.1.1 of Annex A 
for an example of a probe marking procedure, suitable for use with a 
short reference scribe line.)
    10.4.2 The scribe line should be placed on the probe first and then 
its offset from the yaw-null position established (as specified in 
section 10.5). The rotational position of the reference scribe line 
relative to the yaw-null position of the probe, as determined by the yaw 
angle calibration procedure in section 10.5, is the reference scribe 
line rotational offset, R<INF>SLO</INF>. The reference scribe line 
rotational offset shall be recorded and retained as part of the probe's 
calibration record.
    10.4.3 Scribe line for automated probes. A scribe line may not be 
necessary for an automated probe system if a reference rotational 
position of the probe is built into the probe system design. For such 
systems, a ``flat'' (or comparable, clearly identifiable physical 
characteristic) should be provided on the probe casing or flange plate 
to ensure that the reference position of the probe assembly remains in a 
vertical or horizontal position. The rotational offset of the flat (or 
comparable, clearly identifiable physical characteristic) needed to 
orient the reference position of the probe assembly shall be recorded 
and maintained as part of the automated probe system's specifications.
    10.5 Yaw Angle Calibration Procedure. For each probe used to measure 
yaw angles with this method, a calibration procedure shall be performed 
in a wind tunnel meeting the specifications in section 10.1 to determine 
the rotational position of the reference scribe line relative to the 
probe's yaw-null position. This procedure shall be performed on the main 
probe with all devices that will be attached to the main probe in the 
field [such as thermocouples, resistance temperature detectors (RTDs), 
or sampling nozzles] that may affect the flow around the probe head. 
Probe shaft extensions that do not affect flow around the probe head 
need not be attached during calibration. At a minimum, this procedure 
shall include the following steps.
    10.5.1 Align and lock the angle-measuring device on the reference 
scribe line. If a marking procedure (such as described in section 
18.1.1.1) is used, align the angle-measuring device on a mark within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] of the rotational position of the reference 
scribe line. Lock the angle-measuring device onto the probe sheath at 
this position.
    10.5.2 Zero the pressure-measuring device used for yaw nulling.
    10.5.3 Insert the probe assembly into the wind tunnel through the 
entry port, positioning the probe's impact port at the calibration 
location. Check the responsiveness of the pressure-measurement device to 
probe rotation, taking corrective action if the response is 
unacceptable.
    10.5.4 Ensure that the probe is in a horizontal position, using a 
carpenter's level.
    10.5.5 Rotate the probe either clockwise or counterclockwise until a 
yaw null [zero [Delta]P for a Type S probe or zero (P<INF>2</INF>-
P<INF>3</INF>) for a 3-D probe] is obtained. If using a Type S probe 
with an attached thermocouple, the direction of the probe rotation shall 
be such that the thermocouple is located downstream of the probe 
pressure ports at the yaw-null position.
    10.5.6 Use the reading displayed by the angle-measuring device at 
the yaw-null position to determine the magnitude of the reference scribe 
line rotational offset, R<INF>SLO</INF>, as defined in section 3.15. 
Annex D in section 18 of this method gives a recommended procedure for 
determining the magnitude of R<INF>SLO</INF> with a digital inclinometer 
and a second procedure for determining the magnitude of R<INF>SLO</INF> 
with a protractor wheel and pointer device. Table 2G-6 gives an example 
data form and Table 2G-7 is a look-up table with the recommended 
procedure. Procedures other than those recommended in Annex D in section 
18 may be used, if they can determine R<INF>SLO</INF> to within 1[deg] 
and are explained in detail

[[Page 104]]

in the field test report. The algebraic sign of R<INF>SLO</INF> will 
either be positive if the rotational position of the reference scribe 
line (as viewed from the ``tail'' end of the probe) is clockwise, or 
negative, if counterclockwise with respect to the probe's yaw-null 
position. (This is illustrated in Figure 2G-10.)
    10.5.7 The steps in sections 10.5.3 through 10.5.6 shall be 
performed twice at each of the velocities at which the probe will be 
calibrated (in accordance with section 10.6). Record the values of 
R<INF>SLO</INF>.
    10.5.8 The average of all of the R<INF>SLO</INF> values shall be 
documented as the reference scribe line rotational offset for the probe.
    10.5.9 Use of reference scribe line offset. The reference scribe 
line rotational offset shall be used to determine the yaw angle of flow 
in accordance with section 8.9.4.
    10.6 Velocity Calibration Procedure. When a 3-D probe is used under 
this method, follow the provisions for the calibration of 3-D probes in 
section 10.6 of Method 2F to obtain the necessary velocity calibration 
coefficients (F<INF>2</INF> as derived using Equation 2F-2 in Method 2F) 
corresponding to a pitch angle position of 0[deg]. The following 
procedure applies to Type S probes. This procedure shall be performed on 
the main probe and all devices that will be attached to the main probe 
in the field (e.g., thermocouples, RTDs, sampling nozzles) that may 
affect the flow around the probe head. Probe shaft extensions that do 
not affect flow around the probe head need not be attached during 
calibration. (Note: If a sampling nozzle is part of the assembly, two 
additional requirements must be satisfied before proceeding. The 
distance between the nozzle and the pitot tube shall meet the minimum 
spacing requirement prescribed in Method 2, and a wind tunnel 
demonstration shall be performed that shows the probe's ability to yaw 
null is not impaired when the nozzle is drawing sample.) To obtain 
velocity calibration coefficient(s) for the tested probe, proceed as 
follows.
    10.6.1 Calibration velocities. The tester may calibrate the probe at 
two nominal wind tunnel velocity settings of 18.3 m/sec and 27.4 m/sec 
(60 ft/sec and 90 ft/sec) and average the results of these calibrations, 
as described in sections 10.6.12 through 10.6.14, in order to generate 
the calibration coefficient, C<INF>p</INF>. If this option is selected, 
this calibration coefficient may be used for all field applications 
where the velocities are 9.1 m/sec (30 ft/sec) or greater. 
Alternatively, the tester may customize the probe calibration for a 
particular field test application (or for a series of applications), 
based on the expected average velocity(ies) at the test site(s). If this 
option is selected, generate the calibration coefficients by calibrating 
the probe at two nominal wind tunnel velocity settings, one of which is 
less than or equal to and the other greater than or equal to the 
expected average velocity(ies) for the field application(s), and average 
the results as described in sections 10.6.12 through 10.6.14. Whichever 
calibration option is selected, the probe calibration coefficient(s) 
obtained at the two nominal calibration velocities shall meet the 
conditions specified in sections 10.6.12 through 10.6.14.
    10.6.2 Connect the tested probe and calibration pitot tube to their 
respective pressure-measuring devices. Zero the pressure-measuring 
devices. Inspect and leak-check all pitot lines; repair or replace them, 
if necessary. Turn on the fan, and allow the wind tunnel air flow to 
stabilize at the first of the selected nominal velocity settings.
    10.6.3 Position the calibration pitot tube at its measurement 
location (determined as outlined in section 6.11.4.3), and align the 
tube so that its tip is pointed directly into the flow. Ensure that the 
entry port surrounding the tube is properly sealed. The calibration 
pitot tube may either remain in the wind tunnel throughout the 
calibration, or be removed from the wind tunnel while measurements are 
taken with the probe being calibrated.
    10.6.4 Check the zero setting of each pressure-measuring device.
    10.6.5 Insert the tested probe into the wind tunnel and align it so 
that the designated pressure port (e.g., either the A-side or B-side of 
a Type S probe) is pointed directly into the flow and is positioned 
within the wind tunnel calibration location (as defined in section 
3.21). Secure the probe at the 0[deg] pitch angle position. Ensure that 
the entry port surrounding the probe is properly sealed.
    10.6.6 Read the differential pressure from the calibration pitot 
tube ([Delta]P<INF>std</INF>), and record its value. Read the barometric 
pressure to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm Hg (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in. Hg) and the temperature in the wind tunnel to 
within 0.6[deg]C (1[deg]F). Record these values on a data form similar 
to Table 2G-8.
    10.6.7 After the tested probe's differential pressure gauges have 
had sufficient time to stabilize, yaw null the probe (and then rotate it 
back 90[deg] for Type S probes), then obtain the differential pressure 
reading ([Delta]P). Record the yaw angle and differential pressure 
readings.
    10.6.8 Take paired differential pressure measurements with the 
calibration pitot tube and tested probe (according to sections 10.6.6 
and 10.6.7). The paired measurements in each replicate can be made 
either simultaneously (i.e., with both probes in the wind tunnel) or by 
alternating the measurements of the two probes (i.e., with only one 
probe at a time in the wind tunnel).
    10.6.9 Repeat the steps in sections 10.6.6 through 10.6.8 at the 
same nominal velocity setting until three pairs of [Delta]P readings 
have been obtained from the calibration pitot tube and the tested probe.

[[Page 105]]

    10.6.10 Repeat the steps in sections 10.6.6 through 10.6.9 above for 
the A-side and B-side of the Type S pitot tube. For a probe assembly 
constructed such that its pitot tube is always used in the same 
orientation, only one side of the pitot tube need be calibrated (the 
side that will face the flow). However, the pitot tube must still meet 
the alignment and dimension specifications in section 6.1.1 and must 
have an average deviation ([sigma]) value of 0.01 or less as provided in 
section 10.6.12.4.
    10.6.11 Repeat the calibration procedures in sections 10.6.6 through 
10.6.10 at the second selected nominal wind tunnel velocity setting.
    10.6.12 Perform the following calculations separately on the A-side 
and B-side values.
    10.6.12.1 Calculate a C<INF>p</INF> value for each of the three 
replicates performed at the lower velocity setting where the 
calibrations were performed using Equation 2-2 in section 4.1.4 of 
Method 2.
    10.6.12.2 Calculate the arithmetic average, C<INF>p(avg-low)</INF>, 
of the three C<INF>p</INF> values.
    10.6.12.3 Calculate the deviation of each of the three individual 
values of C<INF>p</INF> from the A-side average C<INF>p(avg-low)</INF> 
value using Equation 2-3 in Method 2.
    10.6.12.4 Calculate the average deviation ([sigma]) of the three 
individual C<INF>p</INF> values from C<INF>p(avg-low)</INF> using 
Equation 2-4 in Method 2. Use the Type S pitot tube only if the values 
of [sigma] (side A) and [sigma] (side B) are less than or equal to 0.01. 
If both A-side and B-side calibration coefficients are calculated, the 
absolute value of the difference between C<INF>p(avg-low)</INF> (side A) 
and C<INF>p(avg-low)</INF> (side B) must not exceed 0.01.
    10.6.13 Repeat the calculations in section 10.6.12 using the data 
obtained at the higher velocity setting to derive the arithmetic 
C<INF>p</INF> values at the higher velocity setting, 
C<INF>p(avg-high)</INF>, and to determine whether the conditions in 
10.6.12.4 are met by both the A-side and B-side calibrations at this 
velocity setting.
    10.6.14 Use equation 2G-1 to calculate the percent difference of the 
averaged C<INF>p</INF> values at the two calibration velocities.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.062

The percent difference between the averaged C<INF>p</INF> values shall 
not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent. If the specification is met, 
average the A-side values of C<INF>p(avg-low)</INF> and 
C<INF>p(avg-high)</INF> to produce a single A-side calibration 
coefficient, C<INF>p</INF>. Repeat for the B-side values if calibrations 
were performed on that side of the pitot. If the specification is not 
met, make necessary adjustments in the selected velocity settings and 
repeat the calibration procedure until acceptable results are obtained.
    10.6.15 If the two nominal velocities used in the calibration were 
18.3 and 27.4 m/sec (60 and 90 ft/sec), the average C<INF>p</INF> from 
section 10.6.14 is applicable to all velocities 9.1 m/sec (30 ft/sec) or 
greater. If two other nominal velocities were used in the calibration, 
the resulting average C<INF>p</INF> value shall be applicable only in 
situations where the velocity calculated using the calibration 
coefficient is neither less than the lower nominal velocity nor greater 
than the higher nominal velocity.
    10.7 Recalibration. Recalibrate the probe using the procedures in 
section 10 either within 12 months of its first field use after its most 
recent calibration or after 10 field tests (as defined in section 3.3), 
whichever occurs later. In addition, whenever there is visible damage to 
the probe head, the probe shall be recalibrated before it is used again.
    10.8 Calibration of pressure-measuring devices used in the field. 
Before its initial use in a field test, calibrate each pressure-
measuring device (except those used exclusively for yaw nulling) using 
the three-point calibration procedure described in section 10.3.3. The 
device shall be recalibrated according to the procedure in section 
10.3.3 no later than 90 days after its first field use following its 
most recent calibration. At the discretion of the tester, more frequent 
calibrations (e.g., after a field test) may be performed. No 
adjustments, other than adjustments to the zero setting, shall be made 
to the device between calibrations.
    10.8.1 Post-test calibration check. A single-point calibration check 
shall be performed on each pressure-measuring device after completion of 
each field test. At the discretion of the tester, more frequent single-
point calibration checks (e.g., after one or more field test runs) may 
be performed. It is recommended that the post-test check be performed 
before leaving the field test site. The check shall be performed at a 
pressure between 50 and 90 percent of full scale by taking a common 
pressure reading with the tested probe and a reference pressure-
measuring device (as described in section 6.4.4) or by challenging the 
tested device with a reference pressure source (as described in section 
6.4.4) or by performing an equivalent check using a reference device 
approved by the Administrator.

[[Page 106]]

    10.8.2 Acceptance criterion. At the selected pressure setting, the 
pressure readings made using the reference device and the tested device 
shall agree to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent of full scale of 
the tested device or 0.8 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.03 in. H<INF>2</INF>O), 
whichever is less restrictive. If this specification is met, the test 
data collected during the field test are valid. If the specification is 
not met, all test data collected since the last successful calibration 
or calibration check are invalid and shall be repeated using a pressure-
measuring device with a current, valid calibration. Any device that 
fails the calibration check shall not be used in a field test until a 
successful recalibration is performed according to the procedures in 
section 10.3.3.
    10.9 Temperature Gauges. Same as Method 2, section 4.3. The 
alternative thermocouple calibration procedures outlined in Emission 
Measurement Center (EMC) Approved Alternative Method (ALT-011) 
``Alternative Method 2 Thermocouple Calibration Procedure'' may be 
performed. Temperature gauges shall be calibrated no more than 30 days 
prior to the start of a field test or series of field tests and 
recalibrated no more than 30 days after completion of a field test or 
series of field tests.
    10.10 Barometer. Same as Method 2, section 4.4. The barometer shall 
be calibrated no more than 30 days prior to the start of a field test or 
series of field tests.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    These calculations use the measured yaw angle and the differential 
pressure and temperature measurements at individual traverse points to 
derive the near-axial flue gas velocity (v<INF>a(i)</INF>) at each of 
those points. The near-axial velocity values at all traverse points that 
comprise a full stack or duct traverse are then averaged to obtain the 
average near-axial stack or duct gas velocity (v<INF>a(avg)</INF>).

                            12.1 Nomenclature

A=Cross-sectional area of stack or duct at the test port location, m \2\ 
(ft \2\).
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream (from Method 4 or 
alternative), proportion by volume.
C<INF>p</INF>=Pitot tube calibration coefficient, dimensionless.
F<INF>2(i)</INF>=3-D probe velocity coefficient at 0 pitch, applicable 
at traverse point i.
K<INF>p</INF>=Pitot tube constant,
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.063

for the metric system, and
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.064

for the English system.

M<INF>d</INF>=Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, dry basis (see 
section 8.13), g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
M<INF>s</INF>=Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, wet basis, g/g-mole 
(lb/lb-mole).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.065

P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at velocity measurement site, mm Hg 
(in. Hg).
P<INF>g</INF>=Stack or duct static pressure, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O).
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute stack or duct pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg),
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.066

P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
13.6=Conversion from mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O) to mm Hg 
(in. Hg).
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Average dry-basis volumetric stack or duct gas flow rate 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm/hr (dscf/hr).
Q<INF>sw</INF>=Average wet-basis volumetric stack or duct gas flow rate 
corrected to standard conditions, wscm/hr (wscf/hr).
t<INF>s(i)</INF>=Stack or duct temperature, [deg]C ([deg]F), at traverse 
point i.
T<INF>s(i)</INF>=Absolute stack or duct temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R), at 
traverse point i.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.067

for the metric system, and
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.068

for the English system.

T<INF>s(avg)</INF>=Average absolute stack or duct gas temperature across 
all traverse points.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293[deg]K (528[deg]R).
v<INF>a(i)</INF>=Measured stack or duct gas impact velocity, m/sec (ft/
sec), at traverse point i.
v<INF>a(avg)</INF>=Average near-axial stack or duct gas velocity, m/sec 
(ft/sec) across all traverse points.
[Delta]P<INF>i</INF>=Velocity head (differential pressure) of stack or 
duct gas, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O), applicable at traverse 
point i.
(P<INF>1</INF>-P<INF>2</INF>)=Velocity head (differential pressure) of 
stack or duct gas measured by a 3-D probe, mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O), applicable at traverse point i.
3,600=Conversion factor, sec/hr.
18.0=Molecular weight of water, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).

[[Page 107]]

[theta]<INF>y(i)</INF>=Yaw angle of the flow velocity vector, at 
traverse point i.
n=Number of traverse points.

    12.2 Traverse Point Velocity Calculations. Perform the following 
calculations from the measurements obtained at each traverse point.
    12.2.1 Selection of calibration coefficient. Select the calibration 
coefficient as described in section 10.6.1.
    12.2.2 Near-axial traverse point velocity. When using a Type S 
probe, use the following equation to calculate the traverse point near-
axial velocity (v<INF>a(i)</INF>) from the differential pressure 
([Delta]P<INF>i</INF>), yaw angle ([theta]<INF>y(i)</INF>), absolute 
stack or duct standard temperature (T<INF>s(i)</INF>) measured at 
traverse point i, the absolute stack or duct pressure (P<INF>s</INF>), 
and molecular weight (M<INF>s</INF>).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.069

Use the following equation when using a 3-D probe.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.070

    12.2.3 Handling multiple measurements at a traverse point. For 
pressure or temperature devices that take multiple measurements at a 
traverse point, the multiple measurements (or where applicable, their 
square roots) may first be averaged and the resulting average values 
used in the equations above. Alternatively, the individual measurements 
may be used in the equations above and the resulting calculated values 
may then be averaged to obtain a single traverse point value. With 
either approach, all of the individual measurements recorded at a 
traverse point must be used in calculating the applicable traverse point 
value.
    12.3 Average Near-Axial Velocity in Stack or Duct. Use the reported 
traverse point near-axial velocity in the following equation.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.071

    12.4 Acceptability of Results. The acceptability provisions in 
section 12.4 of Method 2F apply to 3-D probes used under Method 2G. The 
following provisions apply to Type S probes. For Type S probes, the test 
results are acceptable and the calculated value of v<INF>a(avg)</INF> 
may be reported as the average near-axial velocity for the test run if 
the conditions in either section 12.4.1 or 12.4.2 are met.
    12.4.1 The average calibration coefficient C<INF>p</INF> used in 
Equation 2G-6 was generated at nominal velocities of 18.3 and 27.4 m/sec 
(60 and 90 ft/sec) and the value of v<INF>a(avg)</INF> calculated using 
Equation 2G-8 is greater than or equal to 9.1 m/sec (30 ft/sec).
    12.4.2 The average calibration coefficient C<INF>p</INF> used in 
Equation 2G-6 was generated at nominal velocities other than 18.3 or 
27.4 m/sec (60 or 90 ft/sec) and the value of v<INF>a(avg)</INF> 
calculated using Equation 2G-8 is greater than or equal to the lower 
nominal velocity and less than or equal to the higher nominal velocity 
used to derive the average C<INF>p</INF>.
    12.4.3 If the conditions in neither section 12.4.1 nor section 
12.4.2 are met, the test results obtained from Equation 2G-8 are not 
acceptable, and the steps in sections 12.2 and 12.3 must be repeated 
using an average calibration coefficient C<INF>p</INF> that satisfies 
the conditions in section 12.4.1 or 12.4.2.
    12.5 Average Gas Volumetric Flow Rate in Stack or Duct (Wet Basis). 
Use the following equation to compute the average volumetric flow rate 
on a wet basis.

[[Page 108]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.072

    12.6 Average Gas Volumetric Flow Rate in Stack or Duct (Dry Basis). 
Use the following equation to compute the average volumetric flow rate 
on a dry basis.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.073

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 Reporting.

    16.1 Field Test Reports. Field test reports shall be submitted to 
the Agency according to applicable regulatory requirements. Field test 
reports should, at a minimum, include the following elements.
    16.1.1 Description of the source. This should include the name and 
location of the test site, descriptions of the process tested, a 
description of the combustion source, an accurate diagram of stack or 
duct cross-sectional area at the test site showing the dimensions of the 
stack or duct, the location of the test ports, and traverse point 
locations and identification numbers or codes. It should also include a 
description and diagram of the stack or duct layout, showing the 
distance of the test location from the nearest upstream and downstream 
disturbances and all structural elements (including breachings, baffles, 
fans, straighteners, etc.) affecting the flow pattern. If the source and 
test location descriptions have been previously submitted to the Agency 
in a document (e.g., a monitoring plan or test plan), referencing the 
document in lieu of including this information in the field test report 
is acceptable.
    16.1.2 Field test procedures. These should include a description of 
test equipment and test procedures. Testing conventions, such as 
traverse point numbering and measurement sequence (e.g., sampling from 
center to wall, or wall to center), should be clearly stated. Test port 
identification and directional reference for each test port should be 
included on the appropriate field test data sheets.
    16.1.3 Field test data.
    16.1.3.1 Summary of results. This summary should include the dates 
and times of testing, and the average near-axial gas velocity and the 
average flue gas volumetric flow results for each run and tested 
condition.
    16.1.3.2 Test data. The following values for each traverse point 
should be recorded and reported:

    (a) Differential pressure at traverse point i ([Delta]P<INF>i</INF>)
    (b) Stack or duct temperature at traverse point i (t<INF>s(i)</INF>)
    (c) Absolute stack or duct temperature at traverse point i 
(T<INF>s(i)</INF>)
    (d) Yaw angle at traverse point i ([theta]<INF>y(i)</INF>)
    (e) Stack gas near-axial velocity at traverse point i 
(v<INF>a(i)</INF>)

    16.1.3.3 The following values should be reported once per run:

    (a) Water vapor in the gas stream (from Method 4 or alternative), 
proportion by volume (B<INF>ws</INF>), measured at the frequency 
specified in the applicable regulation
    (b) Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, dry basis (M<INF>d</INF>)
    (c) Molecular weight of stack or duct gas, wet basis (M<INF>s</INF>)
    (d) Stack or duct static pressure (P<INF>g</INF>)
    (e) Absolute stack or duct pressure (P<INF>s</INF>)
    (f) Carbon dioxide concentration in the flue gas, dry basis 
(%<INF>d</INF> CO<INF>2</INF>)
    (g) Oxygen concentration in the flue gas, dry basis (%<INF>d</INF> 
O<INF>2</INF>)
    (h) Average near-axial stack or duct gas velocity 
(v<INF>a(avg)</INF>) across all traverse points
    (i) Gas volumetric flow rate corrected to standard conditions, dry 
or wet basis as required by the applicable regulation (Q<INF>sd</INF> or 
Q<INF>sw</INF>)

    16.1.3.4 The following should be reported once per complete set of 
test runs:

    (a) Cross-sectional area of stack or duct at the test location (A)
    (b) Pitot tube calibration coefficient (C<INF>p</INF>)
    (c) Measurement system response time (sec)
    (d) Barometric pressure at measurement site (P<INF>bar</INF>)

    16.1.4 Calibration data. The field test report should include 
calibration data for all

[[Page 109]]

probes and test equipment used in the field test. At a minimum, the 
probe calibration data reported to the Agency should include the 
following:

    (a) Date of calibration
    (b) Probe type
    (c) Probe identification number(s) or code(s)
    (d) Probe inspection sheets
    (e) Pressure measurements and calculations used to obtain 
calibration coefficients in accordance with section 10.6 of this method
    (f) Description and diagram of wind tunnel used for the calibration, 
including dimensions of cross-sectional area and position and size of 
the test section
    (g) Documentation of wind tunnel qualification tests performed in 
accordance with section 10.1 of this method

    16.1.5 Quality assurance. Specific quality assurance and quality 
control procedures used during the test should be described.

                           17.0 Bibliography.

    (1) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 1--Sample and velocity 
traverses for stationary sources.
    (2) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2--Determination of stack gas 
velocity and volumetric flow rate (Type S pitot tube) .
    (3) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2F--Determination of stack 
gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with three-dimensional probes.
    (4) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2H--Determination of stack 
gas velocity taking into account velocity decay near the stack wall.
    (5) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 3--Gas analysis for carbon 
dioxide, oxygen, excess air, and dry molecular weight.
    (6) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 3A--Determination of oxygen 
and carbon dioxide concentrations in emissions from stationary sources 
(instrumental analyzer procedure).
    (7) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 4--Determination of moisture 
content in stack gases.
    (8) Emission Measurement Center (EMC) Approved Alternative Method 
(ALT-011) ``Alternative Method 2 Thermocouple Calibration Procedure.''
    (9) Electric Power Research Institute, Interim Report EPRI TR-
106698, ``Flue Gas Flow Rate Measurement Errors,'' June 1996.
    (10) Electric Power Research Institute, Final Report EPRI TR-108110, 
``Evaluation of Heat Rate Discrepancy from Continuous Emission 
Monitoring Systems,'' August 1997.
    (11) Fossil Energy Research Corporation, Final Report, ``Velocity 
Probe Tests in Non-axial Flow Fields,'' November 1998, Prepared for the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
    (12) Fossil Energy Research Corporation, ``Additional Swirl Tunnel 
Tests: E-DAT and T-DAT Probes,'' February 24, 1999, Technical Memorandum 
Prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, P.O. No. 7W-1193-
NALX.
    (13) Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Report WBWT-TR-1317, 
``Calibration of Eight Wind Speed Probes Over a Reynolds Number Range of 
46,000 to 725,000 Per Foot, Text and Summary Plots,'' Plus appendices, 
October 15, 1998, Prepared for The Cadmus Group, Inc.
    (14) National Institute of Standards and Technology, Special 
Publication 250, ``NIST Calibration Services Users Guide 1991,'' Revised 
October 1991, U.S. Department of Commerce, p. 2.
    (15) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Four Prandtl Probes, Four 
S-Type Probes, Four French Probes, Four Modified Kiel Probes,'' Prepared 
for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (16) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed In-strumentation, Five Autoprobes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (17) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Eight Spherical Probes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (18) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Four DAT Probes, `` 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG 
<greek-i>DW13938432-01-0.
    (19) Norfleet, S.K., ``An Evaluation of Wall Effects on Stack Flow 
Velocities and Related Overestimation Bias in EPA's Stack Flow Reference 
Methods,'' EPRI CEMS User's Group Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana, May 
13-15, 1998.
    (20) Page, J.J., E.A. Potts, and R.T. Shigehara, ``3-D Pitot Tube 
Calibration Study,'' EPA Contract No. 68D10009, Work Assignment No. I-
121, March 11, 1993.
    (21) Shigehara, R.T., W.F. Todd, and W.S. Smith, ``Significance of 
Errors in Stack Sampling Measurements,'' Presented at the Annual Meeting 
of the Air Pollution Control Association, St. Louis, Missouri, June 
1419, 1970.
    (22) The Cadmus Group, Inc., May 1999, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Findings Report,'' EPA/430-R-99-009.
    (23) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Texas Utilities, DeCordova Steam 
Electric Station, Volume

[[Page 110]]

I: Test Description and Appendix A (Data Distribution Package),'' EPA/
430-R-98-015a.
    (24) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Texas Utilities, Lake Hubbard Steam 
Electric Station, Volume I: Test Description and Appendix A (Data 
Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-017a.
    (25) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Pennsylvania Electric Co., G.P.U. 
Genco Homer City Station: Unit 1, Volume I: Test Description and 
Appendix A (Data Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-018a.
    (26) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1997, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Wind Tunnel Experimental Results,'' EPA/430-R-97-
013.

                              18.0 Annexes

    Annex A, C, and D describe recommended procedures for meeting 
certain provisions in sections 8.3, 10.4, and 10.5 of this method. Annex 
B describes procedures to be followed when using the protractor wheel 
and pointer assembly to measure yaw angles, as provided under section 
8.9.1.
    18.1 Annex A--Rotational Position Check. The following are 
recommended procedures that may be used to satisfy the rotational 
position check requirements of section 8.3 of this method and to 
determine the angle-measuring device rotational offset 
(R<INF>ADO</INF>).
    18.1.1 Rotational position check with probe outside stack. Where 
physical constraints at the sampling location allow full assembly of the 
probe outside the stack and insertion into the test port, the following 
procedures should be performed before the start of testing. Two angle-
measuring devices that meet the specifications in section 6.2.1 or 6.2.3 
are required for the rotational position check. An angle measuring 
device whose position can be independently adjusted (e.g., by means of a 
set screw) after being locked into position on the probe sheath shall 
not be used for this check unless the independent adjustment is set so 
that the device performs exactly like a device without the capability 
for independent adjustment. That is, when aligned on the probe such a 
device must give the same reading as a device that does not have the 
capability of being independently adjusted. With the fully assembled 
probe (including probe shaft extensions, if any) secured in a horizontal 
position, affix one yaw angle-measuring device to the probe sheath and 
lock it into position on the reference scribe line specified in section 
6.1.5.1. Position the second angle-measuring device using the procedure 
in section 18.1.1.1 or 18.1.1.2.
    18.1.1.1 Marking procedure. The procedures in this section should be 
performed at each location on the fully assembled probe where the yaw 
angle-measuring device will be mounted during the velocity traverse. 
Place the second yaw angle-measuring device on the main probe sheath (or 
extension) at the position where a yaw angle will be measured during the 
velocity traverse. Adjust the position of the second angle-measuring 
device until it indicates the same angle (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]) 
as the reference device, and affix the second device to the probe sheath 
(or extension). Record the angles indicated by the two angle-measuring 
devices on a form similar to table 2G-2. In this position, the second 
angle-measuring device is considered to be properly positioned for yaw 
angle measurement. Make a mark, no wider than 1.6 mm (\1/16\ in.), on 
the probe sheath (or extension), such that the yaw angle-measuring 
device can be re-affixed at this same properly aligned position during 
the velocity traverse.
    18.1.1.2 Procedure for probe extensions with scribe lines. If, 
during a velocity traverse the angle-measuring device will be affixed to 
a probe extension having a scribe line as specified in section 6.1.5.2, 
the following procedure may be used to align the extension's scribe line 
with the reference scribe line instead of marking the extension as 
described in section 18.1.1.1. Attach the probe extension to the main 
probe. Align and lock the second angle-measuring device on the probe 
extension's scribe line. Then, rotate the extension until both measuring 
devices indicate the same angle (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg]). Lock the 
extension at this rotational position. Record the angles indicated by 
the two angle-measuring devices on a form similar to table 2G-2. An 
angle-measuring device may be aligned at any position on this scribe 
line during the velocity traverse, if the scribe line meets the 
alignment specification in section 6.1.5.3.
    18.1.1.3 Post-test rotational position check. If the fully assembled 
probe includes one or more extensions, the following check should be 
performed immediately after the completion of a velocity traverse. At 
the discretion of the tester, additional checks may be conducted after 
completion of testing at any sample port. Without altering the alignment 
of any of the components of the probe assembly used in the velocity 
traverse, secure the fully assembled probe in a horizontal position. 
Affix an angle-measuring device at the reference scribe line specified 
in section 6.1.5.1. Use the other angle-measuring device to check the 
angle at each location where the device was checked prior to testing. 
Record the readings from the two angle-measuring devices.
    18.1.2 Rotational position check with probe in stack. This section 
applies only to probes that, due to physical constraints, cannot be 
inserted into the test port as fully assembled with all necessary 
extensions needed to reach the inner-most traverse point(s).
    18.1.2.1 Perform the out-of-stack procedure in section 18.1.1 on the 
main probe and

[[Page 111]]

any attached extensions that will be initially inserted into the test 
port.
    18.1.2.2 Use the following procedures to perform additional 
rotational position check(s) with the probe in the stack, each time a 
probe extension is added. Two angle-measuring devices are required. The 
first of these is the device that was used to measure yaw angles at the 
preceding traverse point, left in its properly aligned measurement 
position. The second angle-measuring device is positioned on the added 
probe extension. Use the applicable procedures in section 18.1.1.1 or 
18.1.1.2 to align, adjust, lock, and mark (if necessary) the position of 
the second angle-measuring device to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1[deg] 
of the first device. Record the readings of the two devices on a form 
similar to Table 2G-2.
    18.1.2.3 The procedure in section 18.1.2.2 should be performed at 
the first port where measurements are taken. The procedure should be 
repeated each time a probe extension is re-attached at a subsequent 
port, unless the probe extensions are designed to be locked into a 
mechanically fixed rotational position (e.g., through use of 
interlocking grooves), which can be reproduced from port to port as 
specified in section 8.3.5.2.
    18.2 Annex B--Angle Measurement Protocol for Protractor Wheel and 
Pointer Device. The following procedure shall be used when a protractor 
wheel and pointer assembly, such as the one described in section 6.2.2 
and illustrated in Figure 2G-5 is used to measure the yaw angle of flow. 
With each move to a new traverse point, unlock, re-align, and re-lock 
the probe, angle-pointer collar, and protractor wheel to each other. At 
each such move, particular attention is required to ensure that the 
scribe line on the angle pointer collar is either aligned with the 
reference scribe line on the main probe sheath or is at the rotational 
offset position established under section 8.3.1. The procedure consists 
of the following steps:
    18.2.1 Affix a protractor wheel to the entry port for the test probe 
in the stack or duct.
    18.2.2 Orient the protractor wheel so that the 0[deg] mark 
corresponds to the longitudinal axis of the stack or duct. For stacks, 
vertical ducts, or ports on the side of horizontal ducts, use a digital 
inclinometer meeting the specifications in section 6.2.1 to locate the 
0[deg] orientation. For ports on the top or bottom of horizontal ducts, 
identify the longitudinal axis at each test port and permanently mark 
the duct to indicate the 0[deg] orientation. Once the protractor wheel 
is properly aligned, lock it into position on the test port.
    18.2.3 Move the pointer assembly along the probe sheath to the 
position needed to take measurements at the first traverse point. Align 
the scribe line on the pointer collar with the reference scribe line or 
at the rotational offset position established under section 8.3.1. 
Maintaining this rotational alignment, lock the pointer device onto the 
probe sheath. Insert the probe into the entry port to the depth needed 
to take measurements at the first traverse point.
    18.2.4 Perform the yaw angle determination as specified in sections 
8.9.3 and 8.9.4 and record the angle as shown by the pointer on the 
protractor wheel. Then, take velocity pressure and temperature 
measurements in accordance with the procedure in section 8.9.5. Perform 
the alignment check described in section 8.9.6.
    18.2.5 After taking velocity pressure measurements at that traverse 
point, unlock the probe from the collar and slide the probe through the 
collar to the depth needed to reach the next traverse point.
    18.2.6 Align the scribe line on the pointer collar with the 
reference scribe line on the main probe or at the rotational offset 
position established under section 8.3.1. Lock the collar onto the 
probe.
    18.2.7 Repeat the steps in sections 18.2.4 through 18.2.6 at the 
remaining traverse points accessed from the current stack or duct entry 
port.
    18.2.8 After completing the measurement at the last traverse point 
accessed from a port, verify that the orientation of the protractor 
wheel on the test port has not changed over the course of the traverse 
at that port. For stacks, vertical ducts, or ports on the side of 
horizontal ducts, use a digital inclinometer meeting the specifications 
in section 6.2.1 to check the rotational position of the 0[deg] mark on 
the protractor wheel. For ports on the top or bottom of horizontal 
ducts, observe the alignment of the angle wheel 0[deg] mark relative to 
the permanent 0[deg] mark on the duct at that test port. If these 
observed comparisons exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] of 0[deg], all 
angle and pressure measurements taken at that port since the protractor 
wheel was last locked into position on the port shall be repeated.
    18.2.9 Move to the next stack or duct entry port and repeat the 
steps in sections 18.2.1 through 18.2.8.
    18.3 Annex C--Guideline for Reference Scribe Line Placement. Use of 
the following guideline is recommended to satisfy the requirements of 
section 10.4 of this method. The rotational position of the reference 
scribe line should be either 90[deg] or 180[deg] from the probe's impact 
pressure port. For Type-S probes, place separate scribe lines, on 
opposite sides of the probe sheath, if both the A and B sides of the 
pitot tube are to be used for yaw angle measurements.
    18.4 Annex D--Determination of Reference Scribe Line Rotational 
Offset. The following procedures are recommended for determining the 
magnitude and sign of a probe's reference scribe line rotational offset, 
R<INF>SLO</INF>. Separate procedures are provided for two types of 
angle-measuring devices:

[[Page 112]]

digital inclinometers and protractor wheel and pointer assemblies.
    18.4.1 Perform the following procedures on the main probe with all 
devices that will be attached to the main probe in the field [such as 
thermocouples, resistance temperature detectors (RTDs), or sampling 
nozzles] that may affect the flow around the probe head. Probe shaft 
extensions that do not affect flow around the probe head need not be 
attached during calibration.
    18.4.2 The procedures below assume that the wind tunnel duct used 
for probe calibration is horizontal and that the flow in the calibration 
wind tunnel is axial as determined by the axial flow verification check 
described in section 10.1.2. Angle-measuring devices are assumed to 
display angles in alternating 0[deg] to 90[deg] and 90[deg] to 0[deg] 
intervals. If angle-measuring devices with other readout conventions are 
used or if other calibration wind tunnel duct configurations are used, 
make the appropriate calculational corrections. For Type-S probes, 
calibrate the A-side and B-sides separately, using the appropriate 
scribe line (see section 18.3, above), if both the A and B sides of the 
pitot tube are to be used for yaw angle determinations.
    18.4.2.1 Position the angle-measuring device in accordance with one 
of the following procedures.
    18.4.2.1.1 If using a digital inclinometer, affix the calibrated 
digital inclinometer to the probe. If the digital inclinometer can be 
independently adjusted after being locked into position on the probe 
sheath (e.g., by means of a set screw), the independent adjustment must 
be set so that the device performs exactly like a device without the 
capability for independent adjustment. That is, when aligned on the 
probe the device must give the same readings as a device that does not 
have the capability of being independently adjusted. Either align it 
directly on the reference scribe line or on a mark aligned with the 
scribe line determined according to the procedures in section 18.1.1.1. 
Maintaining this rotational alignment, lock the digital inclinometer 
onto the probe sheath.
    18.4.2.1.2 If using a protractor wheel and pointer device, orient 
the protractor wheel on the test port so that the 0[deg] mark is aligned 
with the longitudinal axis of the wind tunnel duct. Maintaining this 
alignment, lock the wheel into place on the wind tunnel test port. Align 
the scribe line on the pointer collar with the reference scribe line or 
with a mark aligned with the reference scribe line, as determined under 
section 18.1.1.1. Maintaining this rotational alignment, lock the 
pointer device onto the probe sheath.
    18.4.2.2 Zero the pressure-measuring device used for yaw nulling.
    18.4.2.3 Insert the probe assembly into the wind tunnel through the 
entry port, positioning the probe's impact port at the calibration 
location. Check the responsiveness of the pressure-measuring device to 
probe rotation, taking corrective action if the response is 
unacceptable.
    18.4.2.4 Ensure that the probe is in a horizontal position using a 
carpenter's level.
    18.4.2.5 Rotate the probe either clockwise or counterclockwise until 
a yaw null [zero [Delta]P for a Type S probe or zero (P<INF>2</INF>-
P<INF>3</INF>) for a 3-D probe] is obtained. If using a Type S probe 
with an attached thermocouple, the direction of the probe rotation shall 
be such that the thermocouple is located downstream of the probe 
pressure ports at the yaw-null position.
    18.4.2.6 Read and record the value of [theta]<INF>null</INF>, the 
angle indicated by the angle-measuring device at the yaw-null position. 
Record the angle reading on a form similar to Table 2G-6. Do not 
associate an algebraic sign with this reading.
    18.4.2.7 Determine the magnitude and algebraic sign of the reference 
scribe line rotational offset, R<INF>SLO</INF>. The magnitude of 
R<INF>SLO</INF> will be equal to either [theta]<INF>null</INF> or 
(90[deg]-[theta]<INF>null</INF>), depending on the type of probe being 
calibrated and the type of angle-measuring device used. (See Table 2G-7 
for a summary.) The algebraic sign of R<INF>SLO</INF> will either be 
positive if the rotational position of the reference scribe line is 
clockwise or negative if counterclockwise with respect to the probe's 
yaw-null position. Figure 2G-10 illustrates how the magnitude and sign 
of R<INF>SLO</INF> are determined.
    18.4.2.8 Perform the steps in sections 18.3.2.3 through 18.3.2.7 
twice at each of the two calibration velocities selected for the probe 
under section 10.6. Record the values of R<INF>SLO</INF> in a form 
similar to Table 2G-6.
    18.4.2.9 The average of all R<INF>SLO</INF> values is the reference 
scribe line rotational offset for the probe.

[[Page 113]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.020


[[Page 114]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.021


[[Page 115]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.022


[[Page 116]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.023


[[Page 117]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.024


[[Page 118]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.025


[[Page 119]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.026


[[Page 120]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.027


[[Page 121]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.028


[[Page 122]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.029


[[Page 123]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.030


[[Page 124]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.031


[[Page 125]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.032


[[Page 126]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.034


[[Page 127]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.035


[[Page 128]]



   Method 2H--Determination of Stack Gas Velocity Taking Into Account 
                   Velocity Decay Near the Stack Wall

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 This method is applicable in conjunction with Methods 2, 2F, and 
2G (40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A) to account for velocity decay near the 
wall in circular stacks and ducts.
    1.2 This method is not applicable for testing stacks and ducts less 
than 3.3 ft (1.0 m) in diameter.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A wall effects adjustment factor is determined. It is used to 
adjust the average stack gas velocity obtained under Method 2, 2F, or 2G 
of this appendix to take into account velocity decay near the stack or 
duct wall.
    2.2 The method contains two possible procedures: a calculational 
approach which derives an adjustment factor from velocity measurements 
and a default procedure which assigns a generic adjustment factor based 
on the construction of the stack or duct.
    2.2.1 The calculational procedure derives a wall effects adjustment 
factor from velocity measurements taken using Method 2, 2F, or 2G at 16 
(or more) traverse points specified under Method 1 of this appendix and 
a total of eight (or more) wall effects traverse points specified under 
this method. The calculational procedure based on velocity measurements 
is not applicable for horizontal circular ducts where build-up of 
particulate matter or other material in the bottom of the duct is 
present.
    2.2.2 A default wall effects adjustment factor of 0.9900 for brick 
and mortar stacks and 0.9950 for all other types of stacks and ducts may 
be used without taking wall effects measurements in a stack or duct.
    2.3 When the calculational procedure is conducted as part of a 
relative accuracy test audit (RATA) or other multiple-run test 
procedure, the wall effects adjustment factor derived from a single 
traverse (i.e., single RATA run) may be applied to all runs of the same 
RATA without repeating the wall effects measurements. Alternatively, 
wall effects adjustment factors may be derived for several traverses and 
an average wall effects adjustment factor applied to all runs of the 
same RATA.

                            3.0 Definitions.

    3.1 Complete wall effects traverse means a traverse in which 
measurements are taken at d<INF>rem</INF> (see section 3.3) and at 1-in. 
intervals in each of the four Method 1 equal-area sectors closest to the 
wall, beginning not farther than 4 in. (10.2 cm) from the wall and 
extending either (1) across the entire width of the Method 1 equal-area 
sector or (2) for stacks or ducts where this width exceeds 12 in. (30.5 
cm) (i.e., stacks or ducts greater than or equal to 15.6 ft [4.8 m] in 
diameter), to a distance of not less than 12 in. (30.5 cm) from the 
wall. Note: Because this method specifies that measurements must be 
taken at whole number multiples of 1 in. from a stack or duct wall, for 
clarity numerical quantities in this method are expressed in English 
units followed by metric units in parentheses. To enhance readability, 
hyphenated terms such as ``1-in. intervals'' or ``1-in. incremented,'' 
are expressed in English units only.
    3.2 dlast Depending on context, dlast means either (1) the distance 
from the wall of the last 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point 
or (2) the traverse point located at that distance (see Figure 2H-2).
    3.3 drem Depending on context, drem means either (1) the distance 
from the wall of the centroid of the area between dlast and the interior 
edge of the Method 1 equal-area sector closest to the wall or (2) the 
traverse point located at that distance (see Figure 2H-2).
    3.4 ``May,'' ``Must,'' ``Shall,'' ``Should,'' and the imperative 
form of verbs.
    3.4.1 ``May'' is used to indicate that a provision of this method is 
optional.
    3.4.2 ``Must,'' ``Shall,'' and the imperative form of verbs (such as 
``record'' or ``enter'') are used to indicate that a provision of this 
method is mandatory.
    3.4.3 ``Should'' is used to indicate that a provision of this method 
is not mandatory but is highly recommended as good practice.
    3.5 Method 1 refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 1--
Sample and velocity traverses for stationary sources.''
    3.6 Method 1 exterior equal-area sector and Method 1 equal-area 
sector closest to the wall mean any one of the four equal-area sectors 
that are closest to the wall for a circular stack or duct laid out in 
accordance with section 2.3.1 of Method 1 (see Figure 2H-1).
    3.7 Method 1 interior equal-area sector means any of the equal-area 
sectors other than the Method 1 exterior equal-area sectors (as defined 
in section 3.6) for a circular stack or duct laid out in accordance with 
section 2.3.1 of Method 1 (see Figure 2H-1).
    3.8 Method 1 traverse point and Method 1 equal-area traverse point 
mean a traverse point located at the centroid of an equal-area sector of 
a circular stack laid out in accordance with section 2.3.1 of Method 1.
    3.9 Method 2 refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate (Type S 
pitot tube).''
    3.10 Method 2F refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2F--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with three-
dimensional probes.''

[[Page 129]]

    3.11 Method 2G refers to 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 2G--
Determination of stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with two-
dimensional probes.''
    3.12 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point means any of the 
wall effects traverse points that are located at 1-in. intervals, i.e., 
traverse points d<INF>1</INF> through dlast (see Figure 2H-2).
    3.13 Partial wall effects traverse means a traverse in which 
measurements are taken at fewer than the number of traverse points 
required for a ``complete wall effects traverse'' (as defined in section 
3.1), but are taken at a minimum of two traverse points in each Method 1 
equal-area sector closest to the wall, as specified in section 8.2.2.
    3.14 Relative accuracy test audit (RATA) is a field test procedure 
performed in a stack or duct in which a series of concurrent 
measurements of the same stack gas stream is taken by a reference method 
and an installed monitoring system. A RATA usually consists of series of 
9 to 12 sets of such concurrent measurements, each of which is referred 
to as a RATA run. In a volumetric flow RATA, each reference method run 
consists of a complete traverse of the stack or duct.
    3.15 Wall effects-unadjusted average velocity means the average 
stack gas velocity, not accounting for velocity decay near the wall, as 
determined in accordance with Method 2, 2F, or 2G for a Method 1 
traverse consisting of 16 or more points.
    3.16 Wall effects-adjusted average velocity means the average stack 
gas velocity, taking into account velocity decay near the wall, as 
calculated from measurements at 16 or more Method 1 traverse points and 
at the additional wall effects traverse points specified in this method.
    3.17 Wall effects traverse point means a traverse point located in 
accordance with sections 8.2.2 or 8.2.3 of this method.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This method does not purport to address all of the health and 
safety considerations associated with its use. It is the responsibility 
of the user of this method to establish appropriate health and safety 
practices and to determine the applicability of occupational health and 
safety regulatory requirements prior to performing this method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 The provisions pertaining to equipment and supplies in the 
method that is used to take the traverse point measurements (i.e., 
Method 2, 2F, or 2G) are applicable under this method.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

                   8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis

    8.1 Default Wall Effects Adjustment Factors. A default wall effects 
adjustment factor of 0.9900 for brick and mortar stacks and 0.9950 for 
all other types of stacks and ducts may be used without conducting the 
following procedures.
    8.2 Traverse Point Locations. Determine the location of the Method 1 
traverse points in accordance with section 8.2.1 and the location of the 
traverse points for either a partial wall effects traverse in accordance 
with section 8.2.2 or a complete wall effects traverse in accordance 
with section 8.2.3.
    8.2.1 Method 1 equal-area traverse point locations. Determine the 
location of the Method 1 equal-area traverse points for a traverse 
consisting of 16 or more points using Table 1-2 (Location of Traverse 
Points in Circular Stacks) of Method 1.
    8.2.2 Partial wall effects traverse. For a partial wall effects 
traverse, measurements must be taken at a minimum of the following two 
wall effects traverse point locations in all four Method 1 equal-area 
sectors closest to the wall: (1) 1 in. (2.5 cm) from the wall (except as 
provided in section 8.2.2.1) and (2) d<INF>rem</INF>, as determined 
using Equation 2H-1 or 2H-2 (see section 8.2.2.2).
    8.2.2.1 If the probe cannot be positioned at 1 in. (2.5 cm) from the 
wall (e.g., because of insufficient room to withdraw the probe shaft) or 
if velocity pressure cannot be detected at 1 in. (2.5 cm) from the wall 
(for any reason other than build-up of particulate matter in the bottom 
of a duct), take measurements at the 1-in. incremented wall effects 
traverse point closest to the wall where the probe can be positioned and 
velocity pressure can be detected.
    8.2.2.2 Calculate the distance of d<INF>rem</INF> from the wall to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ in. (6.4 mm) using Equation 2H-1 or 
Equation 2H-2 (for a 16-point traverse).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.074

Where:

r=the stack or duct radius determined from direct measurement of the 
stack or duct diameter in accordance with section 8.6 of Method 2F or 
Method 2G, in. (cm);
p=the number of Method 1 equal-area traverse points on a diameter, p 
<ls-thn-eq>= 8 (e.g., for a 16-point traverse, p=8); dlast and drem are 
defined in sections 3.2 and 3.3 respectively, in. (cm).

For a 16-point Method 1 traverse, Equation 2H-1 becomes:

[[Page 130]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.075

    8.2.2.3 Measurements may be taken at any number of additional wall 
effects traverse points, with the following provisions.
    (a) dlast must not be closer to the center of the stack or duct than 
the distance of the interior edge (boundary), db, of the Method 1 equal-
area sector closest to the wall (see Figure 2H-2 or 2H-3). That is,

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.076

Table 2H-1 shows db as a function of the stack or duct radius, r, for 
traverses ranging from 16 to 48 points (i.e., for values of p ranging 
from 8 to 24).
    (b) Each point must be located at a distance that is a whole number 
(e.g., 1, 2, 3) multiple of 1 in. (2.5 cm).
    (c) Points do not have to be located at consecutive 1-in. intervals. 
That is, one or more 1-in. incremented points may be skipped. For 
example, it would be acceptable for points to be located at 1 in. (2.5 
cm), 3 in. (7.6 cm), 5 in. (12.7 cm), dlast, and drem; or at 1 in. (2.5 
cm), 2 in. (5.1 cm), 4 in. (10.2 cm), 7 in. (17.8 cm), dlast, and drem. 
Follow the instructions in section 8.7.1.2 of this method for recording 
results for wall effects traverse points that are skipped. It should be 
noted that the full extent of velocity decay may not be accounted for if 
measurements are not taken at all 1-in. incremented points close to the 
wall.
    8.2.3 Complete wall effects traverse. For a complete wall effects 
traverse, measurements must be taken at the following points in all four 
Method 1 equal-area sectors closest to the wall.
    (a) The 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point closest to the 
wall where the probe can be positioned and velocity can be detected, but 
no farther than 4 in. (10.2 cm) from the wall.
    (b) Every subsequent 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point 
out to the interior edge of the Method 1 equal-area sector or to 12 in. 
(30.5 cm) from the wall, whichever comes first. Note: In stacks or ducts 
with diameters greater than 15.6 ft (4.8 m) the interior edge of the 
Method 1 equal-area sector is farther from the wall than 12 in. (30.5 
cm).
    (c) d<INF>rem</INF>, as determined using Equation 2H-1 or 2H-2 (as 
applicable). Note: For a complete traverse of a stack or duct with a 
diameter less than 16.5 ft (5.0 m), the distance between d<INF>rem</INF> 
and d<INF>last</INF> is less than or equal to \1/2\ in. (12.7 mm). As 
discussed in section 8.2.4.2, when the distance between d<INF>rem</INF> 
and d<INF>last</INF> is less than or equal to \1/2\ in. (12.7 mm), the 
velocity measured at d<INF>last</INF> may be used for d<INF>rem</INF>. 
Thus, it is not necessary to calculate the distance of d<INF>rem</INF> 
or to take measurements at d<INF>rem</INF> when conducting a complete 
traverse of a stack or duct with a diameter less than 16.5 ft (5.0 m).
    8.2.4 Special considerations. The following special considerations 
apply when the distance between traverse points is less than or equal to 
\1/2\ in. (12.7 mm).
    8.2.4.1 A wall effects traverse point and the Method 1 traverse 
point. If the distance between a wall effects traverse point and the 
Method 1 traverse point is less than or equal to \1/2\ in. (12.7 mm), 
taking measurements at both points is allowed but not required or 
recommended; if measurements are taken at only one point, take the 
measurements at the point that is farther from the wall and use the 
velocity obtained at that point as the value for both points (see 
sections 8.2.3 and 9.2 for related requirements).
    8.2.4.2 d<INF>rem</INF> and d<INF>last</INF>. If the distance 
between d<INF>rem</INF> and d<INF>last</INF> is less than or equal to 
\1/2\ in. (12.7 mm), taking measurements at d<INF>rem</INF> is allowed 
but not required or recommended; if measurements are not taken at 
d<INF>rem</INF>, the measured velocity value at d<INF>last</INF> must be 
used as the value for both d<INF>last</INF> and d<INF>rem</INF>.
    8.3 Traverse Point Sampling Order and Probe Selection. Determine the 
sampling order of the Method 1 and wall effects traverse points and 
select the appropriate probe for the measurements, taking into account 
the following considerations.
    8.3.1 Traverse points on any radius may be sampled in either 
direction (i.e., from the wall toward the center of the stack or duct, 
or vice versa).
    8.3.2 To reduce the likelihood of velocity variations during the 
time of the traverse and the attendant potential impact on the wall 
effects-adjusted and unadjusted average velocities, the following 
provisions of this method shall be met.
    8.3.2.1 Each complete set of Method 1 and wall effects traverse 
points accessed from the same port shall be sampled without 
interruption. Unless traverses are performed simultaneously in all ports 
using separate probes at each port, this provision disallows first 
sampling all Method 1 points at all ports and then sampling all the wall 
effects points.
    8.3.2.2 The entire integrated Method 1 and wall effects traverse 
across all test ports shall be as short as practicable, consistent with 
the measurement system response time

[[Page 131]]

(see section 8.4.1.1) and sampling (see section 8.4.1.2) provisions of 
this method.
    8.3.3 It is recommended but not required that in each Method 1 
equal-area sector closest to the wall, the Method 1 equal-area traverse 
point should be sampled in sequence between the adjacent wall effects 
traverse points. For example, for the traverse point configuration shown 
in Figure 2H-2, it is recommended that the Method 1 equal-area traverse 
point be sampled between d<INF>last</INF> and d<INF>rem</INF>. In this 
example, if the traverse is conducted from the wall toward the center of 
the stack or duct, it is recommended that measurements be taken at 
points in the following order: d<INF>1</INF>, d<INF>2</INF>, 
d<INF>last</INF>, the Method 1 traverse point, d<INF>rem</INF>, and then 
at the traverse points in the three Method 1 interior equal-area 
sectors.
    8.3.4 The same type of probe must be used to take measurements at 
all Method 1 and wall effects traverse points. However, different copies 
of the same type of probe may be used at different ports (e.g., Type S 
probe 1 at port A, Type S probe 2 at port B) or at different traverse 
points accessed from a particular port (e.g., Type S probe 1 for Method 
1 interior traverse points accessed from port A, Type S probe 2 for wall 
effects traverse points and the Method 1 exterior traverse point 
accessed from port A). The identification number of the probe used to 
obtain measurements at each traverse point must be recorded.
    8.4 Measurements at Method 1 and Wall Effects Traverse Points. 
Conduct measurements at Method 1 and wall effects traverse points in 
accordance with Method 2, 2F, or 2G and in accordance with the 
provisions of the following subsections (some of which are included in 
Methods 2F and 2G but not in Method 2), which are particularly important 
for wall effects testing.
    8.4.1 Probe residence time at wall effects traverse points. Due to 
the steep temperature and pressure gradients that can occur close to the 
wall, it is very important for the probe residence time (i.e., the total 
time spent at a traverse point) to be long enough to ensure collection 
of representative temperature and pressure measurements. The provisions 
of Methods 2F and 2G in the following subsections shall be observed.
    8.4.1.1 System response time. Determine the response time of each 
probe measurement system by inserting and positioning the ``cold'' probe 
(at ambient temperature and pressure) at any Method 1 traverse point. 
Read and record the probe differential pressure, temperature, and 
elapsed time at 15-second intervals until stable readings for both 
pressure and temperature are achieved. The response time is the longer 
of these two elapsed times. Record the response time.
    8.4.1.2 Sampling. At the start of testing in each port (i.e., after 
a probe has been inserted into the stack gas stream), allow at least the 
response time to elapse before beginning to take measurements at the 
first traverse point accessed from that port. Provided that the probe is 
not removed from the stack gas stream, measurements may be taken at 
subsequent traverse points accessed from the same test port without 
waiting again for the response time to elapse.
    8.4.2 Temperature measurement for wall effects traverse points. 
Either (1) take temperature measurements at each wall effects traverse 
point in accordance with the applicable provisions of Method 2, 2F, or 
2G; or (2) use the temperature measurement at the Method 1 traverse 
point closest to the wall as the temperature measurement for all the 
wall effects traverse points in the corresponding equal-area sector.
    8.4.3 Non-detectable velocity pressure at wall effects traverse 
points. If the probe cannot be positioned at a wall effects traverse 
point or if no velocity pressure can be detected at a wall effects 
point, measurements shall be taken at the first subsequent wall effects 
traverse point farther from the wall where velocity can be detected. 
Follow the instructions in section 8.7.1.2 of this method for recording 
results for wall effects traverse points where velocity pressure cannot 
be detected. It should be noted that the full extent of velocity decay 
may not be accounted for if measurements are not taken at the 1-in. 
incremented wall effects traverse points closest to the wall.
    8.5 Data Recording. For each wall effects and Method 1 traverse 
point where measurements are taken, record all pressure, temperature, 
and attendant measurements prescribed in section 3 of Method 2 or 
section 8.0 of Method 2F or 2G, as applicable.
    8.6 Point Velocity Calculation. For each wall effects and Method 1 
traverse point, calculate the point velocity value (vi) in accordance 
with sections 12.1 and 12.2 of Method 2F for tests using Method 2F and 
in accordance with sections 12.1 and 12.2 of Method 2G for tests using 
Method 2 and Method 2G. (Note that the term (vi) in this method 
corresponds to the term (va(i)) in Methods 2F and 2G.) When the 
equations in the indicated sections of Method 2G are used in deriving 
point velocity values for Method 2 tests, set the value of the yaw 
angles appearing in the equations to 0[deg].
    8.7 Tabulating Calculated Point Velocity Values for Wall Effects 
Traverse Points. Enter the following values in a hardcopy or electronic 
form similar to Form 2H-1 (for 16-point Method 1 traverses) or Form 2H-2 
(for Method 1 traverses consisting of more than 16 points). A separate 
form must be completed for each of the four Method 1 equal-area sectors 
that are closest to the wall.
    (a) Port ID (e.g., A, B, C, or D)
    (b) Probe type
    (c) Probe ID

[[Page 132]]

    (d) Stack or duct diameter in ft (m) (determined in accordance with 
section 8.6 of Method 2F or Method 2G)
    (e) Stack or duct radius in in. (cm)
    (f) Distance from the wall of wall effects traverse points at 1-in. 
intervals, in ascending order starting with 1 in. (2.5 cm) (column A of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2)
    (g) Point velocity values (vd) for 1-in. incremented traverse points 
(see section 8.7.1), including dlast (see section 8.7.2)
    (h) Point velocity value (vdrem) at drem (see section 8.7.3).
    8.7.1 Point velocity values at wall effects traverse points other 
than dlast. For every 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point 
other than dlast, enter in column B of Form 2H-1 or 2H-2 either the 
velocity measured at the point (see section 8.7.1.1) or the velocity 
measured at the first subsequent traverse point farther from the wall 
(see section 8.7.1.2). A velocity value must be entered in column B of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2 for every 1-in. incremented traverse point from d1 
(representing the wall effects traverse point 1 in. [2.5 cm] from the 
wall) to dlast.
    8.7.1.1 For wall effects traverse points where the probe can be 
positioned and velocity pressure can be detected, enter the value 
obtained in accordance with section 8.6.
    8.7.1.2 For wall effects traverse points that were skipped [see 
section 8.2.2.3(c)] and for points where the probe cannot be positioned 
or where no velocity pressure can be detected, enter the value obtained 
at the first subsequent traverse point farther from the wall where 
velocity pressure was detected and measured and follow the entered value 
with a ``flag,'' such as the notation ``NM,'' to indicate that ``no 
measurements'' were actually taken at this point.
    8.7.2 Point velocity value at dlast. For dlast, enter in column B of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2 the measured value obtained in accordance with section 
8.6.
    8.7.3 Point velocity value (vdrem) at drem. Enter the point velocity 
value obtained at drem in column G of row 4a in Form 2H-1 or 2H-2. If 
the distance between drem and dlast is less than or equal to \1/2\ in. 
(12.7 mm), the measured velocity value at dlast may be used as the value 
at drem (see section 8.2.4.2).

                          9.0 Quality Control.

    9.1 Particulate Matter Build-up in Horizontal Ducts. Wall effects 
testing of horizontal circular ducts should be conducted only if build-
up of particulate matter or other material in the bottom of the duct is 
not present.
    9.2 Verifying Traverse Point Distances. In taking measurements at 
wall effects traverse points, it is very important for the probe impact 
pressure port to be positioned as close as practicable to the traverse 
point locations in the gas stream. For this reason, before beginning 
wall effects testing, it is important to calculate and record the 
traverse point positions that will be marked on each probe for each 
port, taking into account the distance that each port nipple (or probe 
mounting flange for automated probes) extends out of the stack and any 
extension of the port nipple (or mounting flange) into the gas stream. 
To ensure that traverse point positions are properly identified, the 
following procedures should be performed on each probe used.
    9.2.1 Manual probes. Mark the probe insertion distance of the wall 
effects and Method 1 traverse points on the probe sheath so that when a 
mark is aligned with the outside face of the stack port, the probe 
impact port is located at the calculated distance of the traverse point 
from the stack inside wall. The use of different colored marks is 
recommended for designating the wall effects and Method 1 traverse 
points. Before the first use of each probe, check to ensure that the 
distance of each mark from the center of the probe impact pressure port 
agrees with the previously calculated traverse point positions to within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ in. (6.4 mm).
    9.2.2 Automated probe systems. For automated probe systems that 
mechanically position the probe head at prescribed traverse point 
positions, activate the system with the probe assemblies removed from 
the test ports and sequentially extend the probes to the programmed 
location of each wall effects traverse point and the Method 1 traverse 
points. Measure the distance between the center of the probe impact 
pressure port and the inside of the probe assembly mounting flange for 
each traverse point. The measured distances must agree with the 
previously calculated traverse point positions to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ in. (6.4 mm).
    9.3 Probe Installation. Properly sealing the port area is 
particularly important in taking measurements at wall effects traverse 
points. For testing involving manual probes, the area between the probe 
sheath and the port should be sealed with a tightly fitting flexible 
seal made of an appropriate material such as heavy cloth so that leakage 
is minimized. For automated probe systems, the probe assembly mounting 
flange area should be checked to verify that there is no leakage.
    9.4 Velocity Stability. This method should be performed only when 
the average gas velocity in the stack or duct is relatively constant 
over the duration of the test. If the average gas velocity changes 
significantly during the course of a wall effects test, the test results 
should be discarded.

                            10.0 Calibration

    10.1 The calibration coefficient(s) or curves obtained under Method 
2, 2F, or 2G and used to perform the Method 1 traverse are applicable 
under this method.

[[Page 133]]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method 
(see section 8).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 The following calculations shall be performed to obtain a wall 
effects adjustment factor (WAF) from (1) the wall effects-unadjusted 
average velocity (T4avg), (2) the replacement velocity (vej) for each of 
the four Method 1 sectors closest to the wall, and (3) the average stack 
gas velocity that accounts for velocity decay near the wall (vavg).
    12.2 Nomenclature. The following terms are listed in the order in 
which they appear in Equations 2H-5 through 2H-21.

vavg=the average stack gas velocity, unadjusted for wall effects, actual 
ft/sec (m/sec);
vii=stack gas point velocity value at Method 1 interior equal-area 
sectors, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
vej=stack gas point velocity value, unadjusted for wall effects, at 
Method 1 exterior equal-area sectors, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
i=index of Method 1 interior equal-area traverse points;
j=index of Method 1 exterior equal-area traverse points;
n=total number of traverse points in the Method 1 traverse;
vdecd=the wall effects decay velocity for a sub-sector located between 
the traverse points at distances d-1 (in metric units, d-2.5) and d from 
the wall, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
vd=the measured stack gas velocity at distance d from the wall, actual 
ft/sec (m/sec); Note: v0=0;
d=the distance of a 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point from 
the wall, for traverse points d1 through dlast, in. (cm);
Ad=the cross-sectional area of a sub-sector located between the traverse 
points at distances d-1 (in metric units, d-2.5) and d from the wall, 
in.\2\ (cm \2\) ( e.g., sub-sector A<INF>2</INF> shown in Figures 2H-3 
and 2H-4);
r=the stack or duct radius, in. (cm);
Qd=the stack gas volumetric flow rate for a sub-sector located between 
the traverse points at distances d-1 (in metric units, d-2.5) and d from 
the wall, actual ft-in.\2\/sec (m-cm \2\/sec);
Qd1[rarr]dlast=the total stack gas volumetric flow rate for all sub-
sectors located between the wall and dlast, actual ft-in.\2\/sec (m-cm 
\2\/sec);
dlast=the distance from the wall of the last 1-in. incremented wall 
effects traverse point, in. (cm);
Adrem=the cross-sectional area of the sub-sector located between dlast 
and the interior edge of the Method 1 equal-area sector closest to the 
wall, in.\2\ (cm \2\) (see Figure 2H-4);
p=the number of Method 1 traverse points per diameter, p<ls-thn-eq>=8 
(e.g., for a 16-point traverse, p=8);
drem=the distance from the wall of the centroid of the area between 
dlast and the interior edge of the Method 1 equal-area sector closest to 
the wall, in. (cm);
Qdrem=the total stack gas volumetric flow rate for the sub-sector 
located between dlast and the interior edge of the Method 1 equal-area 
sector closest to the wall, actual ft-in.\2\/sec (m-cm \2\/sec);
vdrem=the measured stack gas velocity at distance drem from the wall, 
actual ft/sec (m/sec);
QT=the total stack gas volumetric flow rate for the Method 1 equal-area 
sector closest to the wall, actual ft-in.\2\/sec (m-cm \2\/sec);
vej=the replacement stack gas velocity for the Method 1 equal-area 
sector closest to the wall, i.e., the stack gas point velocity value, 
adjusted for wall effects, for the j<SUP>th</SUP> Method 1 equal-area 
sector closest to the wall, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
vavg=the average stack gas velocity that accounts for velocity decay 
near the wall, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
WAF=the wall effects adjustment factor derived from vavg and vavg for a 
single traverse, dimensionless;
vfinal=the final wall effects-adjusted average stack gas velocity that 
replaces the unadjusted average stack gas velocity obtained using Method 
2, 2F, or 2G for a field test consisting of a single traverse, actual 
ft/sec (m/sec);
WAF=the wall effects adjustment factor that is applied to the average 
velocity, unadjusted for wall effects, in order to obtain the final wall 
effects-adjusted stack gas velocity, vfinal or, vfinal(k), 
dimensionless;
vfinal(k)=the final wall effects-adjusted average stack gas velocity 
that replaces the unadjusted average stack gas velocity obtained using 
Method 2, 2F, or 2G on run k of a RATA or other multiple-run field test 
procedure, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
vavg(k)=the average stack gas velocity, obtained on run k of a RATA or 
other multiple-run procedure, unadjusted for velocity decay near the 
wall, actual ft/sec (m/sec);
k=index of runs in a RATA or other multiple-run procedure.

    12.3 Calculate the average stack gas velocity that does not account 
for velocity decay near the wall (vavg) using Equation 2H-5.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.077


[[Page 134]]


(Note that vavg in Equation 2H-5 is the same as v(a)avg in Equations 2F-
9 and 2G-8 in Methods 2F and 2G, respectively.)
    For a 16-point traverse, Equation 2H-5 may be written as follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.078
    
    12.4 Calculate the replacement velocity, vej, for each of the four 
Method 1 equal-area sectors closest to the wall using the procedures 
described in sections 12.4.1 through 12.4.8. Forms 2H-1 and 2H-2 provide 
sample tables that may be used in either hardcopy or spreadsheet format 
to perform the calculations described in sections 12.4.1 through 12.4.8. 
Forms 2H-3 and 2H-4 provide examples of Form 2H-1 filled in for partial 
and complete wall effects traverses.
    12.4.1 Calculate the average velocity (designated the ``decay 
velocity,'' vdec<INF>d</INF>) for each sub-sector located between the 
wall and d<INF>last</INF> (see Figure 2H-3) using Equation 2H-7.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.079

For each line in column A of Form 2H-1 or 2H-2 that contains a value of 
d, enter the corresponding calculated value of vdec<INF>d</INF> in 
column C.
    12.4.2 Calculate the cross-sectional area between the wall and the 
first 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse point and between 
successive 1-in. incremented wall effects traverse points, from the wall 
to d<INF>last</INF> (see Figure 2H-3), using Equation 2H-8.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.080

For each line in column A of Form 2H-1 or 2H-2 that contains a value of 
d, enter the value of the expression \1/4\ [pi](r-d+1)<SUP>2</SUP> in 
column D, the value of the expression \1/4\ [pi](r-d)<SUP>2</SUP> in 
column E, and the value of A<INF>d</INF> in column F. Note that Equation 
2H-8 is designed for use only with English units (in.). If metric units 
(cm) are used, the first term, \1/4\ [pi](r-d+1)<SUP>2</SUP>, must be 
changed to \1/4\ [pi](r-d+2.5)<SUP>2</SUP>. This change must also be 
made in column D of Form 2H-1 or 2H-2.
    12.4.3 Calculate the volumetric flow through each cross-sectional 
area derived in section 12.4.2 by multiplying the values of vdecd, 
derived according to section 12.4.1, by the cross-sectional areas 
derived in section 12.4.2 using Equation 2H-9.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.081

For each line in column A of Form 2H-1 or 2H-2 that contains a value of 
d, enter the corresponding calculated value of Qd in column G.
    12.4.4 Calculate the total volumetric flow through all sub-sectors 
located between the wall and dlast, using Equation 2H-10.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TN09JY99.003

Enter the calculated value of Qd1[rarr]cdlast in line 3 of column G of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2.
    12.4.5 Calculate the cross-sectional area of the sub-sector located 
between dlast and the interior edge of the Method 1 equal-area sector 
(e.g., sub-sector Adrem shown in Figures 2H-3 and 2H-4) using Equation 
2H-11.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.083


[[Page 135]]


For a 16-point traverse (eight points per diameter), Equation 2H-11 may 
be written as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.084

Enter the calculated value of A<INF>drem</INF> in line 4b of column G of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2.
    12.4.6 Calculate the volumetric flow for the sub-sector located 
between d<INF>last</INF> and the interior edge of the Method 1 equal-
area sector, using Equation 2H-13.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.085

In Equation 2H-13, v<INF>drem</INF> is either (1) the measured velocity 
value at d<INF>rem</INF> or (2) the measured velocity at 
d<INF>last</INF>, if the distance between d<INF>rem</INF> and 
d<INF>last</INF> is less than or equal to \1/2\ in. (12.7 mm) and no 
velocity measurement is taken at d<INF>rem</INF> (see section 8.2.4.2). 
Enter the calculated value of Q<INF>drem</INF> in line 4c of column G of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2.
    12.4.7 Calculate the total volumetric flow for the Method 1 equal-
area sector closest to the wall, using Equation 2H-14.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.086

Enter the calculated value of Q<INF>T</INF> in line 5a of column G of 
Form 2H-1 or 2H-2.
    12.4.8 Calculate the wall effects-adjusted replacement velocity 
value for the Method 1 equal-area sector closest to the wall, using 
Equation 2H-15.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.087

For a 16-point traverse (eight points per diameter), Equation 2H-15 may 
be written as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.088

Enter the calculated value of vej in line 5B of column G of Form 2H-1 or 
2H-2.
    12.5 Calculate the wall effects-adjusted average velocity, vavg, by 
replacing the four values of ve<INF>j</INF> shown in Equation 2H-5 with 
the four wall effects-adjusted replacement velocity 
values,ve<INF>j</INF>, calculated according to section 12.4.8, using 
Equation 2H-17.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.089

For a 16-point traverse, Equation 2H-17 may be written as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.090

    12.6 Calculate the wall effects adjustment factor, WAF, using 
Equation 2H-19.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.091

    12.6.1 Partial wall effects traverse. If a partial wall effects 
traverse (see section 8.2.2) is conducted, the value obtained from 
Equation 2H-19 is acceptable and may be reported as the wall effects 
adjustment factor provided that the value is greater than or equal to 
0.9800. If the value is less than 0.9800, it shall not be used and a 
wall effects adjustment factor of 0.9800 may be used instead.
    12.6.2 Complete wall effects traverse. If a complete wall effects 
traverse (see section 8.2.3) is conducted, the value obtained from 
Equation 2H-19 is acceptable and may be reported as the wall effects 
adjustment factor provided that the value is greater than or equal to 
0.9700. If the value is less than 0.9700, it shall not be used and a 
wall effects adjustment factor of 0.9700 may be used instead. If the 
wall effects adjustment factor for a particular stack or duct is less 
than 0.9700, the tester may (1) repeat the wall effects test, taking 
measurements at more Method 1 traverse points and (2) recalculate the 
wall effects adjustment factor from these measurements, in an attempt to 
obtain a wall effects adjustment factor that meets the 0.9700 
specification and completely characterizes the wall effects.
    12.7 Applying a Wall Effects Adjustment Factor. A default wall 
effects adjustment factor, as specified in section 8.1, or a calculated 
wall effects adjustment factor meeting the requirements of section 
12.6.1 or 12.6.2

[[Page 136]]

may be used to adjust the average stack gas velocity obtained using 
Methods 2, 2F, or 2G to take into account velocity decay near the wall 
of circular stacks or ducts. Default wall effects adjustment factors 
specified in section 8.1 and calculated wall effects adjustment factors 
that meet the requirements of section 12.6.1 and 12.6.2 are summarized 
in Table 2H-2.
    12.7.1 Single-run tests. Calculate the final wall effects-adjusted 
average stack gas velocity for field tests consisting of a single 
traverse using Equation 2H-20.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.092

The wall effects adjustment factor, WAF, shown in Equation 2H-20, may be 
(1) a default wall effects adjustment factor, as specified in section 
8.1, or (2) a calculated adjustment factor that meets the specifications 
in sections 12.6.1 or 12.6.2. If a calculated adjustment factor is used 
in Equation 2H-20, the factor must have been obtained during the same 
traverse in which v<INF>avg</INF> was obtained.
    12.7.2 RATA or other multiple run test procedure. Calculate the 
final wall effects-adjusted average stack gas velocity for any run k of 
a RATA or other multiple-run procedure using Equation 2H-21.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.093

The wall effects adjustment factor, WAF, shown in Equation 2H-21 may be 
(1) a default wall effects adjustment factor, as specified in section 
8.1; (2) a calculated adjustment factor (meeting the specifications in 
sections 12.6.1 or 12.6.2) obtained from any single run of the RATA that 
includes run k; or (3) the arithmetic average of more than one WAF (each 
meeting the specifications in sections 12.6.1 or 12.6.2) obtained 
through wall effects testing conducted during several runs of the RATA 
that includes run k. If wall effects adjustment factors (meeting the 
specifications in sections 12.6.1 or 12.6.2) are determined for more 
than one RATA run, the arithmetic average of all of the resulting 
calculated wall effects adjustment factors must be used as the value of 
WAF and applied to all runs of that RATA. If a calculated, not a 
default, wall effects adjustment factor is used in Equation 2H-21, the 
average velocity unadjusted for wall effects, v<INF>avg(k)</INF> must be 
obtained from runs in which the number of Method 1 traverse points 
sampled does not exceed the number of Method 1 traverse points in the 
runs used to derive the wall effects adjustment factor, WAF, shown in 
Equation 2H-21.
    12.8 Calculating Volumetric Flow Using Final Wall Effects-Adjusted 
Average Velocity Value. To obtain a stack gas flow rate that accounts 
for velocity decay near the wall of circular stacks or ducts, replace 
v<INF>s</INF> in Equation 2-10 in Method 2, or v<INF>a(avg)</INF> in 
Equations 2F-10 and 2F-11 in Method 2F, or v<INF>a(avg)</INF> in 
Equations 2G-9 and 2G-10 in Method 2G with one of the following.
    12.8.1 For single-run test procedures, use the final wall effects-
adjusted average stack gas velocity, vfinal, calculated according to 
Equation 2H-20.
    12.8.2 For RATA and other multiple run test procedures, use the 
final wall effects-adjusted average stack gas velocity, vfinal(k), 
calculated according to Equation 2H-21.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 Reporting

    16.1 Field Test Reports. Field test reports shall be submitted to 
the Agency according to the applicable regulatory requirements. When 
Method 2H is performed in conjunction with Method 2, 2F, or 2G to derive 
a wall effects adjustment factor, a single consolidated Method 2H/2F (or 
2H/2G) field test report should be prepared. At a minimum, the 
consolidated field test report should contain (1) all of the general 
information, and data for Method 1 points, specified in section 16.0 of 
Method 2F (when Method 2H is used in conjunction with Method 2F) or 
section 16.0 of Method 2G (when Method 2H is used in conjunction with 
Method 2 or 2G) and (2) the additional general information, and data for 
Method 1 points and wall effects points, specified in this section (some 
of which are included in section 16.0 of Methods 2F and 2G and are 
repeated in this section to ensure complete reporting for wall effects 
testing).
    16.1.1 Description of the source and site. The field test report 
should include the descriptive information specified in section 16.1.1 
of Method 2F (when using Method 2F) or 2G (when using either Method 2 or 
2G). It should also include a description of the stack or duct's 
construction material along with the diagram showing the dimensions of 
the stack or duct at the test port elevation prescribed in Methods 2F 
and 2G. The diagram should indicate the location of all wall effects 
traverse points where measurements were taken as well as the Method 1 
traverse points. The diagram should provide a unique identification 
number for each wall effects and Method 1 traverse point, its distance 
from the wall, and its location relative to the probe entry ports.
    16.1.2 Field test forms. The field test report should include a copy 
of Form 2H-1, 2H-2, or an equivalent for each Method 1 exterior equal-
area sector.
    16.1.3 Field test data. The field test report should include the 
following data for the Method 1 and wall effects traverse.
    16.1.3.1 Data for each traverse point. The field test report should 
include the values

[[Page 137]]

specified in section 16.1.3.2 of Method 2F (when using Method 2F) or 2G 
(when using either Method 2 or 2G) for each Method 1 and wall effects 
traverse point. The provisions of section 8.4.2 of Method 2H apply to 
the temperature measurements reported for wall effects traverse points. 
For each wall effects and Method 1 traverse point, the following values 
should also be included in the field test report.
    (a) Traverse point identification number for each Method 1 and wall 
effects traverse point.
    (b) Probe type.
    (c) Probe identification number.
    (d) Probe velocity calibration coefficient (i.e., Cp when Method 2 
or 2G is used; F2 when Method 2F is used).

    For each Method 1 traverse point in an exterior equal-area sector, 
the following additional value should be included.
    (e) Calculated replacement velocity, vej, accounting for wall 
effects.
    16.1.3.2 Data for each run. The values specified in section 16.1.3.3 
of Method 2F (when using Method 2F) or 2G (when using either Method 2 or 
2G) should be included in the field test report once for each run. The 
provisions of section 12.8 of Method 2H apply for calculating the 
reported gas volumetric flow rate. In addition, the following Method 2H 
run values should also be included in the field test report.
    (a) Average velocity for run, accounting for wall effects, vavg.
    (b) Wall effects adjustment factor derived from a test run, WAF.
    16.1.3.3 Data for a complete set of runs. The values specified in 
section 16.1.3.4 of Method 2F (when using Method 2F) or 2G (when using 
either Method 2 or 2G) should be included in the field test report once 
for each complete set of runs. In addition, the field test report should 
include the wall effects adjustment factor, WAF, that is applied in 
accordance with section 12.7.1 or 12.7.2 to obtain the final wall 
effects-adjusted average stack gas velocity vfinal or vfinal(k).
    16.1.4 Quality assurance and control. Quality assurance and control 
procedures, specifically tailored to wall effects testing, should be 
described.
    16.2 Reporting a Default Wall Effects Adjustment Factor. When a 
default wall effects adjustment factor is used in accordance with 
section 8.1 of this method, its value and a description of the stack or 
duct's construction material should be reported in lieu of submitting a 
test report.

                            17.0 References.

    (1) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 1--Sample and velocity 
traverses for stationary sources.
    (2) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2--Determination of stack gas 
velocity and volumetric flow rate (Type S pitot tube).
    (3) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2F--Determination of stack 
gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with three-dimensional probes.
    (4) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 2G--Determination of stack 
gas velocity and volumetric flow rate with two-dimensional probes.
    (5) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 3--Gas analysis for carbon 
dioxide, oxygen, excess air, and dry molecular weight.
    (6) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 3A--Determination of oxygen 
and carbon dioxide concentrations in emissions from stationary sources 
(instrumental analyzer procedure).
    (7) 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 4--Determination of moisture 
content in stack gases.
    (8) Emission Measurement Center (EMC) Approved Alternative Method 
(ALT-011) ``Alternative Method 2 Thermocouple Calibration Procedure.''
    (9) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Texas Utilities, DeCordova Steam 
Electric Station, Volume I: Test Description and Appendix A (Data 
Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-015a.
    (10) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Texas Utilities, Lake Hubbard Steam 
Electric Station, Volume I: Test Description and Appendix A (Data 
Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-017a.
    (11) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1998, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Data Report, Pennsylvania Electric Co., G.P.U. 
Genco Homer City Station: Unit 1, Volume I: Test Description and 
Appendix A (Data Distribution Package),'' EPA/430-R-98-018a.
    (12) The Cadmus Group, Inc., May 1999, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Findings Report,'' EPA/430-R-99-009.
    (13) The Cadmus Group, Inc., 1997, ``EPA Flow Reference Method 
Testing and Analysis: Wind Tunnel Experimental Results,'' EPA/430-R-97-
013.
    (14) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Four Prandtl Probes, Four 
S-Type Probes, Four French Probes, Four Modified Kiel Probes,'' Prepared 
for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG No. DW13938432-
01-0.
    (15) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Five Autoprobes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG No. 
DW13938432-01-0.

[[Page 138]]

    (16) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Eight Spherical Probes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG No. 
DW13938432-01-0.
    (17) National Institute of Standards and Technology, 1998, ``Report 
of Special Test of Air Speed Instrumentation, Four DAT Probes,'' 
Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under IAG No. 
DW13938432-01-0.
    (18) Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 1998, 
``Calibration of Eight Wind Speed Probes Over a Reynolds Number Range of 
46,000 to 725,000 per Foot, Text and Summary Plots,'' Plus Appendices, 
WBWT-TR-1317, Prepared for The Cadmus Group, Inc., under EPA Contract 
68-W6-0050, Work Assignment 0007AA-3.
    (19) Fossil Energy Research Corporation, Final Report, ``Velocity 
Probe Tests in Non-axial Flow Fields,'' November 1998, Prepared for the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
    (20) Fossil Energy Research Corporation, ``Additional Swirl Tunnel 
Tests: E-DAT and T-DAT Probes,'' February 24, 1999, Technical Memorandum 
Prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, P.O. No. 7W-1193-
NALX.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.036


[[Page 139]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.037


[[Page 140]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.038


[[Page 141]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.039


[[Page 142]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.040


[[Page 143]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.041


[[Page 144]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.042


[[Page 145]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.043


[[Page 146]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14MY99.044

  Method 3--Gas Analysis for the Determination of Dry Molecular Weight

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of Method 1.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 147]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Analytes                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oxygen (O2).......................       7782-44-7  2,000 ppmv.
Nitrogen (N2).....................       7727-37-9  N/A.
Carbon dioxide (CO2)..............        124-38-9  2,000 ppmv.
Carbon monoxide (CO)..............        630-08-0  N/A.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> concentrations and dry molecular 
weight of a sample from an effluent gas stream of a fossil-fuel 
combustion process or other process.
    1.3 Other methods, as well as modifications to the procedure 
described herein, are also applicable for all of the above 
determinations. Examples of specific methods and modifications include: 
(1) A multi-point grab sampling method using an Orsat analyzer to 
analyze the individual grab sample obtained at each point; (2) a method 
for measuring either CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF> and using 
stoichiometric calculations to determine dry molecular weight; and (3) 
assigning a value of 30.0 for dry molecular weight, in lieu of actual 
measurements, for processes burning natural gas, coal, or oil. These 
methods and modifications may be used, but are subject to the approval 
of the Administrator. The method may also be applicable to other 
processes where it has been determined that compounds other than 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, carbon monoxide (CO), and nitrogen 
(N<INF>2</INF>) are not present in concentrations sufficient to affect 
the results.
    1.4 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from a stack by one of the following 
methods: (1) single-point, grab sampling; (2) single-point, integrated 
sampling; or (3) multi-point, integrated sampling. The gas sample is 
analyzed for percent CO<INF>2</INF> and percent O<INF>2</INF>. For dry 
molecular weight determination, either an Orsat or a Fyrite analyzer may 
be used for the analysis.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Several compounds can interfere, to varying degrees, with the 
results of Orsat or Fyrite analyses. Compounds that interfere with 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration measurement include acid gases (e.g., 
sulfur dioxide, hydrogen chloride); compounds that interfere with 
O<INF>2</INF> concentration measurement include unsaturated hydrocarbons 
(e.g., acetone, acetylene), nitrous oxide, and ammonia. Ammonia reacts 
chemically with the O<INF>2</INF> absorbing solution, and when present 
in the effluent gas stream must be removed before analysis.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents.
    5.2.1 A typical Orsat analyzer requires four reagents: a gas-
confining solution, CO<INF>2</INF> absorbent, O<INF>2</INF> absorbent, 
and CO absorbent. These reagents may contain potassium hydroxide, sodium 
hydroxide, cuprous chloride, cuprous sulfate, alkaline pyrogallic acid, 
and/or chromous chloride. Follow manufacturer's operating instructions 
and observe all warning labels for reagent use.
    5.2.2 A typical Fyrite analyzer contains zinc chloride, hydrochloric 
acid, and either potassium hydroxide or chromous chloride. Follow 
manufacturer's operating instructions and observe all warning labels for 
reagent use.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Note: As an alternative to the sampling apparatus and systems 
described herein, other sampling systems (e.g., liquid displacement) may 
be used, provided such systems are capable of obtaining a representative 
sample and maintaining a constant sampling rate, and are, otherwise, 
capable of yielding acceptable results. Use of such systems is subject 
to the approval of the Administrator.

    6.1 Grab Sampling (See Figure 3-1).
    6.1.1 Probe. Stainless steel or borosilicate glass tubing equipped 
with an in-stack or out-of-stack filter to remove particulate matter (a 
plug of glass wool is satisfactory for this purpose). Any other 
materials, resistant to temperature at sampling conditions and inert to 
all components of the gas stream, may be used for the probe. Examples of 
such materials may include aluminum, copper, quartz glass, and Teflon.
    6.1.2 Pump. A one-way squeeze bulb, or equivalent, to transport the 
gas sample to the analyzer.
    6.2 Integrated Sampling (Figure 3-2).
    6.2.1 Probe. Same as in Section 6.1.1.

[[Page 148]]

    6.2.2 Condenser. An air-cooled or water-cooled condenser, or other 
condenser no greater than 250 ml that will not remove O<INF>2</INF>, 
CO<INF>2</INF>, CO, and N<INF>2</INF>, to remove excess moisture which 
would interfere with the operation of the pump and flowmeter.
    6.2.3 Valve. A needle valve, to adjust sample gas flow rate.
    6.2.4 Pump. A leak-free, diaphragm-type pump, or equivalent, to 
transport sample gas to the flexible bag. Install a small surge tank 
between the pump and rate meter to eliminate the pulsation effect of the 
diaphragm pump on the rate meter.
    6.2.5 Rate Meter. A rotameter, or equivalent, capable of measuring 
flow rate to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the selected flow rate. 
A flow rate range of 500 to 1000 ml/min is suggested.
    6.2.6 Flexible Bag. Any leak-free plastic (e.g., Tedlar, Mylar, 
Teflon) or plastic-coated aluminum (e.g., aluminized Mylar) bag, or 
equivalent, having a capacity consistent with the selected flow rate and 
duration of the test run. A capacity in the range of 55 to 90 liters 
(1.9 to 3.2 ft<SUP>3</SUP>) is suggested. To leak-check the bag, connect 
it to a water manometer, and pressurize the bag to 5 to 10 cm 
H<INF>2</INF>O (2 to 4 in. H<INF>2</INF>O). Allow to stand for 10 
minutes. Any displacement in the water manometer indicates a leak. An 
alternative leak-check method is to pressurize the bag to 5 to 10 cm (2 
to 4 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O and allow to stand overnight. A deflated bag 
indicates a leak.
    6.2.7 Pressure Gauge. A water-filled U-tube manometer, or 
equivalent, of about 30 cm (12 in.), for the flexible bag leak-check.
    6.2.8 Vacuum Gauge. A mercury manometer, or equivalent, of at least 
760 mm (30 in.) Hg, for the sampling train leak-check.
    6.3 Analysis. An Orsat or Fyrite type combustion gas analyzer.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Reagents. As specified by the Orsat or Fyrite-type combustion 
analyzer manufacturer.
    7.2 Standards. Two standard gas mixtures, traceable to National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standards, to be used in 
auditing the accuracy of the analyzer and the analyzer operator 
technique:
    7.2.1. Gas cylinder containing 2 to 4 percent O<INF>2</INF> and 14 
to 18 percent CO<INF>2</INF>.
    7.2.2. Gas cylinder containing 2 to 4 percent CO<INF>2</INF> and 
about 15 percent O<INF>2</INF>.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Single Point, Grab Sampling Procedure.
    8.1.1 The sampling point in the duct shall either be at the centroid 
of the cross section or at a point no closer to the walls than 1.0 m 
(3.3 ft), unless otherwise specified by the Administrator.
    8.1.2 Set up the equipment as shown in Figure 3-1, making sure all 
connections ahead of the analyzer are tight. If an Orsat analyzer is 
used, it is recommended that the analyzer be leak-checked by following 
the procedure in Section 11.5; however, the leak-check is optional.
    8.1.3 Place the probe in the stack, with the tip of the probe 
positioned at the sampling point. Purge the sampling line long enough to 
allow at least five exchanges. Draw a sample into the analyzer, and 
immediately analyze it for percent CO<INF>2</INF> and percent 
O<INF>2</INF> according to Section 11.2.
    8.2 Single-Point, Integrated Sampling Procedure.
    8.2.1 The sampling point in the duct shall be located as specified 
in Section 8.1.1.
    8.2.2 Leak-check (optional) the flexible bag as in Section 6.2.6. 
Set up the equipment as shown in Figure 3-2. Just before sampling, leak-
check (optional) the train by placing a vacuum gauge at the condenser 
inlet, pulling a vacuum of at least 250 mm Hg (10 in. Hg), plugging the 
outlet at the quick disconnect, and then turning off the pump. The 
vacuum should remain stable for at least 0.5 minute. Evacuate the 
flexible bag. Connect the probe, and place it in the stack, with the tip 
of the probe positioned at the sampling point. Purge the sampling line. 
Next, connect the bag, and make sure that all connections are tight.
    8.2.3 Sample Collection. Sample at a constant rate (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent). The sampling run should be simultaneous 
with, and for the same total length of time as, the pollutant emission 
rate determination. Collection of at least 28 liters (1.0 
ft<SUP>3</SUP>) of sample gas is recommended; however, smaller volumes 
may be collected, if desired.
    8.2.4 Obtain one integrated flue gas sample during each pollutant 
emission rate determination. Within 8 hours after the sample is taken, 
analyze it for percent CO<INF>2</INF> and percent O<INF>2</INF> using 
either an Orsat analyzer or a Fyrite type combustion gas analyzer 
according to Section 11.3.

    Note: When using an Orsat analyzer, periodic Fyrite readings may be 
taken to verify/confirm the results obtained from the Orsat.

    8.3 Multi-Point, Integrated Sampling Procedure.
    8.3.1 Unless otherwise specified in an applicable regulation, or by 
the Administrator, a minimum of eight traverse points shall be used for 
circular stacks having diameters less than 0.61 m (24 in.), a minimum of 
nine shall be used for rectangular stacks having equivalent diameters 
less than 0.61 m (24 in.), and a minimum of 12 traverse points shall be 
used for all other cases. The traverse points shall be located according 
to Method 1.
    8.3.2 Follow the procedures outlined in Sections 8.2.2 through 
8.2.4, except for the following: Traverse all sampling points, and

[[Page 149]]

sample at each point for an equal length of time. Record sampling data 
as shown in Figure 3-3.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2...........................  Use of Fyrite to   Ensures the accurate
                                 confirm Orsat      measurement of CO2
                                 results.           and O2.
10.1..........................  Periodic audit of  Ensures that the
                                 analyzer and       analyzer is
                                 operator           operating properly
                                 technique.         and that the
                                                    operator performs
                                                    the sampling
                                                    procedure correctly
                                                    and accurately.
11.3..........................  Replicable         Minimizes
                                 analyses of        experimental error.
                                 integrated
                                 samples.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Analyzer. The analyzer and analyzer operator's technique should 
be audited periodically as follows: take a sample from a manifold 
containing a known mixture of CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF>, and 
analyze according to the procedure in Section 11.3. Repeat this 
procedure until the measured concentration of three consecutive samples 
agrees with the stated value <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 percent. If 
necessary, take corrective action, as specified in the analyzer users 
manual.
    10.2 Rotameter. The rotameter need not be calibrated, but should be 
cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's instruction.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Maintenance. The Orsat or Fyrite-type analyzer should be 
maintained and operated according to the manufacturers specifications.
    11.2 Grab Sample Analysis. Use either an Orsat analyzer or a Fyrite-
type combustion gas analyzer to measure O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration for dry molecular weight determination, using procedures 
as specified in the analyzer user's manual. If an Orsat analyzer is 
used, it is recommended that the Orsat leak-check, described in Section 
11.5, be performed before this determination; however, the check is 
optional. Calculate the dry molecular weight as indicated in Section 
12.0. Repeat the sampling, analysis, and calculation procedures until 
the dry molecular weights of any three grab samples differ from their 
mean by no more than 0.3 g/g-mole (0.3 lb/lb-mole). Average these three 
molecular weights, and report the results to the nearest 0.1 g/g-mole 
(0.1 lb/lb-mole).
    11.3 Integrated Sample Analysis. Use either an Orsat analyzer or a 
Fyrite-type combustion gas analyzer to measure O<INF>2</INF> and 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration for dry molecular weight determination, 
using procedures as specified in the analyzer user's manual. If an Orsat 
analyzer is used, it is recommended that the Orsat leak-check, described 
in Section 11.5, be performed before this determination; however, the 
check is optional. Calculate the dry molecular weight as indicated in 
Section 12.0. Repeat the analysis and calculation procedures until the 
individual dry molecular weights for any three analyses differ from 
their mean by no more than 0.3 g/g-mole (0.3 lb/lb-mole). Average these 
three molecular weights, and report the results to the nearest 0.1 g/g-
mole (0.1 lb/lb-mole).
    11.4 Standardization. A periodic check of the reagents and of 
operator technique should be conducted at least once every three series 
of test runs as outlined in Section 10.1.
    11.5 Leak-Check Procedure for Orsat Analyzer. Moving an Orsat 
analyzer frequently causes it to leak. Therefore, an Orsat analyzer 
should be thoroughly leak-checked on site before the flue gas sample is 
introduced into it. The procedure for leak-checking an Orsat analyzer is 
as follows:
    11.5.1 Bring the liquid level in each pipette up to the reference 
mark on the capillary tubing, and then close the pipette stopcock.
    11.5.2 Raise the leveling bulb sufficiently to bring the confining 
liquid meniscus onto the graduated portion of the burette, and then 
close the manifold stopcock.
    11.5.3 Record the meniscus position.
    11.5.4 Observe the meniscus in the burette and the liquid level in 
the pipette for movement over the next 4 minutes.
    11.5.5 For the Orsat analyzer to pass the leak-check, two conditions 
must be met:
    11.5.5.1 The liquid level in each pipette must not fall below the 
bottom of the capillary tubing during this 4-minute interval.
    11.5.5.2 The meniscus in the burette must not change by more than 
0.2 ml during this 4-minute interval.
    11.5.6 If the analyzer fails the leak-check procedure, check all 
rubber connections and stopcocks to determine whether they might be the 
cause of the leak. Disassemble, clean, and regrease any leaking 
stopcocks. Replace leaking rubber connections. After the analyzer is 
reassembled, repeat the leak-check procedure.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 Nomenclature.


[[Page 150]]


M<INF>d</INF>=Dry molecular weight, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
%CO<INF>2</INF>=Percent CO<INF>2</INF> by volume, dry basis.
%O<INF>2</INF>=Percent O<INF>2</INF> by volume, dry basis.
%CO=Percent CO by volume, dry basis.
%N<INF>2</INF>=Percent N<INF>2</INF> by volume, dry basis.
0.280 =Molecular weight of N<INF>2</INF> or CO, divided by 100.
0.320 =Molecular weight of O<INF>2</INF> divided by 100.
0.440 =Molecular weight of CO<INF>2</INF> divided by 100.

    12.2 Nitrogen, Carbon Monoxide Concentration. Determine the 
percentage of the gas that is N<INF>2</INF> and CO by subtracting the 
sum of the percent CO<INF>2</INF> and percent O<INF>2</INF> from 100 
percent.
    12.3 Dry Molecular Weight. Use Equation 3-1 to calculate the dry 
molecular weight of the stack gas.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.090

    Note: The above Equation 3-1 does not consider the effect on 
calculated dry molecular weight of argon in the effluent gas. The 
concentration of argon, with a molecular weight of 39.9, in ambient air 
is about 0.9 percent. A negative error of approximately 0.4 percent is 
introduced. The tester may choose to include argon in the analysis using 
procedures subject to approval of the Administrator.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Altshuller, A.P. Storage of Gases and Vapors in Plastic Bags. 
International Journal of Air and Water Pollution. 6:75-81. 1963.
    2. Conner, William D. and J.S. Nader. Air Sampling with Plastic 
Bags. Journal of the American Industrial Hygiene Association. 25:291-
297. 1964.
    3. Burrell Manual for Gas Analysts, Seventh edition. Burrell 
Corporation, 2223 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA. 15219. 1951.
    4. Mitchell, W.J. and M.R. Midgett. Field Reliability of the Orsat 
Analyzer. Journal of Air Pollution Control Association. 26:491-495. May 
1976.
    5. Shigehara, R.T., R.M. Neulicht, and W.S. Smith. Validating Orsat 
Analysis Data from Fossil Fuel-Fired Units. Stack Sampling News. 
4(2):21-26. August 1976.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.091


[[Page 151]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.092


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Time                       Traverse point           Q (liter/min)            % Deviation a
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
Average
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a % Dev.=[(Q-Qavg)/Qavg]x100 (Must be <=<plus-minus>10%)

                     Figure 3-3. Sampling Rate Data

Method 3A--Determination of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Concentrations in 
   Emissions From Stationary Sources (Instrumental Analyzer Procedure)

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable to the determination of 
oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) and carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) 
concentrations in emissions from stationary sources only when specified 
within the regulations.
    1.2 Principle. A sample is continuously extracted from the effluent 
stream: a portion of the sample stream is conveyed to an instrumental 
analyzer(s) for determination of O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration(s). Performance specifications and test procedures are 
provided to ensure reliable data.

[[Page 152]]

                        2. Range and Sensitivity

    Same as Method 6C, Sections 2.1 and 2.2, except that the span of the 
monitoring system shall be selected such that the average O<INF>2</INF> 
or CO<INF>2</INF> concentration is not less than 20 percent of the span.

                             3. Definitions

    3.1 Measurement System. The total equipment required for the 
determination of the O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> concentration. The 
measurement system consists of the same major subsystems as defined in 
Method 6C, Sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.1.3.
    3.2 Span, Calibration Gas, Analyzer Calibration Error, Sampling 
System Bias, Zero Drift, Calibration Drift, Response Time, and 
Calibration Curve. Same as Method 6C, Sections 3.2 through 3.8, and 
3.10.
    3.3 Interference Response. The output response of the measurement 
system to a component in the sample gas, other than the gas component 
being measured.

            4. Measurement System Performance Specifications

    Same as Method 6C, Sections 4.1 through 4.4.

                        5. Apparatus and Reagents

    5.1 Measurement System. Any measurement system for O<INF>2</INF> or 
CO<INF>2</INF> that meets the specifications of this method. A schematic 
of an acceptable measurement system is shown in Figure 6C-1 of Method 
6C. The essential components of the measurement system are described 
below:
    5.1.1 Sample Probe. A leak-free probe, of sufficient length to 
traverse the sample points.
    5.1.2 Sample Line. Tubing, to transport the sample gas from the 
probe to the moisture removal system. A heated sample line is not 
required for systems that measure the O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration on a dry basis, or transport dry gases.
    5.1.3 Sample Transport Line, Calibration Value Assembly, Moisture 
Removal System, Particulate Filter, Sample Pump, Sample Flow Rate 
Control, Sample Gas Manifold, and Data Recorder. Same as Method 6C, 
Sections 5.1.3 through 5.1.9, and 5.1.11, except that the requirements 
to use stainless steel, Teflon, and nonreactive glass filters do not 
apply.
    5.1.4 Gas Analyzer. An analyzer to determine continuously the 
O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> concentration in the sample gas stream. 
The analyzer shall meet the applicable performance specifications of 
Section 4. A means of controlling the analyzer flow rate and a device 
for determining proper sample flow rate (e.g., precision rotameter, 
pressure gauge downstream of all flow controls, etc.) shall be provided 
at the analyzer. The requirements for measuring and controlling the 
analyzer flow rate are not applicable if data are presented that 
demonstrate the analyzer is insensitive to flow variations over the 
range encountered during the test.
    5.2 Calibration Gases. The calibration gases for CO<INF>2</INF> 
analyzers shall be CO<INF>2</INF> in N<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> in 
air. Alternatively, CO<INF>2</INF>/SO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>/
SO<INF>2</INF> , or O<INF>2</INF>/CO<INF>2</INF>/SO<INF>2</INF> gas 
mixtures in N<INF>2</INF> may be used. Three calibration gases, as 
specified Section 5.3.1 through 5.3.3 of Method 6C, shall be used. For 
O<INF>2</INF> monitors that cannot analyze zero gas, a calibration gas 
concentration equivalent to less than 10 percent of the span may be used 
in place of zero gas.

            6. Measurement System Performance Test Procedures

    Perform the following procedures before measurement of emissions 
(Section 7).
    6.1 Calibration Concentration Verification. Follow Section 6.1 of 
Method 6C, except if calibration gas analysis is required, use Method 3 
and change the acceptance criteria for agreement among Method 3 results 
to 5 percent (or 0.2 percent by volume, whichever is greater).
    6.2 Interference Response. Conduct an interference response test of 
the analyzer prior to its initial use in the field. Thereafter, recheck 
the measurement system if changes are made in the instrumentation that 
could alter the interference response (e.g., changes in the type of gas 
detector). Conduct the interference response in accordance with Section 
5.4 of Method 20.
    6.3 Measurement System Preparation, Analyzer Calibration Error, and 
Sampling System Bias Check. Follow Sections 6.2 through 6.4 of Method 
6C.

                       7. Emission Test Procedure

    7.1 Selection of Sampling Site and Sampling Points. Select a 
measurement site and sampling points using the same criteria that are 
applicable to tests performed using Method 3.
    7.2 Sample Collection. Position the sampling probe at the first 
measurement point, and begin sampling at the same rate as used during 
the sampling system bias check. Maintain constant rate sampling (i.e., 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) during the entire run. The sampling 
time per run shall be the same as for tests conducted using Method 3 
plus twice the system response time. For each run, use only those 
measurements obtained after twice the response time of the measurement 
system has elapsed to determine the average effluent concentration.
    7.3 Zero and Calibration Drift Test. Follow Section 7.4 of Method 
6C.

                      8. Quality Control Procedures

    The following quality control procedures are recommended when the 
results of this

[[Page 153]]

method are used for an emission rate correction factor, or excess air 
determination. The tester should select one of the following options for 
validating measurement results:
    8.1 If both O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> are measured using 
Method 3A, the procedures described in Section 4.4 of Method 3 should be 
followed to validate the O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> measurement 
results.
    8.2 If only O<INF>2</INF> is measured using Method 3A, measurements 
of the sample stream CO<INF>2</INF> concentration should be obtained at 
the sample by-pass vent discharge using an Orsat or Fyrite analyzer, or 
equivalent. Duplicate samples should be obtained concurrent with at 
least one run. Average the duplicate Orsat or Fyrite analysis results 
for each run. Use the average CO<INF>2</INF> values for comparison with 
the O<INF>2</INF> measurements in accordance with the procedures 
described in Section 4.4 of Method 3.
    8.3 If only CO<INF>2</INF> is measured using Method 3A, concurrent 
measurements of the sample stream CO<INF>2</INF> concentration should be 
obtained using an Orsat or Fyrite analyzer as described in Section 8.2. 
For each run, differences greater than 0.5 percent between the Method 3A 
results and the average of the duplicate Fyrite analysis should be 
investigated.

                         9. Emission Calculation

    For all CO<INF>2</INF> analyzers, and for O<INF>2</INF> analyzers 
that can be calibrated with zero gas, follow Section 8 of Method 6C, 
except express all concentrations as percent, rather than ppm.
    For O<INF>2</INF> analyzers that use a low-level calibration gas in 
place of a zero gas, calculate the effluent gas concentration using 
Equation 3A-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.116

Where:

C<INF>gas</INF>=Effluent gas concentration, dry basis, percent.
C<INF>ma</INF>=Actual concentration of the upscale calibration gas, 
percent.
C<INF>oa</INF>=Actual concentration of the low-level calibration gas, 
percent.
C<INF>m</INF>=Average of initial and final system calibration bias check 
responses for the upscale calibration gas, percent.
C<INF>o</INF>=Average of initial and final system calibration bias check 
responses for the low-level gas, percent.
C=Average gas concentration indicated by the gas analyzer, dry basis, 
percent.

                            10. Bibliography

    Same as bibliography of Method 6C.

     Method 3B--Gas Analysis for the Determination of Emission Rate 
                     Correction Factor or Excess Air

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 1 and 3.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oxygen (O2).......................       7782-44-7  2,000 ppmv.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)..............        124-38-9  2,000 ppmv.
Carbon Monoxide (CO)..............        630-08-0  N/A.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of O<INF>2</INF>, CO<INF>2</INF>, and CO concentrations in the effluent 
from fossil-fuel combustion processes for use in excess air or emission 
rate correction factor calculations. Where compounds other than 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, CO, and nitrogen (N<INF>2</INF>) are 
present in concentrations sufficient to affect the results, the 
calculation procedures presented in this method must be modified, 
subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    1.3 Other methods, as well as modifications to the procedure 
described herein, are also applicable for all of the above 
determinations. Examples of specific methods and modifications include: 
(1) A multi-point sampling method using an Orsat analyzer to analyze 
individual grab samples obtained at each point, and (2) a method using 
CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF> and stoichiometric calculations to 
determine excess air. These methods and modifications

[[Page 154]]

may be used, but are subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    1.4 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from a stack by one of the following 
methods: (1) Single-point, grab sampling; (2) single-point, integrated 
sampling; or (3) multi-point, integrated sampling. The gas sample is 
analyzed for percent CO<INF>2</INF>, percent O<INF>2</INF>, and, if 
necessary, percent CO using an Orsat combustion gas analyzer.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Several compounds can interfere, to varying degrees, with the 
results of Orsat analyses. Compounds that interfere with CO2 
concentration measurement include acid gases (e.g., sulfur dioxide, 
hydrogen chloride); compounds that interfere with O<INF>2</INF> 
concentration measurement include unsaturated hydrocarbons (e.g., 
acetone, acetylene), nitrous oxide, and ammonia. Ammonia reacts 
chemically with the O<INF>2</INF> absorbing solution, and when present 
in the effluent gas stream must be removed before analysis.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. A typical Orsat analyzer requires four 
reagents: a gas-confining solution, CO<INF>2</INF> absorbent, 
O<INF>2</INF> absorbent, and CO absorbent. These reagents may contain 
potassium hydroxide, sodium hydroxide, cuprous chloride, cuprous 
sulfate, alkaline pyrogallic acid, and/or chromous chloride. Follow 
manufacturer's operating instructions and observe all warning labels for 
reagent use.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Note: As an alternative to the sampling apparatus and systems 
described herein, other sampling systems (e.g., liquid displacement) may 
be used, provided such systems are capable of obtaining a representative 
sample and maintaining a constant sampling rate, and are, otherwise, 
capable of yielding acceptable results. Use of such systems is subject 
to the approval of the Administrator.

    6.1 Grab Sampling and Integrated Sampling. Same as in Sections 6.1 
and 6.2, respectively for Method 3.
    6.2 Analysis. An Orsat analyzer only. For low CO<INF>2</INF> (less 
than 4.0 percent) or high O<INF>2</INF> (greater than 15.0 percent) 
concentrations, the measuring burette of the Orsat must have at least 
0.1 percent subdivisions. For Orsat maintenance and operation 
procedures, follow the instructions recommended by the manufacturer, 
unless otherwise specified herein.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Reagents. Same as in Method 3, Section 7.1.
    7.2 Standards. Same as in Method 3, Section 7.2.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Note: Each of the three procedures below shall be used only when 
specified in an applicable subpart of the standards. The use of these 
procedures for other purposes must have specific prior approval of the 
Administrator. A Fyrite-type combustion gas analyzer is not acceptable 
for excess air or emission rate correction factor determinations, unless 
approved by the Administrator. If both percent CO<INF>2</INF> and 
percent O<INF>2</INF> are measured, the analytical results of any of the 
three procedures given below may also be used for calculating the dry 
molecular weight (see Method 3).
    8.1 Single-Point, Grab Sampling and Analytical Procedure.
    8.1.1 The sampling point in the duct shall either be at the centroid 
of the cross section or at a point no closer to the walls than 1.0 m 
(3.3 ft), unless otherwise specified by the Administrator.
    8.1.2 Set up the equipment as shown in Figure 3-1 of Method 3, 
making sure all connections ahead of the analyzer are tight. Leak-check 
the Orsat analyzer according to the procedure described in Section 11.5 
of Method 3. This leak-check is mandatory.
    8.1.3 Place the probe in the stack, with the tip of the probe 
positioned at the sampling point; purge the sampling line long enough to 
allow at least five exchanges. Draw a sample into the analyzer. For 
emission rate correction factor determinations, immediately analyze the 
sample for percent CO<INF>2</INF> or percent O<INF>2</INF>, as outlined 
in Section 11.2. For excess air determination, immediately analyze the 
sample for percent CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, and CO, as outlined in 
Section 11.2, and calculate excess air as outlined in Section 12.2.
    8.1.4 After the analysis is completed, leak-check (mandatory) the 
Orsat analyzer once again, as described in Section 11.5 of Method 3. For 
the results of the analysis to be valid, the Orsat analyzer must pass 
this leak-test before and after the analysis.

[[Page 155]]

    8.2 Single-Point, Integrated Sampling and Analytical Procedure.
    8.2.1 The sampling point in the duct shall be located as specified 
in Section 8.1.1.
    8.2.2 Leak-check (mandatory) the flexible bag as in Section 6.2.6 of 
Method 3. Set up the equipment as shown in Figure 3-2 of Method 3. Just 
before sampling, leak-check (mandatory) the train by placing a vacuum 
gauge at the condenser inlet, pulling a vacuum of at least 250 mm Hg (10 
in. Hg), plugging the outlet at the quick disconnect, and then turning 
off the pump. The vacuum should remain stable for at least 0.5 minute. 
Evacuate the flexible bag. Connect the probe, and place it in the stack, 
with the tip of the probe positioned at the sampling point; purge the 
sampling line. Next, connect the bag, and make sure that all connections 
are tight.
    8.2.3 Sample at a constant rate, or as specified by the 
Administrator. The sampling run must be simultaneous with, and for the 
same total length of time as, the pollutant emission rate determination. 
Collect at least 28 liters (1.0 ft\3\) of sample gas. Smaller volumes 
may be collected, subject to approval of the Administrator.
    8.2.4 Obtain one integrated flue gas sample during each pollutant 
emission rate determination. For emission rate correction factor 
determination, analyze the sample within 4 hours after it is taken for 
percent CO<INF>2</INF> or percent O<INF>2</INF> (as outlined in Section 
11.2).
    8.3 Multi-Point, Integrated Sampling and Analytical Procedure.
    8.3.1 Unless otherwise specified in an applicable regulation, or by 
the Administrator, a minimum of eight traverse points shall be used for 
circular stacks having diameters less than 0.61 m (24 in.), a minimum of 
nine shall be used for rectangular stacks having equivalent diameters 
less than 0.61 m (24 in.), and a minimum of 12 traverse points shall be 
used for all other cases. The traverse points shall be located according 
to Method 1.
    8.3.2 Follow the procedures outlined in Sections 8.2.2 through 
8.2.4, except for the following: Traverse all sampling points, and 
sample at each point for an equal length of time. Record sampling data 
as shown in Figure 3-3 of Method 3.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Data Validation Using Fuel Factor. Although in most instances, 
only CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF> measurement is required, it is 
recommended that both CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> be measured to 
provide a check on the quality of the data. The data validation 
procedure of Section 12.3 is suggested.

    Note: Since this method for validating the CO<INF>2</INF> and 
O<INF>2</INF> analyses is based on combustion of organic and fossil 
fuels and dilution of the gas stream with air, this method does not 
apply to sources that (1) remove CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF> through 
processes other than combustion, (2) add O<INF>2</INF> (e.g., oxygen 
enrichment) and N<INF>2</INF> in proportions different from that of air, 
(3) add CO<INF>2</INF> (e.g., cement or lime kilns), or (4) have no fuel 
factor, F<INF>O</INF>, values obtainable (e.g., extremely variable waste 
mixtures). This method validates the measured proportions of 
CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> for fuel type, but the method does not 
detect sample dilution resulting from leaks during or after sample 
collection. The method is applicable for samples collected downstream of 
most lime or limestone flue-gas desulfurization units as the 
CO<INF>2</INF> added or removed from the gas stream is not significant 
in relation to the total CO<INF>2</INF> concentration. The 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentrations from other types of scrubbers using only 
water or basic slurry can be significantly affected and would render the 
fuel factor check minimally useful.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Analyzer. The analyzer and analyzer operator technique should 
be audited periodically as follows: take a sample from a manifold 
containing a known mixture of CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF>, and 
analyze according to the procedure in Section 11.3. Repeat this 
procedure until the measured concentration of three consecutive samples 
agrees with the stated value <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 percent. If 
necessary, take corrective action, as specified in the analyzer users 
manual.
    10.2 Rotameter. The rotameter need not be calibrated, but should be 
cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's instruction.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Maintenance. The Orsat analyzer should be maintained according 
to the manufacturers specifications.
    11.2 Grab Sample Analysis. To ensure complete absorption of the 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, or if applicable, CO, make repeated 
passes through each absorbing solution until two consecutive readings 
are the same. Several passes (three or four) should be made between 
readings. (If constant readings cannot be obtained after three 
consecutive readings, replace the absorbing solution.) Although in most 
cases, only CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF> concentration is required, 
it is recommended that both CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> be 
measured, and that the procedure in Section 12.3 be used to validate the 
analytical data.

    Note: Since this single-point, grab sampling and analytical 
procedure is normally conducted in conjunction with a single-point, grab 
sampling and analytical procedure for a pollutant, only one analysis is 
ordinarily conducted. Therefore, great care must be taken to obtain a 
valid sample and analysis.


[[Page 156]]


    11.3 Integrated Sample Analysis. The Orsat analyzer must be leak-
checked (see Section 11.5 of Method 3) before the analysis. If excess 
air is desired, proceed as follows: (1) within 4 hours after the sample 
is taken, analyze it (as in Sections 11.3.1 through 11.3.3) for percent 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, and CO; (2) determine the percentage of 
the gas that is N<INF>2</INF> by subtracting the sum of the percent 
CO<INF>2</INF>, percent O<INF>2</INF>, and percent CO from 100 percent; 
and (3) calculate percent excess air, as outlined in Section 12.2.
    11.3.1 To ensure complete absorption of the CO<INF>2</INF>, 
O<INF>2</INF>, or if applicable, CO, follow the procedure described in 
Section 11.2.

    Note: Although in most instances only CO<INF>2</INF> or 
O<INF>2</INF> is required, it is recommended that both CO<INF>2</INF> 
and O<INF>2</INF> be measured, and that the procedures in Section 12.3 
be used to validate the analytical data.

    11.3.2 Repeat the analysis until the following criteria are met:
    11.3.2.1 For percent CO<INF>2</INF>, repeat the analytical procedure 
until the results of any three analyses differ by no more than (a) 0.3 
percent by volume when CO<INF>2</INF> is greater than 4.0 percent or (b) 
0.2 percent by volume when CO<INF>2</INF> is less than or equal to 4.0 
percent. Average three acceptable values of percent CO<INF>2</INF>, and 
report the results to the nearest 0.2 percent.
    11.3.2.2 For percent O<INF>2</INF>, repeat the analytical procedure 
until the results of any three analyses differ by no more than (a) 0.3 
percent by volume when O<INF>2</INF> is less than 15.0 percent or (b) 
0.2 percent by volume when O<INF>2</INF> is greater than or equal to 
15.0 percent. Average the three acceptable values of percent 
O<INF>2</INF>, and report the results to the nearest 0.1 percent.
    11.3.2.3 For percent CO, repeat the analytical procedure until the 
results of any three analyses differ by no more than 0.3 percent. 
Average the three acceptable values of percent CO, and report the 
results to the nearest 0.1 percent.
    11.3.3 After the analysis is completed, leak-check (mandatory) the 
Orsat analyzer once again, as described in Section 11.5 of Method 3. For 
the results of the analysis to be valid, the Orsat analyzer must pass 
this leak-test before and after the analysis.
    11.4 Standardization. A periodic check of the reagents and of 
operator technique should be conducted at least once every three series 
of test runs as indicated in Section 10.1.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 Nomenclature. Same as Section 12.1 of Method 3 with the 
addition of the following:
%EA=Percent excess air.
0.264=Ratio of O<INF>2</INF> to N<INF>2</INF> in air, v/v.

    12.2 Percent Excess Air. Determine the percentage of the gas that is 
N<INF>2</INF> by subtracting the sum of the percent CO<INF>2</INF>, 
percent CO, and percent O<INF>2</INF> from 100 percent. Calculate the 
percent excess air (if applicable) by substituting the appropriate 
values of percent O<INF>2</INF>, CO, and N<INF>2</INF> into Equation 3B-
1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.093

    Note: The equation above assumes that ambient air is used as the 
source of O<INF>2</INF> and that the fuel does not contain appreciable 
amounts of N<INF>2</INF> (as do coke oven or blast furnace gases). For 
those cases when appreciable amounts of N<INF>2</INF> are present (coal, 
oil, and natural gas do not contain appreciable amounts of 
N<INF>2</INF>) or when oxygen enrichment is used, alternative methods, 
subject to approval of the Administrator, are required.

    12.3 Data Validation When Both CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> Are 
Measured.
    12.3.1 Fuel Factor, F<INF>o</INF>. Calculate the fuel factor (if 
applicable) using Equation 3B-2:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.094

Where:

%O<INF>2</INF>=Percent O<INF>2</INF> by volume, dry basis.
%CO<INF>2</INF>=Percent CO<INF>2</INF> by volume, dry basis.
20.9=Percent O<INF>2</INF> by volume in ambient air.

    If CO is present in quantities measurable by this method, adjust the 
O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> values using Equations 3B-3 and 3B-4 
before performing the calculation for F<INF>o</INF>:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.096

Where:
%CO=Percent CO by volume, dry basis.

    12.3.2 Compare the calculated F<INF>o</INF> factor with the expected 
F<INF>o</INF> values. Table 3B-1 in Section 17.0 may be used in 
establishing acceptable ranges for the expected F<INF>o</INF> if the 
fuel being burned is known. When fuels are burned in combinations, 
calculate the combined fuel F<INF>d</INF> and F<INF>c</INF> factors (as 
defined in Method 19, Section 12.2) according to the procedure in Method 
19, Sections 12.2 and 12.3.

[[Page 157]]

Then calculate the F<INF>o</INF> factor according to Equation 3B-5.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.097

    12.3.3 Calculated F<INF>o</INF> values, beyond the acceptable ranges 
shown in this table, should be investigated before accepting the test 
results. For example, the strength of the solutions in the gas analyzer 
and the analyzing technique should be checked by sampling and analyzing 
a known concentration, such as air; the fuel factor should be reviewed 
and verified. An acceptability range of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>12 percent 
is appropriate for the F<INF>o</INF> factor of mixed fuels with variable 
fuel ratios. The level of the emission rate relative to the compliance 
level should be considered in determining if a retest is appropriate; 
i.e., if the measured emissions are much lower or much greater than the 
compliance limit, repetition of the test would not significantly change 
the compliance status of the source and would be unnecessarily time 
consuming and costly.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 3, Section 16.0.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

                Table 3B-1--Fo Factors for Selected Fuels
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Fuel type                            Fo range
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coal:
    Anthracite and lignite..............................     1.016-1.130
    Bituminous..........................................     1.083-1.230
Oil:
    Distillate..........................................     1.260-1.413
    Residual............................................     1.210-1.370
Gas:
    Natural.............................................     1.600-1.836
    Propane.............................................     1.434-1.586
    Butane..............................................     1.405-1.553
Wood....................................................     1.000-1.120
Wood bark...............................................     1.003-1.130
------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Method 3C--Determination of Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrogen, and 
                     Oxygen From Stationary Sources

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. This method applies to the analysis of carbon 
dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>), methane (CH<INF>4</INF>), nitrogen 
(N<INF>2</INF>), and oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) in samples from municipal 
solid waste landfills and other sources when specified in an applicable 
subpart.
    1.2 Principle. A portion of the sample is injected into a gas 
chromatograph (GC) and the CO<INF>2</INF>, CH<INF>4</INF>, 
N<INF>2</INF>, and O<INF>2</INF> concentrations are determined by using 
a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and integrator.

                        2. Range and Sensitivity

    2.1 Range. The range of this method depends upon the concentration 
of samples. The analytical range of TCD's is generally between 
approximately 10 ppmv and the upper percent range.
    2.2 Sensitivity. The sensitivity limit for a compound is defined as 
the minimum detectable concentration of that compound, or the 
concentration that produces a signal-to-noise ratio of three to one. For 
CO<INF>2</INF>, CH<INF>4</INF>, N<INF>2</INF>, and O<INF>2</INF>, the 
sensitivity limit is in the low ppmv range.

                            3. Interferences

    Since the TCD exhibits universal response and detects all gas 
components except the carrier, interferences may occur. Choosing the 
appropriate GC or shifting the retention times by changing the column 
flow rate may help to eliminate resolution interferences.
    To assure consistent detector response, helium is used to prepare 
calibration gases. Frequent exposure to samples or carrier gas 
containing oxygen may gradually destroy filaments.

                              4. Apparatus

    4.1 Gas Chromatograph. GC having at least the following components:
    4.1.1 Separation Column. Appropriate column(s) to resolve 
CO<INF>2</INF>, CH<INF>4</INF>, N<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, and other 
gas components that may be present in the sample.
    4.1.2 Sample Loop. Teflon or stainless steel tubing of the 
appropriate diameter. Note: Mention of trade names or specific products 
does not constitute endorsement or recommendation by the U. S. 
Environmental Protection Agency.
    4.1.3 Conditioning System. To maintain the column and sample loop at 
constant temperature.
    4.1.4 Thermal Conductivity Detector.
    4.2 Recorder. Recorder with linear strip chart. Electronic 
integrator (optional) is recommended.
    4.3 Teflon Tubing. Diameter and length determined by connection 
requirements of cylinder regulators and the GC.
    4.4 Regulators. To control gas cylinder pressures and flow rates.
    4.5 Adsorption Tubes. Applicable traps to remove any O<INF>2</INF> 
from the carrier gas.

                               5. Reagents

    5.1 Calibration and Linearity Gases. Standard cylinder gas mixtures 
for each

[[Page 158]]

compound of interest with at least three concentration levels spanning 
the range of suspected sample concentrations. The calibration gases 
shall be prepared in helium.
    5.2 Carrier Gas. Helium, high-purity.

                               6. Analysis

    6.1 Sample Collection. Use the sample collection procedures 
described in Methods 3 or 25C to collect a sample of landfill gas (LFG).
    6.2 Preparation of GC. Before putting the GC analyzer into routine 
operation, optimize the operational conditions according to the 
manufacturer's specifications to provide good resolution and minimum 
analysis time. Establish the appropriate carrier gas flow and set the 
detector sample and reference cell flow rates at exactly the same 
levels. Adjust the column and detector temperatures to the recommended 
levels. Allow sufficient time for temperature stabilization. This may 
typically require 1 hour for each change in temperature.
    6.3 Analyzer Linearity Check and Calibration. Perform this test 
before sample analysis. Using the gas mixtures in section 5.1, verify 
the detector linearity over the range of suspected sample concentrations 
with at least three points per compound of interest. This initial check 
may also serve as the initial instrument calibration. All subsequent 
calibrations may be performed using a single-point standard gas provided 
the calibration point is within 20 percent of the sample component 
concentration. For each instrument calibration, record the carrier and 
detector flow rates, detector filament and block temperatures, 
attenuation factor, injection time, chart speed, sample loop volume, and 
component concentrations. Plot a linear regression of the standard 
concentrations versus area values to obtain the response factor of each 
compound. Alternatively, response factors of uncorrected component 
concentrations (wet basis) may be generated using instrumental 
integration. Note: Peak height may be used instead of peak area 
throughout this method.
    6.4 Sample Analysis. Purge the sample loop with sample, and allow to 
come to atmospheric pressure before each injection. Analyze each sample 
in duplicate, and calculate the average sample area (A). The results are 
acceptable when the peak areas for two consecutive injections agree 
within 5 percent of their average. If they do not agree, run additional 
samples until consistent area data are obtained. Determine the tank 
sample concentrations according to section 7.2.

                             7. Calculations

    Carry out calculations retaining at least one extra decimal figure 
beyond that of the acquired data. Round off results only after the final 
calculation.
    7.1 Nomenclature.

A=average sample area
B<INF>w</INF>=moisture content in the sample, fraction
C=component concentration in the sample, dry basis, ppmv
C<INF>t</INF>=calculated NMOC concentration, ppmv C equivalent
C<INF>tm</INF>=measured NMOC concentration, ppmv C equivalent
P<INF>bar</INF>=barometric pressure, mm Hg
P<INF>ti</INF>=gas sample tank pressure after evacuation, mm Hg absolute
P<INF>t</INF>=gas sample tank pressure after sampling, but before 
pressurizing, mm Hg absolute
P<INF>tf</INF>=final gas sample tank pressure after pressurizing, mm Hg 
absolute
P<INF>w</INF>=vapor pressure of H<INF>2</INF>O (from table 3C-1), mm Hg
T<INF>ti</INF>=sample tank temperature before sampling, [deg]K
T<INF>t</INF>=sample tank temperature at completion of sampling, [deg]K
T<INF>tf</INF>=sample tank temperature after pressurizing, [deg]K
r=total number of analyzer injections of sample tank during analysis 
(where j=injection number, 1 . . . r)
R=Mean calibration response factor for specific sample component, area/
ppmv

                     Table 3C-1--Moisture Correction
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Vapor
                     Temperature [deg]C                      Pressure of
                                                              H2O, mm Hg
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4..........................................................          6.1
6..........................................................          7.0
8..........................................................          8.0
10.........................................................          9.2
12.........................................................         10.5
14.........................................................         12.0
16.........................................................         13.6
18.........................................................         15.5
20.........................................................         17.5
22.........................................................         19.8
24.........................................................         22.4
26.........................................................         25.2
28.........................................................         28.3
30.........................................................         31.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    7.2 Concentration of Sample Components. Calculate C for each 
compound using Equations 3C-1 and 3C-2. Use the temperature and 
barometric pressure at the sampling site to calculate Bw. If the sample 
was diluted with helium using the procedures in Method 25C, use Equation 
3C-3 to calculate the concentration.

[[Page 159]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MR96.031

                             8. Bibliography

    1. McNair, H.M., and E.J. Bonnelli. Basic Gas Chromatography. 
Consolidated Printers, Berkeley, CA. 1969.

[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-2, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

           Appendix A-3 to Part 60--Test Methods 4 through 5I

Method 4--Determination of moisture content in stack gases
Method 5--Determination of particulate matter emissions from stationary 
sources
Method 5A--Determination of particulate matter emissions from the 
asphalt processing and asphalt roofing industry
Method 5B--Determination of nonsulfuric acid particulate matter 
emissions from stationary sources
Method 5C [Reserved]
Method 5D--Determination of particulate matter emissions from positive 
pressure fabric filters
Method 5E--Determination of particulate matter emissions from the wool 
fiberglass insulation manufacturing industry
Method 5F--Determination of nonsulfate particulate matter emissions from 
stationary sources
Method 5G--Determination of particulate matter emissions from wood 
heaters (dilution tunnel sampling location)
Method 5H--Determination of particulate emissions from wood heaters from 
a stack location
Method 5I--Determination of Low Level Particulate Matter Emissions From 
Stationary Sources
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining to 
any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but

[[Page 160]]

must be identified in the test report. The potentially approvable 
options are cited as ``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or 
as ``or equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or 
alternatives may be used at the discretion of the owner without prior 
approval. However, detailed descriptions for applying these potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test 
methods. Also, the potentially approvable options are not necessarily 
acceptable in all applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such 
potentially approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: 
(1) assuring that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable 
and are properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

       Method 4--Determination of Moisture Content in Stack Gases

    Note: This method does not include all the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 5, and Method 6.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Water vapor (H2O).................       7732-18-5  N/A
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of the moisture content of stack gas.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted at a constant rate from the source; 
moisture is removed from the sample stream and determined either 
volumetrically or gravimetrically.
    2.2 The method contains two possible procedures: a reference method 
and an approximation method.
    2.2.1 The reference method is used for accurate determinations of 
moisture content (such as are needed to calculate emission data). The 
approximation method, provides estimates of percent moisture to aid in 
setting isokinetic sampling rates prior to a pollutant emission 
measurement run. The approximation method described herein is only a 
suggested approach; alternative means for approximating the moisture 
content (e.g., drying tubes, wet bulb-dry bulb techniques, condensation 
techniques, stoichiometric calculations, previous experience, etc.) are 
also acceptable.
    2.2.2 The reference method is often conducted simultaneously with a 
pollutant emission measurement run. When it is, calculation of percent 
isokinetic, pollutant emission rate, etc., for the run shall be based 
upon the results of the reference method or its equivalent. These 
calculations shall not be based upon the results of the approximation 
method, unless the approximation method is shown, to the satisfaction of 
the Administrator, to be capable of yielding results within one percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O of the reference method.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 The moisture content of saturated gas streams or streams that 
contain water droplets, as measured by the reference method, may be 
positively biased. Therefore, when these conditions exist or are 
suspected, a second determination of the moisture content shall be made 
simultaneously with the reference method, as follows: Assume that the 
gas stream is saturated. Attach a temperature sensor [capable of 
measuring to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F)] to the reference 
method probe. Measure the stack gas temperature at each traverse point 
(see Section 8.1.1.1) during the reference method traverse, and 
calculate the average stack gas temperature. Next, determine the 
moisture percentage, either by: (1) Using a psychrometric chart and 
making appropriate corrections if the stack pressure is different from 
that of the chart, or (2) using saturation vapor pressure tables. In 
cases where the psychrometric chart or the saturation vapor pressure 
tables are not applicable (based on evaluation of the process), 
alternative methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, shall 
be used.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety

[[Page 161]]

and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory 
limitations prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Reference Method. A schematic of the sampling train used in this 
reference method is shown in Figure 4-1.
    6.1.1 Probe. Stainless steel or glass tubing, sufficiently heated to 
prevent water condensation, and equipped with a filter, either in-stack 
(e.g., a plug of glass wool inserted into the end of the probe) or 
heated out-of-stack (e.g., as described in Method 5), to remove 
particulate matter. When stack conditions permit, other metals or 
plastic tubing may be used for the probe, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator.
    6.1.2 Condenser. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.8.
    6.1.3 Cooling System. An ice bath container, crushed ice, and water 
(or equivalent), to aid in condensing moisture.
    6.1.4 Metering System. Same as in Method 5, Section 6.1.1.9, except 
do not use sampling systems designed for flow rates higher than 0.0283 
m\3\/min (1.0 cfm). Other metering systems, capable of maintaining a 
constant sampling rate to within 10 percent and determining sample gas 
volume to within 2 percent, may be used, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator.
    6.1.5 Barometer and Graduated Cylinder and/or Balance. Same as 
Method 5, Sections 6.1.2 and 6.2.5, respectively.
    6.2. Approximation Method. A schematic of the sampling train used in 
this approximation method is shown in Figure 4-2.
    6.2.1 Probe. Same as Section 6.1.1.
    6.2.2 Condenser. Two midget impingers, each with 30-ml capacity, or 
equivalent.
    6.2.3 Cooling System. Ice bath container, crushed ice, and water, to 
aid in condensing moisture in impingers.
    6.2.4 Drying Tube. Tube packed with new or regenerated 6- to 16-mesh 
indicating-type silica gel (or equivalent desiccant), to dry the sample 
gas and to protect the meter and pump.
    6.2.5 Valve. Needle valve, to regulate the sample gas flow rate.
    6.2.6 Pump. Leak-free, diaphragm type, or equivalent, to pull the 
gas sample through the train.
    6.2.7 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter, sufficiently accurate to measure 
the sample volume to within 2 percent, and calibrated over the range of 
flow rates and conditions actually encountered during sampling.
    6.2.8 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, to measure the flow 
range from 0 to 3 liters/min (0 to 0.11 cfm).
    6.2.9 Graduated Cylinder. 25-ml.
    6.2.10 Barometer. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.2.
    6.2.11 Vacuum Gauge. At least 760-mm (30-in.) Hg gauge, to be used 
for the sampling leak check.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Reference Method. The following procedure is intended for a 
condenser system (such as the impinger system described in Section 
6.1.1.8 of Method 5) incorporating volumetric analysis to measure the 
condensed moisture, and silica gel and gravimetric analysis to measure 
the moisture leaving the condenser.
    8.1.1 Preliminary Determinations.
    8.1.1.1 Unless otherwise specified by the Administrator, a minimum 
of eight traverse points shall be used for circular stacks having 
diameters less than 0.61 m (24 in.), a minimum of nine points shall be 
used for rectangular stacks having equivalent diameters less than 0.61 m 
(24 in.), and a minimum of twelve traverse points shall be used in all 
other cases. The traverse points shall be located according to Method 1. 
The use of fewer points is subject to the approval of the Administrator. 
Select a suitable probe and probe length such that all traverse points 
can be sampled. Consider sampling from opposite sides of the stack (four 
total sampling ports) for large stacks, to permit use of shorter probe 
lengths. Mark the probe with heat resistant tape or by some other method 
to denote the proper distance into the stack or duct for each sampling 
point.
    8.1.1.2 Select a total sampling time such that a minimum total gas 
volume of 0.60 scm (21 scf) will be collected, at a rate no greater than 
0.021 m\3\/min (0.75 cfm). When both moisture content and pollutant 
emission rate are to be determined, the moisture determination shall be 
simultaneous with, and for the same total length of time as, the 
pollutant emission rate run, unless otherwise specified in an applicable 
subpart of the standards.
    8.1.2 Preparation of Sampling Train.
    8.1.2.1 Place known volumes of water in the first two impingers; 
alternatively, transfer water into the first two impingers and record 
the weight of each impinger (plus water) to the nearest 0.5 g. Weigh and 
record the weight of the silica gel to the nearest 0.5 g, and transfer 
the silica gel to the fourth impinger; alternatively, the silica gel may 
first be transferred to the impinger, and the weight of the silica gel 
plus impinger recorded.
    8.1.2.2 Set up the sampling train as shown in Figure 4-1. Turn on 
the probe heater and (if applicable) the filter heating system to 
temperatures of approximately 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F), to prevent water 
condensation ahead of the condenser. Allow time for the temperatures to 
stabilize. Place crushed ice and water in the ice bath container.

[[Page 162]]

    8.1.3 Leak Check Procedures. It is recommended, but not required, 
that the volume metering system and sampling train be leak-checked as 
follows:
    8.1.3.1 Metering System. Same as Method 5, Section 8.4.1.
    8.1.3.2 Sampling Train. Disconnect the probe from the first impinger 
or (if applicable) from the filter holder. Plug the inlet to the first 
impinger (or filter holder), and pull a 380 mm (15 in.) Hg vacuum. A 
lower vacuum may be used, provided that it is not exceeded during the 
test. A leakage rate in excess of 4 percent of the average sampling rate 
or 0.00057 m\3\/min (0.020 cfm), whichever is less, is unacceptable. 
Following the leak check, reconnect the probe to the sampling train.
    8.1.4 Sampling Train Operation. During the sampling run, maintain a 
sampling rate within 10 percent of constant rate, or as specified by the 
Administrator. For each run, record the data required on a data sheet 
similar to that shown in Figure 4-3. Be sure to record the dry gas meter 
reading at the beginning and end of each sampling time increment and 
whenever sampling is halted. Take other appropriate readings at each 
sample point at least once during each time increment.

    Note: When Method 4 is used concurrently with an isokinetic method 
(e.g., Method 5) the sampling rate should be maintained at isokinetic 
conditions rather than 10 percent of constant rate.

    8.1.4.1 To begin sampling, position the probe tip at the first 
traverse point. Immediately start the pump, and adjust the flow to the 
desired rate. Traverse the cross section, sampling at each traverse 
point for an equal length of time. Add more ice and, if necessary, salt 
to maintain a temperature of less than 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) at the 
silica gel outlet.
    8.1.4.2 After collecting the sample, disconnect the probe from the 
first impinger (or from the filter holder), and conduct a leak check 
(mandatory) of the sampling train as described in Section 8.1.3.2. 
Record the leak rate. If the leakage rate exceeds the allowable rate, 
either reject the test results or correct the sample volume as in 
Section 12.3 of Method 5.
    8.2 Approximation Method.

    Note: The approximation method described below is presented only as 
a suggested method (see Section 2.0).

    8.2.1 Place exactly 5 ml water in each impinger. Leak check the 
sampling train as follows: Temporarily insert a vacuum gauge at or near 
the probe inlet. Then, plug the probe inlet and pull a vacuum of at 
least 250 mm (10 in.) Hg. Note the time rate of change of the dry gas 
meter dial; alternatively, a rotameter (0 to 40 ml/min) may be 
temporarily attached to the dry gas meter outlet to determine the 
leakage rate. A leak rate not in excess of 2 percent of the average 
sampling rate is acceptable.

    Note: Release the probe inlet plug slowly before turning off the 
pump.

    8.2.2 Connect the probe, insert it into the stack, and sample at a 
constant rate of 2 liters/min (0.071 cfm). Continue sampling until the 
dry gas meter registers about 30 liters (1.1 ft\3\) or until visible 
liquid droplets are carried over from the first impinger to the second. 
Record temperature, pressure, and dry gas meter readings as indicated by 
Figure 4-4.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 8.1.1.4...............  Leak rate of the   Ensures the accuracy
                                 sampling system    of the volume of gas
                                 cannot exceed      sampled. (Reference
                                 four percent of    Method)
                                 the average
                                 sampling rate or
                                 0.00057 m\3\/min
                                 (0.20 cfm).
Section 8.2.1.................  Leak rate of the   Ensures the accuracy
                                 sampling system    of the volume of gas
                                 cannot exceed      sampled.
                                 two percent of     (Approximation
                                 the average        Method)
                                 sampling rate.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Reference Method. Calibrate the metering system, temperature 
sensors, and barometer according to Method 5, Sections 10.3, 10.5, and 
10.6, respectively.
    10.2 Approximation Method. Calibrate the metering system and the 
barometer according to Method 6, Section 10.1 and Method 5, Section 
10.6, respectively.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Reference Method. Measure the volume of the moisture condensed 
in each of the impingers to the nearest ml. Alternatively, if the 
impingers were weighed prior to sampling, weigh the impingers after 
sampling

[[Page 163]]

and record the difference in weight to the nearest 0.5 g. Determine the 
increase in weight of the silica gel (or silica gel plus impinger) to 
the nearest 0.5 g. Record this information (see example data sheet, 
Figure 4-5), and calculate the moisture content, as described in Section 
12.0.
    11.2 Approximation Method. Combine the contents of the two 
impingers, and measure the volume to the nearest 0.5 ml.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out the following calculations, retaining at least one extra 
significant figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures 
after final calculation.
    12.1 Reference Method.
    12.1.1 Nomenclature.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Proportion of water vapor, by volume, in the gas stream.
M<INF>w</INF>=Molecular weight of water, 18.0 g/g-mole (18.0 lb/lb-
mole).
P<INF>m</INF>=Absolute pressure (for this method, same as barometric 
pressure) at the dry gas meter, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
R=Ideal gas constant, 0.06236 (mm Hg)(m\3\)/(g-mole)([deg]K) for metric 
units and 21.85 (in. Hg)(ft\3\)/(lb-mole)([deg]R) for English units.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute temperature at meter, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>f</INF>=Final volume of condenser water, ml.
V<INF>i</INF>=Initial volume, if any, of condenser water, ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by dry gas meter, dcm (dcf).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>wc(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor condensed, corrected to 
standard conditions, scm (scf).
V<INF>wsg(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor collected in silica gel, 
corrected to standard conditions, scm (scf).
W<INF>f</INF>=Final weight of silica gel or silica gel plus impinger, g.
W<INF>i</INF>=Initial weight of silica gel or silica gel plus impinger, 
g.
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
[Delta]V<INF>m</INF>=Incremental dry gas volume measured by dry gas 
meter at each traverse point, dcm (dcf).
[rho]<INF>w</INF>=Density of water, 0.9982 g/ml (0.002201 lb/ml).

    12.1.2 Volume of Water Vapor Condensed.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.098
    
Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.001333 m\3\/ml for metric units,
    =0.04706 ft\3\/ml for English units.

    12.1.3 Volume of Water Collected in Silica Gel.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.099
    
Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=1.0 g/g for metric units,
    =453.6 g/lb for English units.
K<INF>3</INF>=0.001335 m\3\/g for metric units,
    =0.04715 ft\3\/g for English units.

    12.1.4 Sample Gas Volume.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.100
    
Where:

K<INF>4</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,
    =17.64 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    Note: If the post-test leak rate (Section 8.1.4.2) exceeds the 
allowable rate, correct the value of Vm in Equation 4-3, as described in 
Section 12.3 of Method 5.

    12.1.5 Moisture Content.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.101
    
    12.1.6 Verification of Constant Sampling Rate. For each time 
increment, determine the [Delta]V<INF>m</INF>. Calculate the average. If 
the value for any time increment differs from the average by more than 
10 percent, reject the results, and repeat the run.
    12.1.7 In saturated or moisture droplet-laden gas streams, two 
calculations of the moisture content of the stack gas shall be made, one 
using a value based upon the saturated conditions (see Section 4.1), and 
another based upon the results of the impinger analysis. The lower of 
these two values of B<INF>ws</INF> shall be considered correct.

[[Page 164]]

    12.2 Approximation Method. The approximation method presented is 
designed to estimate the moisture in the stack gas; therefore, other 
data, which are only necessary for accurate moisture determinations, are 
not collected. The following equations adequately estimate the moisture 
content for the purpose of determining isokinetic sampling rate 
settings.
    12.2.1 Nomenclature.
B<INF>wm</INF>=Approximate proportion by volume of water vapor in the 
gas stream leaving the second impinger, 0.025.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream, proportion by volume.
M<INF>w</INF>=Molecular weight of water, 18.0 g/g-mole (18.0 lb/lb-
mole).
P<INF>m</INF>=Absolute pressure (for this method, same as barometric 
pressure) at the dry gas meter, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
R=Ideal gas constant, 0.06236 [(mm Hg)(m\3\)]/[(g-mole)(K)] for metric 
units and 21.85 [(in. Hg)(ft\3\)]/[(lb-mole)([deg]R)] for English units.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute temperature at meter, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>f</INF>=Final volume of impinger contents, ml.
V<INF>i</INF>=Initial volume of impinger contents, ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by dry gas meter, dcm (dcf).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by dry gas meter, corrected 
to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>wc(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor condensed, corrected to 
standard conditions, scm (scf).
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
[rho]<INF>w</INF>=Density of water, 0.09982 g/ml (0.002201 lb/ml).

    12.2.2 Volume of Water Vapor Collected.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.102
    
Where:

K<INF>5</INF>=0.001333 m\3\/ml for metric units,
    =0.04706 ft\3\/ml for English units.

    12.2.3 Sample Gas Volume.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.103
    
Where:

K<INF>6</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,
    =17.64 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    12.2.4 Approximate Moisture Content.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.104
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    The procedure described in Method 5 for determining moisture content 
is acceptable as a reference method.

                             17.0 References

    1. Air Pollution Engineering Manual (Second Edition). Danielson, 
J.A. (ed.). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality 
Planning and Standards. Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication No. AP-
40. 1973.
    2. Devorkin, Howard, et al. Air Pollution Source Testing Manual. Air 
Pollution Control District, Los Angeles, CA. November 1963.
    3. Methods for Determination of Velocity, Volume, Dust and Mist 
Content of Gases. Western Precipitation Division of Joy Manufacturing 
Co. Los Angeles, CA. Bulletin WP-50. 1968.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 165]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.105


[[Page 166]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.106


[[Page 167]]


Plant___________________________________________________________________
Location________________________________________________________________
Operator________________________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Run No._________________________________________________________________
Ambient temperature_____________________________________________________
Barometric pressure_____________________________________________________
Probe Length____________________________________________________________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 168]]


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                    Gas sample  temperature  Temperature
                                                                             Pressure       Meter                      at  dry gas meter        of gas
                                                   Sampling      Stack     differential  reading gas              --------------------------   leaving
                                                     time     temperature      across       sample     [Delta]Vm                              condenser
                Traverse Pt. No.                  ([Delta]),    [deg]C (      orifice       volume        m\3\     Inlet  Tmin     Outlet      or last
                                                     min        [deg]F)        meter         m\3\       (ft\3\)      [deg]C (      Tmout       impinger
                                                                           [Delta]H  mm    (ft\3\)                   [deg]F)      [deg]C (     [deg]C (
                                                                             (in.) H2O                                            [deg]F)      [deg]F)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------
                    Average
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 169]]

Location________________________________________________________________
Test____________________________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Operator________________________________________________________________
Barometric pressure_____________________________________________________
Comments:_______________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

          Figure 4-3. Moisture Determination--Reference Method

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Gas Volume through     Rate meter setting m3/     Meter temperature
              Clock time                meter, (Vm), m3 (ft3)        min (ft3/min)           [deg]C ( [deg]F)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

      Figure 4-4. Example Moisture Determination Field Data Sheet--
                          Approximation Method

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Impinger volume,   Silica gel weight,
                                          ml                   g
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Final
Initial
Difference
------------------------------------------------------------------------

              Figure 4-5. Analytical Data--Reference Method

Method 5--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of PM emissions from stationary sources.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source and 
collected on a glass fiber filter maintained at a temperature of 120 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F) or 
such other temperature as specified by an applicable subpart of the 
standards or approved by the Administrator for a particular application. 
The PM mass, which includes any material that condenses at or above the 
filtration temperature, is determined gravimetrically after the removal 
of uncombined water.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The following items are required for sample 
collection:
    6.1.1 Sampling Train. A schematic of the sampling train used in this 
method is shown in Figure 5-1 in Section 18.0. Complete construction 
details are given in APTD-0581 (Reference 2 in Section 17.0); commercial

[[Page 170]]

models of this train are also available. For changes from APTD-0581 and 
for allowable modifications of the train shown in Figure 5-1, see the 
following subsections.

    Note: The operating and maintenance procedures for the sampling 
train are described in APTD-0576 (Reference 3 in Section 17.0). Since 
correct usage is important in obtaining valid results, all users should 
read APTD-0576 and adopt the operating and maintenance procedures 
outlined in it, unless otherwise specified herein.

    6.1.1.1 Probe Nozzle. Stainless steel (316) or glass with a sharp, 
tapered leading edge. The angle of taper shall be <=30[deg], and the 
taper shall be on the outside to preserve a constant internal diameter. 
The probe nozzle shall be of the button-hook or elbow design, unless 
otherwise specified by the Administrator. If made of stainless steel, 
the nozzle shall be constructed from seamless tubing. Other materials of 
construction may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator. 
A range of nozzle sizes suitable for isokinetic sampling should be 
available. Typical nozzle sizes range from 0.32 to 1.27 cm (\1/8\ to \1/
2\ in) inside diameter (ID) in increments of 0.16 cm (\1/16\ in). Larger 
nozzles sizes are also available if higher volume sampling trains are 
used. Each nozzle shall be calibrated, according to the procedures 
outlined in Section 10.1.
    6.1.1.2 Probe Liner. Borosilicate or quartz glass tubing with a 
heating system capable of maintaining a probe gas temperature during 
sampling of 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F), or such other temperature as specified by an 
applicable subpart of the standards or as approved by the Administrator 
for a particular application. Since the actual temperature at the outlet 
of the probe is not usually monitored during sampling, probes 
constructed according to APTD-0581 and utilizing the calibration curves 
of APTD-0576 (or calibrated according to the procedure outlined in APTD-
0576) will be considered acceptable. Either borosilicate or quartz glass 
probe liners may be used for stack temperatures up to about 480 [deg]C 
(900 [deg]F); quartz glass liners shall be used for temperatures between 
480 and 900 [deg]C (900 and 1,650 [deg]F). Both types of liners may be 
used at higher temperatures than specified for short periods of time, 
subject to the approval of the Administrator. The softening temperature 
for borosilicate glass is 820 [deg]C (1500 [deg]F), and for quartz glass 
it is 1500 [deg]C (2700 [deg]F). Whenever practical, every effort should 
be made to use borosilicate or quartz glass probe liners. Alternatively, 
metal liners (e.g., 316 stainless steel, Incoloy 825 or other corrosion 
resistant metals) made of seamless tubing may be used, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.
    6.1.1.3 Pitot Tube. Type S, as described in Section 6.1 of Method 2, 
or other device approved by the Administrator. The pitot tube shall be 
attached to the probe (as shown in Figure 5-1) to allow constant 
monitoring of the stack gas velocity. The impact (high pressure) opening 
plane of the pitot tube shall be even with or above the nozzle entry 
plane (see Method 2, Figure 2-7) during sampling. The Type S pitot tube 
assembly shall have a known coefficient, determined as outlined in 
Section 10.0 of Method 2.
    6.1.1.4 Differential Pressure Gauge. Inclined manometer or 
equivalent device (two), as described in Section 6.2 of Method 2. One 
manometer shall be used for velocity head ([Delta]p) readings, and the 
other, for orifice differential pressure readings.
    6.1.1.5 Filter Holder. Borosilicate glass, with a glass frit filter 
support and a silicone rubber gasket. Other materials of construction 
(e.g., stainless steel, Teflon, or Viton) may be used, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator. The holder design shall provide a 
positive seal against leakage from the outside or around the filter. The 
holder shall be attached immediately at the outlet of the probe (or 
cyclone, if used).
    6.1.1.6 Filter Heating System. Any heating system capable of 
maintaining a temperature around the filter holder of 120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F) during 
sampling, or such other temperature as specified by an applicable 
subpart of the standards or approved by the Administrator for a 
particular application.
    6.1.1.7 Temperature Sensor. A temperature sensor capable of 
measuring temperature to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (5.4 
[deg]F) shall be installed so that the sensing tip of the temperature 
sensor is in direct contact with the sample gas, and the temperature 
around the filter holder can be regulated and monitored during sampling.
    6.1.1.8 Condenser. The following system shall be used to determine 
the stack gas moisture content: Four impingers connected in series with 
leak-free ground glass fittings or any similar leak-free 
noncontaminating fittings. The first, third, and fourth impingers shall 
be of the Greenburg-Smith design, modified by replacing the tip with a 
1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) ID glass tube extending to about 1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) 
from the bottom of the flask. The second impinger shall be of the 
Greenburg-Smith design with the standard tip. Modifications (e.g., using 
flexible connections between the impingers, using materials other than 
glass, or using flexible vacuum lines to connect the filter holder to 
the condenser) may be used, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator. The first and second impingers shall contain known 
quantities of water (Section 8.3.1), the third shall be empty, and the 
fourth shall contain a known weight of silica gel, or equivalent 
desiccant. A temperature sensor, capable of measuring temperature to 
within 1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F) shall be placed at the outlet of the fourth 
impinger for monitoring purposes. Alternatively, any system that cools 
the sample

[[Page 171]]

gas stream and allows measurement of the water condensed and moisture 
leaving the condenser, each to within 1 ml or 1 g may be used, subject 
to the approval of the Administrator. An acceptable technique involves 
the measurement of condensed water either gravimetrically or 
volumetrically and the determination of the moisture leaving the 
condenser by: (1) monitoring the temperature and pressure at the exit of 
the condenser and using Dalton's law of partial pressures; or (2) 
passing the sample gas stream through a tared silica gel (or equivalent 
desiccant) trap with exit gases kept below 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) and 
determining the weight gain. If means other than silica gel are used to 
determine the amount of moisture leaving the condenser, it is 
recommended that silica gel (or equivalent) still be used between the 
condenser system and pump to prevent moisture condensation in the pump 
and metering devices and to avoid the need to make corrections for 
moisture in the metered volume.

    Note: If a determination of the PM collected in the impingers is 
desired in addition to moisture content, the impinger system described 
above shall be used, without modification. Individual States or control 
agencies requiring this information shall be contacted as to the sample 
recovery and analysis of the impinger contents.

    6.1.1.9 Metering System. Vacuum gauge, leak-free pump, temperature 
sensors capable of measuring temperature to within 3 [deg]C (5.4 
[deg]F), dry gas meter (DGM) capable of measuring volume to within 2 
percent, and related equipment, as shown in Figure 5-1. Other metering 
systems capable of maintaining sampling rates within 10 percent of 
isokinetic and of determining sample volumes to within 2 percent may be 
used, subject to the approval of the Administrator. When the metering 
system is used in conjunction with a pitot tube, the system shall allow 
periodic checks of isokinetic rates.
    6.1.1.10 Sampling trains utilizing metering systems designed for 
higher flow rates than that described in APTD-0581 or APTD-0576 may be 
used provided that the specifications of this method are met.
    6.1.2 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in.).

    Note: The barometric pressure reading may be obtained from a nearby 
National Weather Service station. In this case, the station value (which 
is the absolute barometric pressure) shall be requested and an 
adjustment for elevation differences between the weather station and 
sampling point shall be made at a rate of minus 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in.) per 
30 m (100 ft) elevation increase or plus 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in) per 30 m 
(100 ft) elevation decrease.

    6.1.3 Gas Density Determination Equipment. Temperature sensor and 
pressure gauge, as described in Sections 6.3 and 6.4 of Method 2, and 
gas analyzer, if necessary, as described in Method 3. The temperature 
sensor shall, preferably, be permanently attached to the pitot tube or 
sampling probe in a fixed configuration, such that the tip of the sensor 
extends beyond the leading edge of the probe sheath and does not touch 
any metal. Alternatively, the sensor may be attached just prior to use 
in the field. Note, however, that if the temperature sensor is attached 
in the field, the sensor must be placed in an interference-free 
arrangement with respect to the Type S pitot tube openings (see Method 
2, Figure 2-4). As a second alternative, if a difference of not more 
than 1 percent in the average velocity measurement is to be introduced, 
the temperature sensor need not be attached to the probe or pitot tube. 
(This alternative is subject to the approval of the Administrator.)
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are required for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes. Nylon bristle brushes 
with stainless steel wire handles. The probe brush shall have extensions 
(at least as long as the probe) constructed of stainless steel, Nylon, 
Teflon, or similarly inert material. The brushes shall be properly sized 
and shaped to brush out the probe liner and nozzle.
    6.2.2 Wash Bottles. Two Glass wash bottles are recommended. 
Alternatively, polyethylene wash bottles may be used. It is recommended 
that acetone not be stored in polyethylene bottles for longer than a 
month.
    6.2.3 Glass Sample Storage Containers. Chemically resistant, 
borosilicate glass bottles, for acetone washes, 500 ml or 1000 ml. Screw 
cap liners shall either be rubber-backed Teflon or shall be constructed 
so as to be leak-free and resistant to chemical attack by acetone. 
(Narrow mouth glass bottles have been found to be less prone to 
leakage.) Alternatively, polyethylene bottles may be used.
    6.2.4 Petri Dishes. For filter samples; glass or polyethylene, 
unless otherwise specified by the Administrator.
    6.2.5 Graduated Cylinder and/or Balance. To measure condensed water 
to within 1 ml or 0.5 g. Graduated cylinders shall have subdivisions no 
greater than 2 ml.
    6.2.6 Plastic Storage Containers. Air-tight containers to store 
silica gel.
    6.2.7 Funnel and Rubber Policeman. To aid in transfer of silica gel 
to container; not necessary if silica gel is weighed in the field.
    6.2.8 Funnel. Glass or polyethylene, to aid in sample recovery.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. The following equipment is required for sample 
analysis:
    6.3.1 Glass Weighing Dishes.
    6.3.2 Desiccator.

[[Page 172]]

    6.3.3 Analytical Balance. To measure to within 0.1 mg.
    6.3.4 Balance. To measure to within 0.5 g.
    6.3.5 Beakers. 250 ml.
    6.3.6 Hygrometer. To measure the relative humidity of the laboratory 
environment.
    6.3.7 Temperature Sensor. To measure the temperature of the 
laboratory environment.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 Filters. Glass fiber filters, without organic binder, 
exhibiting at least 99.95 percent efficiency (<0.05 percent penetration) 
on 0.3 micron dioctyl phthalate smoke particles. The filter efficiency 
test shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM Method D 2986-71, 78, or 
95a (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). Test data from the 
supplier's quality control program are sufficient for this purpose. In 
sources containing SO<INF>2</INF> or SO<INF>3</INF>, the filter material 
must be of a type that is unreactive to SO<INF>2</INF> or 
SO<INF>3</INF>. Reference 10 in Section 17.0 may be used to select the 
appropriate filter.
    7.1.2 Silica Gel. Indicating type, 6 to 16 mesh. If previously used, 
dry at 175 [deg]C (350 [deg]F) for 2 hours. New silica gel may be used 
as received. Alternatively, other types of desiccants (equivalent or 
better) may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    7.1.3 Water. When analysis of the material caught in the impingers 
is required, deionized distilled water (to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 
91 Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17)) shall be used. 
Run blanks prior to field use to eliminate a high blank on test samples.
    7.1.4 Crushed Ice.
    7.1.5 Stopcock Grease. Acetone-insoluble, heat-stable silicone 
grease. This is not necessary if screw-on connectors with Teflon 
sleeves, or similar, are used. Alternatively, other types of stopcock 
grease may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Acetone, reagent grade, <=0.001 percent 
residue, in glass bottles, is required. Acetone from metal containers 
generally has a high residue blank and should not be used. Sometimes, 
suppliers transfer acetone to glass bottles from metal containers; thus, 
acetone blanks shall be run prior to field use and only acetone with low 
blank values (<=0.001 percent) shall be used. In no case shall a blank 
value of greater than 0.001 percent of the weight of acetone used be 
subtracted from the sample weight.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. The following reagents are required for sample 
analysis:
    7.3.1 Acetone. Same as in Section 7.2.
    7.3.2 Desiccant. Anhydrous calcium sulfate, indicating type. 
Alternatively, other types of desiccants may be used, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Preparation. It is suggested that sampling equipment be 
maintained according to the procedures described in APTD-0576.
    8.1.1 Place 200 to 300 g of silica gel in each of several air-tight 
containers. Weigh each container, including silica gel, to the nearest 
0.5 g, and record this weight. As an alternative, the silica gel need 
not be preweighed, but may be weighed directly in its impinger or 
sampling holder just prior to train assembly.
    8.1.2 Check filters visually against light for irregularities, 
flaws, or pinhole leaks. Label filters of the proper diameter on the 
back side near the edge using numbering machine ink. As an alternative, 
label the shipping containers (glass or polyethylene petri dishes), and 
keep each filter in its identified container at all times except during 
sampling.
    8.1.3 Desiccate the filters at 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5.6 [deg]C 
(68 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]F) and ambient pressure for at least 
24 hours. Weigh each filter (or filter and shipping container) at 
intervals of at least 6 hours to a constant weight (i.e., <=0.5 mg 
change from previous weighing). Record results to the nearest 0.1 mg. 
During each weighing, the period for which the filter is exposed to the 
laboratory atmosphere shall be less than 2 minutes. Alternatively 
(unless otherwise specified by the Administrator), the filters may be 
oven dried at 105 [deg]C (220 [deg]F) for 2 to 3 hours, desiccated for 2 
hours, and weighed. Procedures other than those described, which account 
for relative humidity effects, may be used, subject to the approval of 
the Administrator.
    8.2 Preliminary Determinations.
    8.2.1 Select the sampling site and the minimum number of sampling 
points according to Method 1 or as specified by the Administrator. 
Determine the stack pressure, temperature, and the range of velocity 
heads using Method 2; it is recommended that a leak check of the pitot 
lines (see Method 2, Section 8.1) be performed. Determine the moisture 
content using Approximation Method 4 or its alternatives for the purpose 
of making isokinetic sampling rate settings. Determine the stack gas dry 
molecular weight, as described in Method 2, Section 8.6; if integrated 
Method 3 sampling is used for molecular weight determination, the 
integrated bag sample shall be taken simultaneously with, and for the 
same total length of time as, the particulate sample run.
    8.2.2 Select a nozzle size based on the range of velocity heads, 
such that it is not necessary to change the nozzle size in order to 
maintain isokinetic sampling rates. During the run, do not change the 
nozzle size. Ensure that the proper differential pressure gauge is 
chosen for the range of velocity

[[Page 173]]

heads encountered (see Section 8.3 of Method 2).
    8.2.3 Select a suitable probe liner and probe length such that all 
traverse points can be sampled. For large stacks, consider sampling from 
opposite sides of the stack to reduce the required probe length.
    8.2.4 Select a total sampling time greater than or equal to the 
minimum total sampling time specified in the test procedures for the 
specific industry such that (l) the sampling time per point is not less 
than 2 minutes (or some greater time interval as specified by the 
Administrator), and (2) the sample volume taken (corrected to standard 
conditions) will exceed the required minimum total gas sample volume. 
The latter is based on an approximate average sampling rate.
    8.2.5 The sampling time at each point shall be the same. It is 
recommended that the number of minutes sampled at each point be an 
integer or an integer plus one-half minute, in order to avoid 
timekeeping errors.
    8.2.6 In some circumstances (e.g., batch cycles) it may be necessary 
to sample for shorter times at the traverse points and to obtain smaller 
gas sample volumes. In these cases, the Administrator's approval must 
first be obtained.
    8.3 Preparation of Sampling Train.
    8.3.1 During preparation and assembly of the sampling train, keep 
all openings where contamination can occur covered until just prior to 
assembly or until sampling is about to begin. Place 100 ml of water in 
each of the first two impingers, leave the third impinger empty, and 
transfer approximately 200 to 300 g of preweighed silica gel from its 
container to the fourth impinger. More silica gel may be used, but care 
should be taken to ensure that it is not entrained and carried out from 
the impinger during sampling. Place the container in a clean place for 
later use in the sample recovery. Alternatively, the weight of the 
silica gel plus impinger may be determined to the nearest 0.5 g and 
recorded.
    8.3.2 Using a tweezer or clean disposable surgical gloves, place a 
labeled (identified) and weighed filter in the filter holder. Be sure 
that the filter is properly centered and the gasket properly placed so 
as to prevent the sample gas stream from circumventing the filter. Check 
the filter for tears after assembly is completed.
    8.3.3 When glass probe liners are used, install the selected nozzle 
using a Viton A O-ring when stack temperatures are less than 260 [deg]C 
(500 [deg]F) or a heat-resistant string gasket when temperatures are 
higher. See APTD-0576 for details. Other connecting systems using either 
316 stainless steel or Teflon ferrules may be used. When metal liners 
are used, install the nozzle as discussed above or by a leak-free direct 
mechanical connection. Mark the probe with heat resistant tape or by 
some other method to denote the proper distance into the stack or duct 
for each sampling point.
    8.3.4 Set up the train as shown in Figure 5-1, using (if necessary) 
a very light coat of silicone grease on all ground glass joints, 
greasing only the outer portion (see APTD-0576) to avoid the possibility 
of contamination by the silicone grease. Subject to the approval of the 
Administrator, a glass cyclone may be used between the probe and filter 
holder when the total particulate catch is expected to exceed 100 mg or 
when water droplets are present in the stack gas.
    8.3.5 Place crushed ice around the impingers.
    8.4 Leak-Check Procedures.
    8.4.1 Leak Check of Metering System Shown in Figure 5-1. That 
portion of the sampling train from the pump to the orifice meter should 
be leak-checked prior to initial use and after each shipment. Leakage 
after the pump will result in less volume being recorded than is 
actually sampled. The following procedure is suggested (see Figure 5-2): 
Close the main valve on the meter box. Insert a one-hole rubber stopper 
with rubber tubing attached into the orifice exhaust pipe. Disconnect 
and vent the low side of the orifice manometer. Close off the low side 
orifice tap. Pressurize the system to 13 to 18 cm (5 to 7 in.) water 
column by blowing into the rubber tubing. Pinch off the tubing, and 
observe the manometer for one minute. A loss of pressure on the 
manometer indicates a leak in the meter box; leaks, if present, must be 
corrected.
    8.4.2 Pretest Leak Check. A pretest leak check of the sampling train 
is recommended, but not required. If the pretest leak check is 
conducted, the following procedure should be used.
    8.4.2.1 After the sampling train has been assembled, turn on and set 
the filter and probe heating systems to the desired operating 
temperatures. Allow time for the temperatures to stabilize. If a Viton A 
O-ring or other leak-free connection is used in assembling the probe 
nozzle to the probe liner, leak-check the train at the sampling site by 
plugging the nozzle and pulling a 380 mm (15 in.) Hg vacuum.

    Note: A lower vacuum may be used, provided that it is not exceeded 
during the test.

    8.4.2.2 If a heat-resistant string is used, do not connect the probe 
to the train during the leak check. Instead, leak-check the train by 
first plugging the inlet to the filter holder (cyclone, if applicable) 
and pulling a 380 mm (15 in.) Hg vacuum (see Note in Section 8.4.2.1). 
Then connect the probe to the train, and leak-check at approximately 25 
mm (1 in.) Hg vacuum; alternatively, the probe may be leak-checked with 
the rest of the sampling train, in one step, at 380 mm (15 in.) Hg 
vacuum. Leakage rates in excess of 4 percent

[[Page 174]]

of the average sampling rate or 0.00057 m\3\/min (0.020 cfm), whichever 
is less, are unacceptable.
    8.4.2.3 The following leak-check instructions for the sampling train 
described in APTD-0576 and APTD-0581 may be helpful. Start the pump with 
the bypass valve fully open and the coarse adjust valve completely 
closed. Partially open the coarse adjust valve, and slowly close the 
bypass valve until the desired vacuum is reached. Do not reverse the 
direction of the bypass valve, as this will cause water to back up into 
the filter holder. If the desired vacuum is exceeded, either leak-check 
at this higher vacuum, or end the leak check and start over.
    8.4.2.4 When the leak check is completed, first slowly remove the 
plug from the inlet to the probe, filter holder, or cyclone (if 
applicable), and immediately turn off the vacuum pump. This prevents the 
water in the impingers from being forced backward into the filter holder 
and the silica gel from being entrained backward into the third 
impinger.
    8.4.3 Leak Checks During Sample Run. If, during the sampling run, a 
component (e.g., filter assembly or impinger) change becomes necessary, 
a leak check shall be conducted immediately before the change is made. 
The leak check shall be done according to the procedure outlined in 
Section 8.4.2 above, except that it shall be done at a vacuum equal to 
or greater than the maximum value recorded up to that point in the test. 
If the leakage rate is found to be no greater than 0.00057 
m<SUP>3</SUP>/min (0.020 cfm) or 4 percent of the average sampling rate 
(whichever is less), the results are acceptable, and no correction will 
need to be applied to the total volume of dry gas metered; if, however, 
a higher leakage rate is obtained, either record the leakage rate and 
plan to correct the sample volume as shown in Section 12.3 of this 
method, or void the sample run.

    Note: Immediately after component changes, leak checks are optional. 
If such leak checks are done, the procedure outlined in Section 8.4.2 
above should be used.

    8.4.4 Post-Test Leak Check. A leak check of the sampling train is 
mandatory at the conclusion of each sampling run. The leak check shall 
be performed in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 
8.4.2, except that it shall be conducted at a vacuum equal to or greater 
than the maximum value reached during the sampling run. If the leakage 
rate is found to be no greater than 0.00057 m<SUP>3</SUP> min (0.020 
cfm) or 4 percent of the average sampling rate (whichever is less), the 
results are acceptable, and no correction need be applied to the total 
volume of dry gas metered. If, however, a higher leakage rate is 
obtained, either record the leakage rate and correct the sample volume 
as shown in Section 12.3 of this method, or void the sampling run.
    8.5 Sampling Train Operation. During the sampling run, maintain an 
isokinetic sampling rate (within 10 percent of true isokinetic unless 
otherwise specified by the Administrator) and a temperature around the 
filter of 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F), or such other temperature as specified by an 
applicable subpart of the standards or approved by the Administrator.
    8.5.1 For each run, record the data required on a data sheet such as 
the one shown in Figure 5-3. Be sure to record the initial DGM reading. 
Record the DGM readings at the beginning and end of each sampling time 
increment, when changes in flow rates are made, before and after each 
leak check, and when sampling is halted. Take other readings indicated 
by Figure 5-3 at least once at each sample point during each time 
increment and additional readings when significant changes (20 percent 
variation in velocity head readings) necessitate additional adjustments 
in flow rate. Level and zero the manometer. Because the manometer level 
and zero may drift due to vibrations and temperature changes, make 
periodic checks during the traverse.
    8.5.2 Clean the portholes prior to the test run to minimize the 
chance of collecting deposited material. To begin sampling, verify that 
the filter and probe heating systems are up to temperature, remove the 
nozzle cap, verify that the pitot tube and probe are properly 
positioned. Position the nozzle at the first traverse point with the tip 
pointing directly into the gas stream. Immediately start the pump, and 
adjust the flow to isokinetic conditions. Nomographs are available which 
aid in the rapid adjustment of the isokinetic sampling rate without 
excessive computations. These nomographs are designed for use when the 
Type S pitot tube coefficient (C<INF>p</INF>) is 0.85 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.02, and the stack gas equivalent density [dry 
molecular weight (M<INF>d</INF>)] is equal to 29 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4. APTD-0576 details the procedure for using the 
nomographs. If C<INF>p</INF> and M<INF>d</INF> are outside the above 
stated ranges, do not use the nomographs unless appropriate steps (see 
Reference 7 in Section 17.0) are taken to compensate for the deviations.
    8.5.3 When the stack is under significant negative pressure (i.e., 
height of impinger stem), take care to close the coarse adjust valve 
before inserting the probe into the stack to prevent water from backing 
into the filter holder. If necessary, the pump may be turned on with the 
coarse adjust valve closed.
    8.5.4 When the probe is in position, block off the openings around 
the probe and porthole to prevent unrepresentative dilution of the gas 
stream.
    8.5.5 Traverse the stack cross-section, as required by Method 1 or 
as specified by the Administrator, being careful not to bump the probe 
nozzle into the stack walls when sampling near the walls or when 
removing or

[[Page 175]]

inserting the probe through the portholes; this minimizes the chance of 
extracting deposited material.
    8.5.6 During the test run, make periodic adjustments to keep the 
temperature around the filter holder at the proper level; add more ice 
and, if necessary, salt to maintain a temperature of less than 20 [deg]C 
(68 [deg]F) at the condenser/silica gel outlet. Also, periodically check 
the level and zero of the manometer.
    8.5.7 If the pressure drop across the filter becomes too high, 
making isokinetic sampling difficult to maintain, the filter may be 
replaced in the midst of the sample run. It is recommended that another 
complete filter assembly be used rather than attempting to change the 
filter itself. Before a new filter assembly is installed, conduct a leak 
check (see Section 8.4.3). The total PM weight shall include the 
summation of the filter assembly catches.
    8.5.8 A single train shall be used for the entire sample run, except 
in cases where simultaneous sampling is required in two or more separate 
ducts or at two or more different locations within the same duct, or in 
cases where equipment failure necessitates a change of trains. In all 
other situations, the use of two or more trains will be subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.

    Note: When two or more trains are used, separate analyses of the 
front-half and (if applicable) impinger catches from each train shall be 
performed, unless identical nozzle sizes were used on all trains, in 
which case, the front-half catches from the individual trains may be 
combined (as may the impinger catches) and one analysis of front-half 
catch and one analysis of impinger catch may be performed. Consult with 
the Administrator for details concerning the calculation of results when 
two or more trains are used.

    8.5.9 At the end of the sample run, close the coarse adjust valve, 
remove the probe and nozzle from the stack, turn off the pump, record 
the final DGM meter reading, and conduct a post-test leak check, as 
outlined in Section 8.4.4. Also, leak-check the pitot lines as described 
in Method 2, Section 8.1. The lines must pass this leak check, in order 
to validate the velocity head data.
    8.6 Calculation of Percent Isokinetic. Calculate percent isokinetic 
(see Calculations, Section 12.11) to determine whether the run was valid 
or another test run should be made. If there was difficulty in 
maintaining isokinetic rates because of source conditions, consult with 
the Administrator for possible variance on the isokinetic rates.
    8.7 Sample Recovery.
    8.7.1 Proper cleanup procedure begins as soon as the probe is 
removed from the stack at the end of the sampling period. Allow the 
probe to cool.
    8.7.2 When the probe can be safely handled, wipe off all external PM 
near the tip of the probe nozzle, and place a cap over it to prevent 
losing or gaining PM. Do not cap off the probe tip tightly while the 
sampling train is cooling down. This would create a vacuum in the filter 
holder, thereby drawing water from the impingers into the filter holder.
    8.7.3 Before moving the sample train to the cleanup site, remove the 
probe from the sample train, wipe off the silicone grease, and cap the 
open outlet of the probe. Be careful not to lose any condensate that 
might be present. Wipe off the silicone grease from the filter inlet 
where the probe was fastened, and cap it. Remove the umbilical cord from 
the last impinger, and cap the impinger. If a flexible line is used 
between the first impinger or condenser and the filter holder, 
disconnect the line at the filter holder, and let any condensed water or 
liquid drain into the impingers or condenser. After wiping off the 
silicone grease, cap off the filter holder outlet and impinger inlet. 
Either ground-glass stoppers, plastic caps, or serum caps may be used to 
close these openings.
    8.7.4 Transfer the probe and filter-impinger assembly to the cleanup 
area. This area should be clean and protected from the wind so that the 
chances of contaminating or losing the sample will be minimized.
    8.7.5 Save a portion of the acetone used for cleanup as a blank. 
Take 200 ml of this acetone directly from the wash bottle being used, 
and place it in a glass sample container labeled ``acetone blank.''
    8.7.6 Inspect the train prior to and during disassembly, and note 
any abnormal conditions. Treat the samples as follows:
    8.7.6.1 Container No. 1. Carefully remove the filter from the filter 
holder, and place it in its identified petri dish container. Use a pair 
of tweezers and/or clean disposable surgical gloves to handle the 
filter. If it is necessary to fold the filter, do so such that the PM 
cake is inside the fold. Using a dry Nylon bristle brush and/or a sharp-
edged blade, carefully transfer to the petri dish any PM and/or filter 
fibers that adhere to the filter holder gasket. Seal the container.
    8.7.6.2 Container No. 2. Taking care to see that dust on the outside 
of the probe or other exterior surfaces does not get into the sample, 
quantitatively recover PM or any condensate from the probe nozzle, probe 
fitting, probe liner, and front half of the filter holder by washing 
these components with acetone and placing the wash in a glass container. 
Deionized distilled water may be used instead of acetone when approved 
by the Administrator and shall be used when specified by the 
Administrator. In these cases, save a water blank, and follow the 
Administrator's directions on analysis. Perform the acetone rinse as 
follows:

[[Page 176]]

    8.7.6.2.1 Carefully remove the probe nozzle. Clean the inside 
surface by rinsing with acetone from a wash bottle and brushing with a 
Nylon bristle brush. Brush until the acetone rinse shows no visible 
particles, after which make a final rinse of the inside surface with 
acetone.
    8.7.6.2.2 Brush and rinse the inside parts of the fitting with 
acetone in a similar way until no visible particles remain.
    8.7.6.2.3 Rinse the probe liner with acetone by tilting and rotating 
the probe while squirting acetone into its upper end so that all inside 
surfaces will be wetted with acetone. Let the acetone drain from the 
lower end into the sample container. A funnel (glass or polyethylene) 
may be used to aid in transferring liquid washes to the container. 
Follow the acetone rinse with a probe brush. Hold the probe in an 
inclined position, squirt acetone into the upper end as the probe brush 
is being pushed with a twisting action through the probe; hold a sample 
container underneath the lower end of the probe, and catch any acetone 
and particulate matter that is brushed from the probe. Run the brush 
through the probe three times or more until no visible PM is carried out 
with the acetone or until none remains in the probe liner on visual 
inspection. With stainless steel or other metal probes, run the brush 
through in the above prescribed manner at least six times since metal 
probes have small crevices in which particulate matter can be entrapped. 
Rinse the brush with acetone, and quantitatively collect these washings 
in the sample container. After the brushing, make a final acetone rinse 
of the probe.
    8.7.6.2.4 It is recommended that two people clean the probe to 
minimize sample losses. Between sampling runs, keep brushes clean and 
protected from contamination.
    8.7.6.2.5 After ensuring that all joints have been wiped clean of 
silicone grease, clean the inside of the front half of the filter holder 
by rubbing the surfaces with a Nylon bristle brush and rinsing with 
acetone. Rinse each surface three times or more if needed to remove 
visible particulate. Make a final rinse of the brush and filter holder. 
Carefully rinse out the glass cyclone, also (if applicable). After all 
acetone washings and particulate matter have been collected in the 
sample container, tighten the lid on the sample container so that 
acetone will not leak out when it is shipped to the laboratory. Mark the 
height of the fluid level to allow determination of whether leakage 
occurred during transport. Label the container to identify clearly its 
contents.
    8.7.6.3 Container No. 3. Note the color of the indicating silica gel 
to determine whether it has been completely spent, and make a notation 
of its condition. Transfer the silica gel from the fourth impinger to 
its original container, and seal. A funnel may make it easier to pour 
the silica gel without spilling. A rubber policeman may be used as an 
aid in removing the silica gel from the impinger. It is not necessary to 
remove the small amount of dust particles that may adhere to the 
impinger wall and are difficult to remove. Since the gain in weight is 
to be used for moisture calculations, do not use any water or other 
liquids to transfer the silica gel. If a balance is available in the 
field, follow the procedure for Container No. 3 in Section 11.2.3.
    8.7.6.4 Impinger Water. Treat the impingers as follows: Make a 
notation of any color or film in the liquid catch. Measure the liquid 
that is in the first three impingers to within 1 ml by using a graduated 
cylinder or by weighing it to within 0.5 g by using a balance. Record 
the volume or weight of liquid present. This information is required to 
calculate the moisture content of the effluent gas. Discard the liquid 
after measuring and recording the volume or weight, unless analysis of 
the impinger catch is required (see NOTE, Section 6.1.1.8). If a 
different type of condenser is used, measure the amount of moisture 
condensed either volumetrically or gravimetrically.
    8.8 Sample Transport. Whenever possible, containers should be 
shipped in such a way that they remain upright at all times.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4, 10.1-10.6................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak     measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. The following procedures are 
suggested to check the volume metering system calibration values at the 
field test site prior to sample collection. These procedures are 
optional.
    9.2.1 Meter Orifice Check. Using the calibration data obtained 
during the calibration procedure described in Section 10.3, determine 
the [Delta]H@ for the metering system orifice. The [Delta]H@ is the 
orifice pressure differential in units of in. H<INF>2</INF>O that 
correlates to 0.75 cfm of air at 528 [deg]R and 29.92 in. Hg. The 
[Delta]H@ is calculated as follows:

[[Page 177]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.107

Where:

[Delta]H=Average pressure differential across the orifice meter, in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute average DGM temperature, [deg]R.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, in. Hg.
[thetas]=Total sampling time, min.
Y=DGM calibration factor, dimensionless.
V<INF>m</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by DGM, dcf.
0.0319=(0.0567 in. Hg/[deg]R) (0.75 cfm)\2\

    9.2.1.1 Before beginning the field test (a set of three runs usually 
constitutes a field test), operate the metering system (i.e., pump, 
volume meter, and orifice) at the [Delta]H@ pressure differential for 10 
minutes. Record the volume collected, the DGM temperature, and the 
barometric pressure. Calculate a DGM calibration check value, 
Y<INF>c</INF>, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.108

where:

Y<INF>c</INF>=DGM calibration check value, dimensionless.
10=Run time, min.
    9.2.1.2 Compare the Y<INF>c</INF> value with the dry gas meter 
calibration factor Y to determine that: 0.97Y < Y<INF>c</INF> < 1.03Y. 
If the Y<INF>c</INF> value is not within this range, the volume metering 
system should be investigated before beginning the test.
    9.2.2 Calibrated Critical Orifice. A critical orifice, calibrated 
against a wet test meter or spirometer and designed to be inserted at 
the inlet of the sampling meter box, may be used as a check by following 
the procedure of Section 16.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Probe Nozzle. Probe nozzles shall be calibrated before their 
initial use in the field. Using a micrometer, measure the ID of the 
nozzle to the nearest 0.025 mm (0.001 in.). Make three separate 
measurements using different diameters each time, and obtain the average 
of the measurements. The difference between the high and low numbers 
shall not exceed 0.1 mm (0.004 in.). When nozzles become nicked, dented, 
or corroded, they shall be reshaped, sharpened, and recalibrated before 
use. Each nozzle shall be permanently and uniquely identified.
    10.2 Pitot Tube Assembly. The Type S pitot tube assembly shall be 
calibrated according to the procedure outlined in Section 10.1 of Method 
2.
    10.3 Metering System.
    10.3.1 Calibration Prior to Use. Before its initial use in the 
field, the metering system shall be calibrated as follows: Connect the 
metering system inlet to the outlet of a wet test meter that is accurate 
to within 1 percent. Refer to Figure 5-4. The wet test meter should have 
a capacity of 30 liters/rev (1 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/rev). A spirometer of 400 
liters (14 ft<SUP>3</SUP>) or more capacity, or equivalent, may be used 
for this calibration, although a wet test meter is usually more 
practical. The wet test meter should be periodically calibrated with a 
spirometer or a liquid displacement meter to ensure the accuracy of the 
wet test meter. Spirometers or wet test meters of other sizes may be 
used, provided that the specified accuracies of the procedure are 
maintained. Run the metering system pump for about 15 minutes with the 
orifice manometer indicating a median reading as expected in field use 
to allow the pump to warm up and to permit the interior surface of the 
wet test meter to be thoroughly wetted. Then, at each of a minimum of 
three orifice manometer settings, pass an exact quantity of gas through 
the wet test meter and note the gas volume indicated by the DGM. Also 
note the barometric pressure and the temperatures of the wet test meter, 
the inlet of the DGM, and the outlet of the DGM. Select the highest and 
lowest orifice settings to bracket the expected field operating range of 
the orifice. Use a minimum volume of 0.14 m<SUP>3</SUP> (5 
ft<SUP>3</SUP>) at all orifice settings. Record all the data on a form 
similar to Figure 5-5 and calculate Y, the DGM calibration factor, and 
[Delta]H<INF>@</INF>, the orifice calibration factor, at each orifice 
setting as shown on Figure 5-5. Allowable tolerances for individual Y 
and [Delta]H<INF>@</INF> values are given in Figure 5-5. Use the average 
of the Y values in the calculations in Section 12.0.
    10.3.1.1 Before calibrating the metering system, it is suggested 
that a leak check be conducted. For metering systems having diaphragm 
pumps, the normal leak-check procedure will not detect leakages within 
the pump. For these cases the following leak-check procedure is 
suggested: make a 10-minute calibration run at 0.00057 m<SUP>3</SUP>/min 
(0.020 cfm). At the end of the run, take the difference of the measured 
wet test meter and DGM volumes. Divide the difference by 10 to get the 
leak rate. The leak rate should not exceed 0.00057 m<SUP>3</SUP>/min 
(0.020 cfm).
    10.3.2 Calibration After Use. After each field use, the calibration 
of the metering system shall be checked by performing three calibration 
runs at a single, intermediate orifice setting (based on the previous 
field test), with the vacuum set at the maximum value reached during the 
test series. To adjust the vacuum, insert a valve between the wet test 
meter and the inlet of the metering system. Calculate the average value 
of the DGM calibration factor. If the value has changed by more than 5 
percent, recalibrate

[[Page 178]]

the meter over the full range of orifice settings, as detailed in 
Section 10.3.1.

    Note: Alternative procedures (e.g., rechecking the orifice meter 
coefficient) may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.

    10.3.3 Acceptable Variation in Calibration. If the DGM coefficient 
values obtained before and after a test series differ by more than 5 
percent, the test series shall either be voided, or calculations for the 
test series shall be performed using whichever meter coefficient value 
(i.e., before or after) gives the lower value of total sample volume.
    10.4 Probe Heater Calibration. Use a heat source to generate air 
heated to selected temperatures that approximate those expected to occur 
in the sources to be sampled. Pass this air through the probe at a 
typical sample flow rate while measuring the probe inlet and outlet 
temperatures at various probe heater settings. For each air temperature 
generated, construct a graph of probe heating system setting versus 
probe outlet temperature. The procedure outlined in APTD-0576 can also 
be used. Probes constructed according to APTD-0581 need not be 
calibrated if the calibration curves in APTD-0576 are used. Also, probes 
with outlet temperature monitoring capabilities do not require 
calibration.

    Note: The probe heating system shall be calibrated before its 
initial use in the field.

    10.5 Temperature Sensors. Use the procedure in Section 10.3 of 
Method 2 to calibrate in-stack temperature sensors. Dial thermometers, 
such as are used for the DGM and condenser outlet, shall be calibrated 
against mercury-in-glass thermometers.
    10.6 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Record the data required on a sheet such as the one shown in 
Figure 5-6.
    11.2 Handle each sample container as follows:
    11.2.1 Container No. 1. Leave the contents in the shipping container 
or transfer the filter and any loose PM from the sample container to a 
tared glass weighing dish. Desiccate for 24 hours in a desiccator 
containing anhydrous calcium sulfate. Weigh to a constant weight, and 
report the results to the nearest 0.1 mg. For the purposes of this 
section, the term ``constant weight'' means a difference of no more than 
0.5 mg or 1 percent of total weight less tare weight, whichever is 
greater, between two consecutive weighings, with no less than 6 hours of 
desiccation time between weighings. Alternatively, the sample may be 
oven dried at 104 [deg]C (220 [deg]F) for 2 to 3 hours, cooled in the 
desiccator, and weighed to a constant weight, unless otherwise specified 
by the Administrator. The sample may be oven dried at 104 [deg]C (220 
[deg]F) for 2 to 3 hours. Once the sample has cooled, weigh the sample, 
and use this weight as a final weight.
    11.2.2 Container No. 2. Note the level of liquid in the container, 
and confirm on the analysis sheet whether leakage occurred during 
transport. If a noticeable amount of leakage has occurred, either void 
the sample or use methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, 
to correct the final results. Measure the liquid in this container 
either volumetrically to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml or gravimetrically 
to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g. Transfer the contents to a tared 250 ml 
beaker, and evaporate to dryness at ambient temperature and pressure. 
Desiccate for 24 hours, and weigh to a constant weight. Report the 
results to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    11.2.3 Container No. 3. Weigh the spent silica gel (or silica gel 
plus impinger) to the nearest 0.5 g using a balance. This step may be 
conducted in the field.
    11.2.4 Acetone Blank Container. Measure the acetone in this 
container either volumetrically or gravimetrically. Transfer the acetone 
to a tared 250 ml beaker, and evaporate to dryness at ambient 
temperature and pressure. Desiccate for 24 hours, and weigh to a 
constant weight. Report the results to the nearest 0.1 mg.

    Note: The contents of Container No. 2 as well as the acetone blank 
container may be evaporated at temperatures higher than ambient. If 
evaporation is done at an elevated temperature, the temperature must be 
below the boiling point of the solvent; also, to prevent ``bumping,'' 
the evaporation process must be closely supervised, and the contents of 
the beaker must be swirled occasionally to maintain an even temperature. 
Use extreme care, as acetone is highly flammable and has a low flash 
point.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after the 
final calculation. Other forms of the equations may be used, provided 
that they give equivalent results.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

A<INF>n</INF>=Cross-sectional area of nozzle, m<SUP>2</SUP> 
(ft<SUP>2</SUP>).
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream, proportion by volume.
C<INF>a</INF>=Acetone blank residue concentration, mg/mg.
c<INF>s</INF>=Concentration of particulate matter in stack gas, dry 
basis, corrected to standard conditions, g/dscm (gr/dscf).
I=Percent of isokinetic sampling.
L<INF>1</INF>=Individual leakage rate observed during the leak-check 
conducted prior to the first component change, m<SUP>3</SUP>/min 
(ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min)
L<INF>a</INF>=Maximum acceptable leakage rate for either a pretest leak-
check or for a leak-check following a component change; equal

[[Page 179]]

to 0.00057 m<SUP>3</SUP>/min (0.020 cfm) or 4 percent of the average 
sampling rate, whichever is less.
L<INF>i</INF>=Individual leakage rate observed during the leak-check 
conducted prior to the ``i\th\'' component change (i=1, 2, 3 . . . n), 
m<SUP>3</SUP>/min (cfm).
L<INF>p</INF>=Leakage rate observed during the post-test leak-check, 
m<SUP>3</SUP>/min (cfm).
m<INF>a</INF>=Mass of residue of acetone after evaporation, mg.
m<INF>n</INF>=Total amount of particulate matter collected, mg.
M<INF>w</INF>=Molecular weight of water, 18.0 g/g-mole (18.0 lb/lb-
mole).
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at the sampling site, mm Hg (in. 
Hg).
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute stack gas pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
R=Ideal gas constant, 0.06236 ((mm Hg)(m \3\))/((K)(g-mole)) {21.85 
((in. Hg) (ft \3\))/(([deg]R) (lb-mole)){time} .
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute average DGM temperature (see Figure 5-3), K 
([deg]R).
T<INF>s</INF>=Absolute average stack gas temperature (see Figure 5-3), K 
([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of acetone blank, ml.
V<INF>aw</INF>=Volume of acetone used in wash, ml.
V<INF>1c</INF>=Total volume of liquid collected in impingers and silica 
gel (see Figure 5-6), ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by dry gas meter, dcm 
(dcf).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>w(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor in the gas sample, corrected to 
standard conditions, scm (scf).
V<INF>s</INF>=Stack gas velocity, calculated by Method 2, Equation 2-7, 
using data obtained from Method 5, m/sec (ft/sec).
W<INF>a</INF>=Weight of residue in acetone wash, mg.
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
[Delta]H=Average pressure differential across the orifice meter (see 
Figure 5-4), mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O).
[rho]<INF>a</INF>=Density of acetone, mg/ml (see label on bottle).
[rho]<INF>w</INF>=Density of water, 0.9982 g/ml. (0.002201 lb/ml).
[thetas]=Total sampling time, min.
[thetas]<INF>1</INF>=Sampling time interval, from the beginning of a run 
until the first component change, min.
[thetas]<INF>i</INF>=Sampling time interval, between two successive 
component changes, beginning with the interval between the first and 
second changes, min.
[thetas]<INF>p</INF>=Sampling time interval, from the final (n \th\) 
component change until the end of the sampling run, min.
13.6 =Specific gravity of mercury.
60=Sec/min.
100=Conversion to percent.

    12.2 Average Dry Gas Meter Temperature and Average Orifice Pressure 
Drop. See data sheet (Figure 5-3).
    12.3 Dry Gas Volume. Correct the sample volume measured by the dry 
gas meter to standard conditions (20 [deg]C, 760 mm Hg or 68 [deg]F, 
29.92 in. Hg) by using Equation 5-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.109

Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3858 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,=17.64 [deg]R/in. Hg 
for English units.

    Note: Equation 5-1 can be used as written unless the leakage rate 
observed during any of the mandatory leak checks (i.e., the post-test 
leak check or leak checks conducted prior to component changes) exceeds 
L<INF>a</INF>. If L<INF>p</INF> or L<INF>i</INF> exceeds L<INF>a</INF>, 
Equation 5-1 must be modified as follows:

    (a) Case I. No component changes made during sampling run. In this 
case, replace V<INF>m</INF> in Equation 5-1 with the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.110

    (b) Case II. One or more component changes made during the sampling 
run. In this case, replace V<INF>m</INF> in Equation 5-1 by the 
expression:

[[Page 180]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.111

and substitute only for those leakage rates (L<INF>i</INF> or 
L<INF>p</INF>) which exceed L<INF>a</INF>.
    12.4 Volume of Water Vapor Condensed.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.112
    
Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=0.001333 m \3\/ml for metric units,=0.04706 ft \3\/ml for 
English units.

    12.5 Moisture Content.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.113
    
    Note: In saturated or water droplet-laden gas streams, two 
calculations of the moisture content of the stack gas shall be made, one 
from the impinger analysis (Equation 5-3), and a second from the 
assumption of saturated conditions. The lower of the two values of 
B<INF>ws</INF> shall be considered correct. The procedure for 
determining the moisture content based upon the assumption of saturated 
conditions is given in Section 4.0 of Method 4. For the purposes of this 
method, the average stack gas temperature from Figure 5-3 may be used to 
make this determination, provided that the accuracy of the in-stack 
temperature sensor is <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F).

    12.6 Acetone Blank Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.114
    
    12.7 Acetone Wash Blank.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.115
    
    12.8 Total Particulate Weight. Determine the total particulate 
matter catch from the sum of the weights obtained from Containers 1 and 
2 less the acetone blank (see Figure 5-6).

    Note: In no case shall a blank value of greater than 0.001 percent 
of the weight of acetone used be subtracted from the sample weight. 
Refer to Section 8.5.8 to assist in calculation of results involving two 
or more filter assemblies or two or more sampling trains.
    12.9 Particulate Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.116
    
Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=0.001 g/mg for metric units.
    =0.0154 gr/mg for English units.
    12.10 Conversion Factors:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                From                         To            Multiply by
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ft\3\...............................  m\3\              0.02832
gr..................................  mg                64.80004
gr/ft\3\............................  mg/m\3\           2288.4
mg..................................  g                 0.001
gr..................................  lb                1.429 x 10-4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    12.11 Isokinetic Variation.
    12.11.1 Calculation from Raw Data.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.117
    
Where:

K<INF>4</INF>=0.003454 ((mm Hg)(m\3\))/((ml)([deg]K)) for metric units,
    =0.002669 ((in. Hg)(ft\3\))/((ml)([deg]R)) for English units.


[[Page 181]]


    12.11.2 Calculation from Intermediate Values.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.118
    
Where:

K<INF>5</INF>=4.320 for metric units,
    =0.09450 for English units.

    12.11.3 Acceptable Results. If 90 percent <= I <= 110 percent, the 
results are acceptable. If the PM results are low in comparison to the 
standard, and ``I'' is over 110 percent or less than 90 percent, the 
Administrator may opt to accept the results. Reference 4 in Section 17.0 
may be used to make acceptability judgments. If ``I'' is judged to be 
unacceptable, reject the results, and repeat the sampling run.
    12.12 Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate. Calculate the 
average stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate, if needed, using 
data obtained in this method and the equations in Sections 12.3 and 12.4 
of Method 2.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Dry Gas Meter as a Calibration Standard. A DGM may be used as a 
calibration standard for volume measurements in place of the wet test 
meter specified in Section 10.3, provided that it is calibrated 
initially and recalibrated periodically as follows:
    16.1.1 Standard Dry Gas Meter Calibration.
    16.1.1.1. The DGM to be calibrated and used as a secondary reference 
meter should be of high quality and have an appropriately sized capacity 
(e.g., 3 liters/rev (0.1 ft\3\/rev)). A spirometer (400 liters (14 
ft\3\) or more capacity), or equivalent, may be used for this 
calibration, although a wet test meter is usually more practical. The 
wet test meter should have a capacity of 30 liters/rev (1 ft\3\/rev) and 
capable of measuring volume to within 1.0 percent. Wet test meters 
should be checked against a spirometer or a liquid displacement meter to 
ensure the accuracy of the wet test meter. Spirometers or wet test 
meters of other sizes may be used, provided that the specified 
accuracies of the procedure are maintained.
    16.1.1.2 Set up the components as shown in Figure 5-7. A spirometer, 
or equivalent, may be used in place of the wet test meter in the system. 
Run the pump for at least 5 minutes at a flow rate of about 10 liters/
min (0.35 cfm) to condition the interior surface of the wet test meter. 
The pressure drop indicated by the manometer at the inlet side of the 
DGM should be minimized (no greater than 100 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (4 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) at a flow rate of 30 liters/min (1 cfm)). This can be 
accomplished by using large diameter tubing connections and straight 
pipe fittings.
    16.1.1.3 Collect the data as shown in the example data sheet (see 
Figure 5-8). Make triplicate runs at each of the flow rates and at no 
less than five different flow rates. The range of flow rates should be 
between 10 and 34 liters/min (0.35 and 1.2 cfm) or over the expected 
operating range.
    16.1.1.4 Calculate flow rate, Q, for each run using the wet test 
meter volume, V<INF>W</INF>, and the run time, [thetas]. Calculate the 
DGM coefficient, Y<INF>ds</INF>, for each run. These calculations are as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.120

Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3858 [deg]C/mm Hg for metric units=17.64 [deg]F/in. Hg 
for English units.
V<INF>W</INF>=Wet test meter volume, liter (ft\3\).
V<INF>ds</INF>=Dry gas meter volume, liter (ft\3\).
T<INF>ds</INF>=Average dry gas meter temperature, [deg]C ( [deg]F).
T<INF>adj</INF>=273 [deg]C for metric units=460 [deg]F for English 
units.
T<INF>W</INF>=Average wet test meter temperature, [deg]C ( [deg]F)
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
[Delta]p=Dry gas meter inlet differential pressure, mm H<INF>2</INF>O 
(in. H<INF>2</INF>O).

[[Page 182]]

[thetas]=Run time, min.

    16.1.1.5 Compare the three Y<INF>ds</INF> values at each of the flow 
rates and determine the maximum and minimum values. The difference 
between the maximum and minimum values at each flow rate should be no 
greater than 0.030. Extra sets of triplicate runs may be made in order 
to complete this requirement. In addition, the meter coefficients should 
be between 0.95 and 1.05. If these specifications cannot be met in three 
sets of successive triplicate runs, the meter is not suitable as a 
calibration standard and should not be used as such. If these 
specifications are met, average the three Y<INF>ds</INF> values at each 
flow rate resulting in no less than five average meter coefficients, 
Y<INF>ds</INF>.
    16.1.1.6 Prepare a curve of meter coefficient, Y<INF>ds</INF>, 
versus flow rate, Q, for the DGM. This curve shall be used as a 
reference when the meter is used to calibrate other DGMs and to 
determine whether recalibration is required.
    16.1.2 Standard Dry Gas Meter Recalibration.
    16.1.2.1 Recalibrate the standard DGM against a wet test meter or 
spirometer annually or after every 200 hours of operation, whichever 
comes first. This requirement is valid provided the standard DGM is kept 
in a laboratory and, if transported, cared for as any other laboratory 
instrument. Abuse to the standard meter may cause a change in the 
calibration and will require more frequent recalibrations.
    16.1.2.2 As an alternative to full recalibration, a two-point 
calibration check may be made. Follow the same procedure and equipment 
arrangement as for a full recalibration, but run the meter at only two 
flow rates [suggested rates are 14 and 30 liters/min (0.5 and 1.0 cfm)]. 
Calculate the meter coefficients for these two points, and compare the 
values with the meter calibration curve. If the two coefficients are 
within 1.5 percent of the calibration curve values at the same flow 
rates, the meter need not be recalibrated until the next date for a 
recalibration check.
    16.2 Critical Orifices As Calibration Standards. Critical orifices 
may be used as calibration standards in place of the wet test meter 
specified in Section 16.1, provided that they are selected, calibrated, 
and used as follows:
    16.2.1 Selection of Critical Orifices.
    16.2.1.1 The procedure that follows describes the use of hypodermic 
needles or stainless steel needle tubings which have been found suitable 
for use as critical orifices. Other materials and critical orifice 
designs may be used provided the orifices act as true critical orifices 
(i.e., a critical vacuum can be obtained, as described in Section 
16.2.2.2.3). Select five critical orifices that are appropriately sized 
to cover the range of flow rates between 10 and 34 liters/min (0.35 and 
1.2 cfm) or the expected operating range. Two of the critical orifices 
should bracket the expected operating range. A minimum of three critical 
orifices will be needed to calibrate a Method 5 DGM; the other two 
critical orifices can serve as spares and provide better selection for 
bracketing the range of operating flow rates. The needle sizes and 
tubing lengths shown in Table 5-1 in Section 18.0 give the approximate 
flow rates.
    16.2.1.2 These needles can be adapted to a Method 5 type sampling 
train as follows: Insert a serum bottle stopper, 13 by 20 mm sleeve 
type, into a \1/2\-inch Swagelok (or equivalent) quick connect. Insert 
the needle into the stopper as shown in Figure 5-9.
    16.2.2 Critical Orifice Calibration. The procedure described in this 
section uses the Method 5 meter box configuration with a DGM as 
described in Section 6.1.1.9 to calibrate the critical orifices. Other 
schemes may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    16.2.2.1 Calibration of Meter Box. The critical orifices must be 
calibrated in the same configuration as they will be used (i.e., there 
should be no connections to the inlet of the orifice).
    16.2.2.1.1 Before calibrating the meter box, leak check the system 
as follows: Fully open the coarse adjust valve, and completely close the 
by-pass valve. Plug the inlet. Then turn on the pump, and determine 
whether there is any leakage. The leakage rate shall be zero (i.e., no 
detectable movement of the DGM dial shall be seen for 1 minute).
    16.2.2.1.2 Check also for leakages in that portion of the sampling 
train between the pump and the orifice meter. See Section 8.4.1 for the 
procedure; make any corrections, if necessary. If leakage is detected, 
check for cracked gaskets, loose fittings, worn O-rings, etc., and make 
the necessary repairs.
    16.2.2.1.3 After determining that the meter box is leakless, 
calibrate the meter box according to the procedure given in Section 
10.3. Make sure that the wet test meter meets the requirements stated in 
Section 16.1.1.1. Check the water level in the wet test meter. Record 
the DGM calibration factor, Y.
    16.2.2.2 Calibration of Critical Orifices. Set up the apparatus as 
shown in Figure 5-10.
    16.2.2.2.1 Allow a warm-up time of 15 minutes. This step is 
important to equilibrate the temperature conditions through the DGM.
    16.2.2.2.2 Leak check the system as in Section 16.2.2.1.1. The 
leakage rate shall be zero.
    16.2.2.2.3 Before calibrating the critical orifice, determine its 
suitability and the appropriate operating vacuum as follows: Turn on the 
pump, fully open the coarse adjust valve, and adjust the by-pass valve 
to give a vacuum reading corresponding to about half of atmospheric 
pressure. Observe the meter box orifice manometer reading, [Delta]H. 
Slowly increase the vacuum reading until a stable

[[Page 183]]

reading is obtained on the meter box orifice manometer. Record the 
critical vacuum for each orifice. Orifices that do not reach a critical 
value shall not be used.
    16.2.2.2.4 Obtain the barometric pressure using a barometer as 
described in Section 6.1.2. Record the barometric pressure, 
P<INF>bar</INF>, in mm Hg (in. Hg).
    16.2.2.2.5 Conduct duplicate runs at a vacuum of 25 to 50 mm Hg (1 
to 2 in. Hg) above the critical vacuum. The runs shall be at least 5 
minutes each. The DGM volume readings shall be in increments of complete 
revolutions of the DGM. As a guideline, the times should not differ by 
more than 3.0 seconds (this includes allowance for changes in the DGM 
temperatures) to achieve <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 percent in K' (see 
Eq. 5-11). Record the information listed in Figure 5-11.
    16.2.2.2.6 Calculate K' using Equation 5-11.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.121
    
Where:

K'=Critical orifice coefficient,
[m \3\)([deg]K)\1/2\]/
[(mm Hg)(min)] {[(ft \3\)([deg]R)\1/2\)] [(in. Hg)(min)].
T<INF>amb</INF>=Absolute ambient temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R).
    Calculate the arithmetic mean of the K' values. The individual K' 
values should not differ by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 percent 
from the mean value.

    16.2.3 Using the Critical Orifices as Calibration Standards.
    16.2.3.1 Record the barometric pressure.
    16.2.3.2 Calibrate the metering system according to the procedure 
outlined in Section 16.2.2. Record the information listed in Figure 5-
12.
    16.2.3.3 Calculate the standard volumes of air passed through the 
DGM and the critical orifices, and calculate the DGM calibration factor, 
Y, using the equations below:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.124

Where:

V<INF>cr(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample passed through the critical 
orifice, corrected to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
K<INF>1</INF>=0.3858 K/mm Hg for metric units
    =17.64 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    16.2.3.4 Average the DGM calibration values for each of the flow 
rates. The calibration factor, Y, at each of the flow rates should not 
differ by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent from the average.
    16.2.3.5 To determine the need for recalibrating the critical 
orifices, compare the DGM Y factors obtained from two adjacent orifices 
each time a DGM is calibrated; for example, when checking orifice 13/
2.5, use orifices 12/10.2 and 13/5.1. If any critical orifice yields a 
DGM Y factor differing by more than 2 percent from the others, 
recalibrate the critical orifice according to Section 16.2.2.

                            17.0 References.

    1. Addendum to Specifications for Incinerator Testing at Federal 
Facilities. PHS, NCAPC. December 6, 1967.
    2. Martin, Robert M. Construction Details of Isokinetic Source-
Sampling Equipment. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle 
Park, NC. APTD-0581. April 1971.
    3. Rom, Jerome J. Maintenance, Calibration, and Operation of 
Isokinetic Source Sampling Equipment. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Research Triangle Park, NC. APTD-0576. March 1972.

[[Page 184]]

    4. Smith, W.S., R.T. Shigehara, and W.F. Todd. A Method of 
Interpreting Stack Sampling Data. Paper Presented at the 63rd Annual 
Meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association, St. Louis, MO. June 
14-19, 1970.
    5. Smith, W.S., et al. Stack Gas Sampling Improved and Simplified 
With New Equipment. APCA Paper No. 67-119. 1967.
    6. Specifications for Incinerator Testing at Federal Facilities. 
PHS, NCAPC. 1967.
    7. Shigehara, R.T. Adjustment in the EPA Nomograph for Different 
Pitot Tube Coefficients and Dry Molecular Weights. Stack Sampling News 
2:4-11. October 1974.
    8. Vollaro, R.F. A Survey of Commercially Available Instrumentation 
for the Measurement of Low-Range Gas Velocities. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Emission Measurement Branch. Research Triangle Park, 
NC. November 1976 (unpublished paper).
    9. Annual Book of ASTM Standards. Part 26. Gaseous Fuels; Coal and 
Coke; Atmospheric Analysis. American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Philadelphia, PA. 1974. pp. 617-622.
    10. Felix, L.G., G.I. Clinard, G.E. Lacy, and J.D. McCain. Inertial 
Cascade Impactor Substrate Media for Flue Gas Sampling. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. 
Publication No. EPA-600/7-77-060. June 1977. 83 pp.
    11. Westlin, P.R. and R.T. Shigehara. Procedure for Calibrating and 
Using Dry Gas Volume Meters as Calibration Standards. Source Evaluation 
Society Newsletter. 3(1):17-30. February 1978.
    12. Lodge, J.P., Jr., J.B. Pate, B.E. Ammons, and G.A. Swanson. The 
Use of Hypodermic Needles as Critical Orifices in Air Sampling. J. Air 
Pollution Control Association. 16:197-200. 1966.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

                         Table 5-1 Flor Rates for Various needle Sizes and Tube Lengths
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Flow rate                       Flow rate
                            Gauge/cm                                liters/min.      Gauge/cm       liters/min.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/7.6..........................................................           32.56          14/2.5           19.54
12/10.2.........................................................           30.02          14/5.1           17.27
13/2.5..........................................................           25.77          14/7.6           16.14
13/5.1..........................................................           23.50          15/3.2           14.16
13/7.6..........................................................           22.37          15/7.6           11.61
13/10.2.........................................................           20.67         15/10.2           10.48
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 185]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.125


[[Page 186]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.126


[[Page 187]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.127


[[Page 188]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.128


[[Page 189]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.129

Plant___________________________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Run No._________________________________________________________________
Filter No.______________________________________________________________
Amount liquid lost during transport_____________________________________
Acetone blank volume, m1________________________________________________
Acetone blank concentration, mg/mg (Equation 5-4)_______________________
Acetone wash blank, mg (Equation 5-5)

[[Page 190]]

________________________________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          Weight of particulate collected, mg
           Container number           --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Final weight             Tare weight              Weight gain
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.
--------------------------------------
2.
--------------------------------------
    Total:
        Less acetone blank...........
        Weight of particulate matter.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Volume of liquid water collected
                                 ---------------------------------------
                                   Impinger volume,   Silica gel weight,
                                          ml                   g
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Final
Initial
Liquid collected
      Total volume collected....  ..................  g* ml
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Convert weight of water to volume by dividing total weight increase by
  density of water (1 g/ml).

                    Figure 5-6. Analytical Data Sheet
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.147


[[Page 191]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.130


[[Page 192]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.131


[[Page 193]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.132


[[Page 194]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.133

Date____________________________________________________________________
Train ID________________________________________________________________
DGM cal. factor_________________________________________________________
Critical orifice ID_____________________________________________________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Run No.
        Dry gas meter                          -------------------------
                                                     1            2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Final reading................  m3 (ft3).......  ...........  ...........
Initial reading..............  m3 (ft3).......  ...........  ...........
Difference, Vm...............  m 3 (ft 3).....  ...........  ...........
Inlet/Outlet.................  ...............  ...........  ...........

[[Page 195]]

 
    Temperatures:............  [deg]C (              /            /
                                [deg]F).
    Initial..................  [deg]C (              /            /
                                [deg]F).
    Final....................  min/sec........       /            /
    Av. Temeperature, t m....  min............  ...........  ...........
Time, [thetas]...............  ...............  ...........  ...........
Orifice man. rdg., [Delta]H..  mm (in.) H 2...  ...........  ...........
Bar. pressure, P bar.........  mm (in.) Hg....  ...........  ...........
Ambient temperature, tamb....  mm (in.) Hg....  ...........  ...........
Pump vacuum..................  ...............  ...........  ...........
K' factor....................  ...............  ...........  ...........
    Average..................  ...............  ...........  ...........
------------------------------------------------------------------------

            Figure 5-11. Data sheet of determining K' factor.

Date____________________________________________________________________
Train ID________________________________________________________________
Critical orifice ID_____________________________________________________
Critical orifice K' factor______________________________________________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Run No.
        Dry gas meter                          -------------------------
                                                     1            2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Final reading................  m\3\ (ft\3\)...  ...........  ...........
Initial reading..............  m\3\ (ft\3\)...  ...........  ...........
Difference, Vm...............  m\3\ (ft\3\)...  ...........  ...........
Inlet/outlet temperatures....  [deg]C (              /            /
                                [deg]F).
    Initial..................  [deg]C (              /            /
                                [deg]F).
    Final....................  [deg]C (         ...........  ...........
                                [deg]F).
    Avg. Temperature, tm.....  min/sec........       /            /
Time, [thetas]...............  min............  ...........  ...........
Orifice man. rdg., [Delta]H..  min............  ...........  ...........
Bar. pressure, Pbar..........  mm (in.) H2O...  ...........  ...........
Ambient temperature, tamb....  mm (in.) Hg....  ...........  ...........
Pump vacuum..................  [deg]C (         ...........  ...........
                                [deg]F).
Vm(std)......................  mm (in.) Hg....  ...........  ...........
Vcr(std).....................  m\3\ (ft\3\)...  ...........  ...........
DGM cal. factor, Y...........  m\3\ (ft\3\)...  ...........  ...........
------------------------------------------------------------------------

          Figure 5-12. Data Sheet for Determining DGM Y Factor

   Method 5A--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions From the 
             Asphalt Processing and Asphalt Roofing Industry

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, and 
Method 5.

                       1.0 Scope and Applications

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of PM emissions from asphalt roofing industry process saturators, 
blowing stills, and other sources as specified in the regulations.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source and 
collected on a glass fiber filter maintained at a temperature of 42 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (108 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F). 
The PM mass, which includes any material that condenses at or above the 
filtration temperature, is determined gravimetrically after the removal 
of uncombined water.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the

[[Page 196]]

applicability of regulatory limitations prior to performing this test 
method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1, with the 
following exceptions and additions:
    6.1.1 Probe Liner. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.2, with the note 
that at high stack gas temperatures greater than 250 [deg]C (480 
[deg]F), water-cooled probes may be required to control the probe exit 
temperature to 42 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (108 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F).
    6.1.2 Precollector Cyclone. Borosilicate glass following the 
construction details shown in Air Pollution Technical Document (APTD)-
0581, ``Construction Details of Isokinetic Source-Sampling Equipment'' 
(Reference 2 in Method 5, Section 17.0).

    Note: The cyclone shall be used when the stack gas moisture is 
greater than 10 percent, and shall not be used otherwise.

    6.1.3 Filter Heating System. Any heating (or cooling) system capable 
of maintaining a sample gas temperature at the exit end of the filter 
holder during sampling at 42 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (108 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F).
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are required for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes, Graduated Cylinder and/
or Balance, Plastic Storage Containers, and Funnel and Rubber Policeman. 
Same as in Method 5, Sections 6.2.1, 6.2.5, 6.2.6, and 6.2.7, 
respectively.
    6.2.2 Wash Bottles. Glass.
    6.2.3 Sample Storage Containers. Chemically resistant 500-ml or 
1,000-ml borosilicate glass bottles, with rubber-backed Teflon screw cap 
liners or caps that are constructed so as to be leak-free, and resistant 
to chemical attack by 1,1,1-trichloroethane (TCE). (Narrow-mouth glass 
bottles have been found to be less prone to leakage.)
    6.2.4 Petri Dishes. Glass, unless otherwise specified by the 
Administrator.
    6.2.5 Funnel. Glass.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 5, Section 6.3, with the 
following additions:
    6.3.1 Beakers. Glass, 250-ml and 500-ml.
    6.3.2 Separatory Funnel. 100-ml or greater.

                       7.0. Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 Filters, Silica Gel, Water, and Crushed Ice. Same as in Method 
5, Sections 7.1.1, 7.1.2, 7.1.3, and 7.1.4, respectively.
    7.1.2 Stopcock Grease. TCE-insoluble, heat-stable grease (if 
needed). This is not necessary if screw-on connectors with Teflon 
sleeves, or similar, are used.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Reagent grade TCE, <=0.001 percent residue and 
stored in glass bottles. Run TCE blanks before field use, and use only 
TCE with low blank values (<=0.001 percent). In no case shall a blank 
value of greater than 0.001 percent of the weight of TCE used be 
subtracted from the sample weight.
    7.3 Analysis. Two reagents are required for the analysis:
    7.3.1 TCE. Same as in Section 7.2.
    7.3.2 Desiccant. Same as in Method 5, Section 7.3.2.

      8.0. Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1. Pretest Preparation. Unless otherwise specified, maintain and 
calibrate all components according to the procedure described in APTD-
0576, ``Maintenance, Calibration, and Operation of Isokinetic Source-
Sampling Equipment'' (Reference 3 in Method 5, Section 17.0).
    8.1.1 Prepare probe liners and sampling nozzles as needed for use. 
Thoroughly clean each component with soap and water followed by a 
minimum of three TCE rinses. Use the probe and nozzle brushes during at 
least one of the TCE rinses (refer to Section 8.7 for rinsing 
techniques). Cap or seal the open ends of the probe liners and nozzles 
to prevent contamination during shipping.
    8.1.2 Prepare silica gel portions and glass filters as specified in 
Method 5, Section 8.1.
    8.2 Preliminary Determinations. Select the sampling site, probe 
nozzle, and probe length as specified in Method 5, Section 8.2. Select a 
total sampling time greater than or equal to the minimum total sampling 
time specified in the ``Test Methods and Procedures'' section of the 
applicable subpart of the regulations. Follow the guidelines outlined in 
Method 5, Section 8.2 for sampling time per point and total sample 
volume collected.
    8.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Prepare the sampling train as 
specified in Method 5, Section 8.3, with the addition of the 
precollector cyclone, if used, between the probe and filter holder. The 
temperature of the precollector cyclone, if used, should be maintained 
in the same range as that of the filter, i.e., 42 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (108 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F). Use no 
stopcock grease on ground glass joints unless grease is insoluble in 
TCE.
    8.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Same as Method 5, Section 8.4.
    8.5 Sampling Train Operation. Operate the sampling train as 
described in Method 5, Section 8.5, except maintain the temperature of 
the gas exiting the filter holder at 42 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C 
(108 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F).
    8.6 Calculation of Percent Isokinetic. Same as Method 5, Section 
8.6.
    8.7 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.1 through 
8.7.6.1, with the addition of the following:
    8.7.1 Container No. 2 (Probe to Filter Holder).
    8.7.1.1 Taking care to see that material on the outside of the probe 
or other exterior

[[Page 197]]

surfaces does not get into the sample, quantitatively recover PM or any 
condensate from the probe nozzle, probe fitting, probe liner, 
precollector cyclone and collector flask (if used), and front half of 
the filter holder by washing these components with TCE and placing the 
wash in a glass container. Carefully measure the total amount of TCE 
used in the rinses. Perform the TCE rinses as described in Method 5, 
Section 8.7.6.2, using TCE instead of acetone.
    8.7.1.2 Brush and rinse the inside of the cyclone, cyclone 
collection flask, and the front half of the filter holder. Brush and 
rinse each surface three times or more, if necessary, to remove visible 
PM.
    8.7.2 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). Same as in Method 5, Section 
8.7.6.3.
    8.7.3 Impinger Water. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.4.
    8.8 Blank. Save a portion of the TCE used for cleanup as a blank. 
Take 200 ml of this TCE directly from the wash bottle being used, and 
place it in a glass sample container labeled ``TCE Blank.''

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak     measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 A quality control (QC) check of the volume metering system at 
the field site is suggested before collecting the sample. Use the 
procedure outlined in Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 5, Section 10.0.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Analysis. Record the data required on a sheet such as the one 
shown in Figure 5A-1. Handle each sample container as follows:
    11.1.1 Container No. 1 (Filter). Transfer the filter from the sample 
container to a tared glass weighing dish, and desiccate for 24 hours in 
a desiccator containing anhydrous calcium sulfate. Rinse Container No. 1 
with a measured amount of TCE, and analyze this rinse with the contents 
of Container No. 2. Weigh the filter to a constant weight. For the 
purpose of this analysis, the term ``constant weight'' means a 
difference of no more than 10 percent of the net filter weight or 2 mg 
(whichever is greater) between two consecutive weighings made 24 hours 
apart. Report the ``final weight'' to the nearest 0.1 mg as the average 
of these two values.
    11.1.2 Container No. 2 (Probe to Filter Holder).
    11.1.2.1 Before adding the rinse from Container No. 1 to Container 
No. 2, note the level of liquid in Container No. 2, and confirm on the 
analysis sheet whether leakage occurred during transport. If noticeable 
leakage occurred, either void the sample or take steps, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator, to correct the final results.
    11.1.2.2 Add the rinse from Container No. 1 to Container No. 2 and 
measure the liquid in this container either volumetrically to <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml or gravimetrically to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g. 
Check to see whether there is any appreciable quantity of condensed 
water present in the TCE rinse (look for a boundary layer or phase 
separation). If the volume of condensed water appears larger than 5 ml, 
separate the oil-TCE fraction from the water fraction using a separatory 
funnel. Measure the volume of the water phase to the nearest ml; adjust 
the stack gas moisture content, if necessary (see Sections 12.3 and 
12.4). Next, extract the water phase with several 25-ml portions of TCE 
until, by visual observation, the TCE does not remove any additional 
organic material. Transfer the remaining water fraction to a tared 
beaker and evaporate to dryness at 93 [deg]C (200 [deg]F), desiccate for 
24 hours, and weigh to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    11.1.2.3 Treat the total TCE fraction (including TCE from the filter 
container rinse and water phase extractions) as follows: Transfer the 
TCE and oil to a tared beaker, and evaporate at ambient temperature and 
pressure. The evaporation of TCE from the solution may take several 
days. Do not desiccate the sample until the solution reaches an apparent 
constant volume or until the odor of TCE is not detected. When it 
appears that the TCE has evaporated, desiccate the sample, and weigh it 
at 24-hour intervals to obtain a ``constant weight'' (as defined for 
Container No. 1 above). The ``total weight'' for Container No. 2 is the 
sum of the evaporated PM weight of the TCE-oil and water phase 
fractions. Report the results to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    11.1.3 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). This step may be conducted in 
the field. Weigh the spent silica gel (or silica gel plus impinger) to 
the nearest 0.5 g using a balance.
    11.1.4 ``TCE Blank'' Container. Measure TCE in this container either 
volumetrically or gravimetrically. Transfer the TCE to a tared 250-ml 
beaker, and evaporate to dryness at ambient temperature and pressure.

[[Page 198]]

Desiccate for 24 hours, and weigh to a constant weight. Report the 
results to the nearest 0.1 mg.

    Note: In order to facilitate the evaporation of TCE liquid samples, 
these samples may be dried in a controlled temperature oven at 
temperatures up to 38 [deg]C (100 [deg]F) until the liquid is 
evaporated.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after the 
final calculation. Other forms of the equations may be used as long as 
they give equivalent results.
    12.1 Nomenclature. Same as Method 5, Section 12.1, with the 
following additions:

C<INF>t</INF>=TCE blank residue concentration, mg/g.
m<INF>t</INF>=Mass of residue of TCE blank after evaporation, mg.
V<INF>pc</INF>=Volume of water collected in precollector, ml.
V<INF>t</INF>=Volume of TCE blank, ml.
V<INF>tw</INF>=Volume of TCE used in wash, ml.
W<INF>t</INF>=Weight of residue in TCE wash, mg.
[rho]<INF>t</INF>=Density of TCE (see label on bottle), g/ml.

    12.2 Dry Gas Meter Temperature, Orifice Pressure Drop, and Dry Gas 
Volume. Same as Method 5, Sections 12.2 and 12.3, except use data 
obtained in performing this test.
    12.3 Volume of Water Vapor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.134
    
Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=0.001333 m\3\/ml for metric units.
    =0.04706 ft\3\/ml for English units.

    12.4 Moisture Content.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.135
    
    Note: In saturated or water droplet-laden gas streams, two 
calculations of the moisture content of the stack gas shall be made, one 
from the impinger and precollector analysis (Equations 5A-1 and 5A-2) 
and a second from the assumption of saturated conditions. The lower of 
the two values of moisture content shall be considered correct. The 
procedure for determining the moisture content based upon assumption of 
saturated conditions is given in Section 4.0 of Method 4. For the 
purpose of this method, the average stack gas temperature from Figure 5-
3 of Method 5 may be used to make this determination, provided that the 
accuracy of the in-stack temperature sensor is within 1 [deg]C (2 
[deg]F).

    12.5 TCE Blank Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.136
    
    Note: In no case shall a blank value of greater than 0.001 percent 
of the weight of TCE used be subtracted from the sample weight.

    12.6 TCE Wash Blank.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.137
    
    12.7 Total PM Weight. Determine the total PM catch from the sum of 
the weights obtained from Containers 1 and 2, less the TCE blank.
    12.8 PM Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.138
    
Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=0.001 g/mg for metric units
    =0.0154 gr/mg for English units

    12.9 Isokinetic Variation. Same as in Method 5, Section 12.11.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 5, Section 17.0.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

Plant___________________________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Run No._________________________________________________________________
Filter No.______________________________________________________________
Amount liquid lost during transport_____________________________________
Acetone blank volume, m1________________________________________________
Acetone blank concentration, mg/mg (Equation 5-4)_______________________
Acetone wash blank, mg (Equation 5-5)___________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          Weight of particulate collected, mg
           Container number           --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Final weight             Tare weight              Weight gain
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.
--------------------------------------
2.
--------------------------------------
    Total:
        Less acetone blank...........

[[Page 199]]

 
        Weight of particulate matter.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Volume of liquid water collected
                                 ---------------------------------------
                                   Impinger volume,   Silica gel weight,
                                          ml                   g
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Final
Initial
Liquid collected
      Total volume collected....  ..................  g* ml
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Convert weight of water to volume by dividing total weight increase by
  density of water (1 g/ml).

  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.139
  
    Method 5B--Determination of Nonsulfuric Acid Particulate Matter 
                    Emissions From Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Nonsulfuric acid particulate matter. No CAS number 
assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is determining applicable for the 
determination of nonsulfuric acid particulate matter from stationary 
sources, only where specified by an applicable subpart of the 
regulations or where approved by the Administrator for a particular 
application.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source and 
collected on a glass fiber filter maintained at a temperature of 160 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (320 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F). 
The collected sample is then heated in an oven at 160 [deg]C (320 
[deg]F) for 6 hours to volatilize any condensed sulfuric acid that may 
have been collected, and the nonsulfuric acid particulate mass is 
determined gravimetrically.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Method 5, Section 6.0, with the following addition and 
exceptions:
    6.1 Sample Collection. The probe liner heating system and filter 
heating system must be capable of maintaining a sample gas temperature 
of 160 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (320 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 
[deg]F).
    6.2 Sample Preparation. An oven is required for drying the sample.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Method 5, Section 7.0.

      8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport.

    Same as Method 5, with the exception of the following:
    8.1 Initial Filter Tare. Oven dry the filter at 160 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (320 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]F) for 2 to 
3 hours, cool in a desiccator for 2 hours, and weigh. Desiccate to 
constant weight to obtain the initial tare weight. Use the applicable 
specifications and techniques of Section 8.1.3 of Method 5 for this 
determination.
    8.2 Probe and Filter Temperatures. Maintain the probe outlet and 
filter temperatures at 160 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (320 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F).

                           9.0 Quality Control

    Same as Method 5, Section 9.0.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 5, Section 10.0.

[[Page 200]]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Same as Method 5, Section 11.0, except replace Section
    11.2.2 With the following:
    11.1 Container No. 2. Note the level of liquid in the container, and 
confirm on the analysis sheet whether leakage occurred during transport. 
If a noticeable amount of leakage has occurred, either void the sample 
or use methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, to correct 
the final results. Measure the liquid in this container either 
volumetrically to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml or gravimetrically to 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g. Transfer the contents to a tared 250 ml 
beaker, and evaporate to dryness at ambient temperature and pressure. 
Then oven dry the probe and filter samples at a temperature of 160 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (320 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]F) for 
6 hours. Cool in a desiccator for 2 hours, and weigh to constant weight. 
Report the results to the nearest 0.1 mg.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as in Method 5, Section 12.0.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 5, Section 17.0.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

                          Method 5C [Reserved]

 Method 5D--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions from Positive 
                         Pressure Fabric Filters

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, Method 17.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.
    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This method is applicable for the determination of PM 
emissions from positive pressure fabric filters. Emissions are 
determined in terms of concentration (mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> or gr/
ft<SUP>3</SUP>) and emission rate (kg/hr or lb/hr).
    1.2.2 The General Provisions of 40 CFR part 60, Sec. 60.8(e), 
require that the owner or operator of an affected facility shall provide 
performance testing facilities. Such performance testing facilities 
include sampling ports, safe sampling platforms, safe access to sampling 
sites, and utilities for testing. It is intended that affected 
facilities also provide sampling locations that meet the specification 
for adequate stack length and minimal flow disturbances as described in 
Method 1. Provisions for testing are often overlooked factors in 
designing fabric filters or are extremely costly. The purpose of this 
procedure is to identify appropriate alternative locations and 
procedures for sampling the emissions from positive pressure fabric 
filters. The requirements that the affected facility owner or operator 
provide adequate access to performance testing facilities remain in 
effect.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source 
and collected on a glass fiber filter maintained at a temperature at or 
above the exhaust gas temperature up to a nominal 120 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F). The particulate mass, which includes any 
material that condenses at or above the filtration temperature, is 
determined gravimetrically after the removal of uncombined water.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and to 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of either Method 5 or Method 17.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of either Method 5 or Method 17.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Same Section 8.0 of either Method 5 or Method 17, except replace 
Section 8.2.1 of Method 5 with the following:
    8.1 Determination of Measurement Site. The configuration of positive 
pressure fabric filter structures frequently are not amenable

[[Page 201]]

to emission testing according to the requirements of Method 1. Following 
are several alternatives for determining measurement sites for positive 
pressure fabric filters.
    8.1.1 Stacks Meeting Method 1 Criteria. Use a measurement site as 
specified in Method 1, Section 11.1.
    8.1.2 Short Stacks Not Meeting Method 1 Criteria. Use stack 
extensions and the procedures in Method 1. Alternatively, use flow 
straightening vanes of the ``egg-crate'' type (see Figure 5D-1). Locate 
the measurement site downstream of the straightening vanes at a distance 
equal to or greater than two times the average equivalent diameter of 
the vane openings and at least one-half of the overall stack diameter 
upstream of the stack outlet.
    8.1.3 Roof Monitor or Monovent. (See Figure 5D-2). For a positive 
pressure fabric filter equipped with a peaked roof monitor, ridge vent, 
or other type of monovent, use a measurement site at the base of the 
monovent. Examples of such locations are shown in Figure 5D-2. The 
measurement site must be upstream of any exhaust point (e.g., louvered 
vent).
    8.1.4 Compartment Housing. Sample immediately downstream of the 
filter bags directly above the tops of the bags as shown in the examples 
in Figure 5D-2. Depending on the housing design, use sampling ports in 
the housing walls or locate the sampling equipment within the 
compartment housing.
    8.2 Determination of Number and Location of Traverse Points. Locate 
the traverse points according to Method 1, Section 11.3. Because a 
performance test consists of at least three test runs and because of the 
varied configurations of positive pressure fabric filters, there are 
several schemes by which the number of traverse points can be determined 
and the three test runs can be conducted.
    8.2.1 Single Stacks Meeting Method 1 Criteria. Select the number of 
traverse points according to Method 1. Sample all traverse points for 
each test run.
    8.2.2 Other Single Measurement Sites. For a roof monitor or 
monovent, single compartment housing, or other stack not meeting Method 
1 criteria, use at least 24 traverse points. For example, for a 
rectangular measurement site, such as a monovent, use a balanced 5x5 
traverse point matrix. Sample all traverse points for each test run.
    8.2.3 Multiple Measurement Sites. Sampling from two or more stacks 
or measurement sites may be combined for a test run, provided the 
following guidelines are met:
    8.2.3.1 All measurement sites up to 12 must be sampled. For more 
than 12 measurement sites, conduct sampling on at least 12 sites or 50 
percent of the sites, whichever is greater. The measurement sites 
sampled should be evenly, or nearly evenly, distributed among the 
available sites; if not, all sites are to be sampled.
    8.2.3.2 The same number of measurement sites must be sampled for 
each test run.
    8.2.3.3 The minimum number of traverse points per test run is 24. An 
exception to the 24-point minimum would be a test combining the sampling 
from two stacks meeting Method 1 criteria for acceptable stack length, 
and Method 1 specifies fewer than 12 points per site.
    8.2.3.4 As long as the 24 traverse points per test run criterion is 
met, the number of traverse points per measurement site may be reduced 
to eight.
    8.2.3.5 Alternatively, conduct a test run for each measurement site 
individually using the criteria in Section 8.2.1 or 8.2.2 to determine 
the number of traverse points. Each test run shall count toward the 
total of three required for a performance test. If more than three 
measurement sites are sampled, the number of traverse points per 
measurement site may be reduced to eight as long as at least 72 traverse 
points are sampled for all the tests.
    8.2.3.6 The following examples demonstrate the procedures for 
sampling multiple measurement sites.
    8.2.3.6.1 Example 1: A source with nine circular measurement sites 
of equal areas may be tested as follows: For each test run, traverse 
three measurement sites using four points per diameter (eight points per 
measurement site). In this manner, test run number 1 will include 
sampling from sites 1,2, and 3; run 2 will include samples from sites 4, 
5, and 6; and run 3 will include sites 7, 8, and 9. Each test area may 
consist of a separate test of each measurement site using eight points. 
Use the results from all nine tests in determining the emission average.
    8.2.3.6.2 Example 2: A source with 30 rectangular measurement sites 
of equal areas may be tested as follows: For each of the three test 
runs, traverse five measurement sites using a 3x3 matrix of traverse 
points for each site. In order to distribute the sampling evenly over 
all the available measurement sites while sampling only 50 percent of 
the sites, number the sites consecutively from 1 to 30 and sample all 
the even numbered (or odd numbered) sites. Alternatively, conduct a 
separate test of each of 15 measurement sites using Section 8.2.1 or 
8.2.2 to determine the number and location of traverse points, as 
appropriate.
    8.2.3.6.3 Example 3: A source with two measurement sites of equal 
areas may be tested as follows: For each test of three test runs, 
traverse both measurement sites, using Section 8.2.3 in determining the 
number of traverse points. Alternatively, conduct two full emission test 
runs for each measurement site using the criteria in Section 8.2.1 or 
8.2.2 to determine the number of traverse points.

[[Page 202]]

    8.2.3.7 Other test schemes, such as random determination of traverse 
points for a large number of measurement sites, may be used with prior 
approval from the Administrator.
    8.3 Velocity Determination.
    8.3.1 The velocities of exhaust gases from positive pressure 
baghouses are often too low to measure accurately with the type S pitot 
tube specified in Method 2 (i.e., velocity head <1.3 mm H<INF>2</INF>O 
(0.05 in. H<INF>2</INF>O)). For these conditions, measure the gas flow 
rate at the fabric filter inlet following the procedures outlined in 
Method 2. Calculate the average gas velocity at the measurement site as 
shown in Section 12.2 and use this average velocity in determining and 
maintaining isokinetic sampling rates.
    8.3.2 Velocity determinations to determine and maintain isokinetic 
rates at measurement sites with gas velocities within the range 
measurable with the type S pitot tube (i.e., velocity head greater than 
1.3 mm H<INF>2</INF>O (0.05 in. H<INF>2</INF>O)) shall be conducted 
according to the procedures outlined in Method 2.
    8.4 Sampling. Follow the procedures specified in Sections 8.1 
through 8.6 of Method 5 or Sections 8.1 through 8.25 in Method 17 with 
the exceptions as noted above.
    8.5 Sample Recovery. Follow the procedures specified in Section 8.7 
of Method 5 or Section 8.2 of Method 17.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.0, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak     measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Section 10.0 of either Method 5 or Method 17.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Same as Section 11.0 of either Method 5 or Method 17.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Section 12.0 of either Method 5 or Method 17 with the 
following exceptions:
    12.1 Nomenclature.
A<INF>o</INF>=Measurement site(s) total cross-sectional area, m\2\ 
(ft\2\).
C or C<INF>avg</INF>=Average concentration of PM for all n runs, mg/scm 
(gr/scf).
Q<INF>i</INF>=Inlet gas volume flow rate, m\3\/sec (ft\3\/sec).
m<INF>i</INF>=Mass collected for run i of n, mg (gr).
T<INF>o</INF>=Average temperature of gas at measurement site, [deg]K 
([deg]R).
T<INF>i</INF>=Average temperature of gas at inlet, [deg]K ([deg]R).
Vol<INF>i</INF>=Sample volume collected for run i of n, scm (scf).
v=Average gas velocity at the measurement site(s), m/s (ft/s)
Q<INF>o</INF>=Total baghouse exhaust volumetric flow rate, m\3\/sec 
(ft\3\/sec).
Q<INF>d</INF>=Dilution air flow rate, m\3\/sec (ft\3\/sec).
Tamb=Ambient Temperature, ([deg]K).

    12.2 Average Gas Velocity. When following Section 8.3.1, calculate 
the average gas velocity at the measurement site as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.140

    12.3 Volumetric Flow Rate. Total volumetric flow rate may be 
determined as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.141

    12.4 Dilution Air Flow Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.142
    
    12.5 Average PM Concentration. For multiple measurement sites, 
calculate the average PM concentration as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.143

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 5, Section 17.0.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 203]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.144


[[Page 204]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.145

 Method 5E--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions From the Wool 
              Fiberglass Insulation Manufacturing Industry

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, and 
Method 5.

                       1.0 Scope and Applications

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.

[[Page 205]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of PM emissions from wool fiberglass insulation manufacturing sources.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source and 
is collected either on a glass fiber filter maintained at a temperature 
in the range of 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F) and in impingers in solutions of 0.1 N sodium 
hydroxide (NaOH). The filtered particulate mass, which includes any 
material that condenses at or above the filtration temperature, is 
determined gravimetrically after the removal of uncombined water. The 
condensed PM collected in the impinger solutions is determined as total 
organic carbon (TOC) using a nondispersive infrared type of analyzer. 
The sum of the filtered PM mass and the condensed PM is reported as the 
total PM mass.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.2.1 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl). Highly toxic. Vapors are highly 
irritating to eyes, skin, nose, and lungs, causing severe damage. May 
cause bronchitis, pneumonia, or edema of lungs. Exposure to 
concentrations of 0.13 to 0.2 percent in air can be lethal in minutes. 
Will react with metals, producing hydrogen.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eye tissues 
and to skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. 
Reacts exothermically with limited amounts of water.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1, with the 
exception of the following:
    6.1.1 Probe Liner. Same as described in Section 6.1.1.2 of Method 5 
except use only borosilicate or quartz glass liners.
    6.1.2 Filter Holder. Same as described in Section 6.1.1.5 of Method 
5 with the addition of a leak-tight connection in the rear half of the 
filter holder designed for insertion of a temperature sensor used for 
measuring the sample gas exit temperature.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 6.2, except three 
wash bottles are needed instead of two and only glass storage bottles 
and funnels may be used.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 5, Section 6.3, with the 
additional equipment for TOC analysis as described below:
    6.3.1 Sample Blender or Homogenizer. Waring type or ultrasonic.
    6.3.2 Magnetic Stirrer.
    6.3.3 Hypodermic Syringe. 0- to 100-[micro]l capacity.
    6.3.4 Total Organic Carbon Analyzer. Rosemount Model 2100A analyzer 
or equivalent and a recorder.
    6.3.5 Beaker. 30-ml.
    6.3.6 Water Bath. Temperature controlled.
    6.3.7 Volumetric Flasks. 1000-ml and 500-ml.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents conform 
to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 5, Section 7.1, with the 
addition of 0.1 N NaOH (Dissolve 4 g of NaOH in water and dilute to 1 
liter).
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 7.2, with the 
addition of the following:
    7.2.1 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM Specification D 
1193-77 or 91 Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). The 
potassium permanganate (KMnO<INF>4</INF>) test for oxidizable organic 
matter may be omitted when high concentrations of organic matter are not 
expected to be present.
    7.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide. Same as described in Section 7.1.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 5, Section 7.3, with the 
addition of the following:
    7.3.1 Carbon Dioxide-Free Water. Distilled or deionized water that 
has been freshly boiled for 15 minutes and cooled to room temperature 
while preventing exposure to ambient air by using a cover vented with an 
Ascarite tube.
    7.3.2 Hydrochloric Acid. HCl, concentrated, with a dropper.
    7.3.3 Organic Carbon Stock Solution. Dissolve 2.1254 g of dried 
potassium biphthalate (HOOCC<INF>6</INF>H<INF>4</INF>COOK) in 
CO<INF>2</INF>-free water, and dilute to 1 liter in a volumetric flask. 
This solution contains 1000 mg/L organic carbon.
    7.3.4 Inorganic Carbon Stock Solution. Dissolve 4.404 g anhydrous 
sodium carbonate

[[Page 206]]

(Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>.) in about 500 ml of CO<INF>2</INF>-free 
water in a 1-liter volumetric flask. Add 3.497 g anhydrous sodium 
bicarbonate (NaHCO<INF>3</INF>) to the flask, and dilute to 1 liter with 
CO<INF>2</INF> -free water. This solution contains 1000 mg/L inorganic 
carbon.
    7.3.5 Oxygen Gas. CO<INF>2</INF> -free.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Preparation and Preliminary Determinations. Same as 
Method 5, Sections 8.1 and 8.2, respectively.
    8.2 Preparation of Sampling Train. Same as Method 5, Section 8.3, 
except that 0.1 N NaOH is used in place of water in the impingers. The 
volumes of the solutions are the same as in Method 5.
    8.3 Leak-Check Procedures, Sampling Train Operation, Calculation of 
Percent Isokinetic. Same as Method 5, Sections 8.4 through 8.6, 
respectively.
    8.4 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Sections 8.7.1 through 8.7.4, 
with the addition of the following:
    8.4.1 Save portions of the water, acetone, and 0.1 N NaOH used for 
cleanup as blanks. Take 200 ml of each liquid directly from the wash 
bottles being used, and place in glass sample containers labeled ``water 
blank,'' ``acetone blank,'' and ``NaOH blank,'' respectively.
    8.4.2 Inspect the train prior to and during disassembly, and note 
any abnormal conditions. Treat the samples as follows:
    8.4.2.1 Container No. 1. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.1.
    8.4.2.2 Container No. 2. Use water to rinse the sample nozzle, 
probe, and front half of the filter holder three times in the manner 
described in Section 8.7.6.2 of Method 5 except that no brushing is 
done. Put all the water wash in one container, seal, and label.
    8.4.2.3 Container No. 3. Rinse and brush the sample nozzle, probe, 
and front half of the filter holder with acetone as described for 
Container No. 2 in Section 8.7.6.2 of Method 5.
    8.4.2.4 Container No. 4. Place the contents of the silica gel 
impinger in its original container as described for Container No. 3 in 
Section 8.7.6.3 of Method 5.
    8.4.2.5 Container No. 5. Measure the liquid in the first three 
impingers and record the volume or weight as described for the Impinger 
Water in Section 8.7.6.4 of Method 5. Do not discard this liquid, but 
place it in a sample container using a glass funnel to aid in the 
transfer from the impingers or graduated cylinder (if used) to the 
sample container. Rinse each impinger thoroughly with 0.1 N NaOH three 
times, as well as the graduated cylinder (if used) and the funnel, and 
put these rinsings in the same sample container. Seal the container and 
label to clearly identify its contents.
    8.5 Sample Transport. Whenever possible, containers should be 
shipped in such a way that they remain upright at all times.

                          9.0 Quality Control.

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.3, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.1.2, 11.2.5.3..............  Repetitive         Ensures precise
                                 analyses.          measurement of total
                                                    carbon and inorganic
                                                    carbon concentration
                                                    of samples, blank,
                                                    and standards.
10.1.4........................  TOC analyzer       Ensures linearity of
                                 calibration.       analyzer response to
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 5, Section 10.0, with the addition of the following 
procedures for calibrating the total organic carbon analyzer:
    10.1 Preparation of Organic Carbon Standard Curve.
    10.1.1 Add 10 ml, 20 ml, 30 ml, 40 ml, and 50 ml of the organic 
carbon stock solution to a series of five 1000-ml volumetric flasks. Add 
30 ml, 40 ml, and 50 ml of the same solution to a series of three 500-ml 
volumetric flasks. Dilute the contents of each flask to the mark using 
CO<INF>2</INF>-free water. These flasks contain 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 
80, and 100 mg/L organic carbon, respectively.
    10.1.2 Use a hypodermic syringe to withdraw a 20- to 50-[micro]l 
aliquot from the 10 mg/L standard solution and inject it into the total 
carbon port of the analyzer. Measure the peak height. Repeat the 
injections until three consecutive peaks are obtained within 10 percent 
of their arithmetic mean. Repeat this procedure for the remaining 
organic carbon standard solutions.
    10.1.3 Calculate the corrected peak height for each standard by 
deducting the blank correction (see Section 11.2.5.3) as follows:

[[Page 207]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.146

Where:

A=Peak height of standard or sample, mm or other appropriate unit.
B=Peak height of blank, mm or other appropriate unit.

    10.1.4 Prepare a linear regression plot of the arithmetic mean of 
the three consecutive peak heights obtained for each standard solution 
against the concentration of that solution. Calculate the calibration 
factor as the inverse of the slope of this curve. If the product of the 
arithmetic mean peak height for any standard solution and the 
calibration factor differs from the actual concentration by more than 5 
percent, remake and reanalyze that standard.
    10.2 Preparation of Inorganic Carbon Standard Curve. Repeat the 
procedures outlined in Sections 10.1.1 through 10.1.4, substituting the 
inorganic carbon stock solution for the organic carbon stock solution, 
and the inorganic carbon port of the analyzer for the total carbon port.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Record the data required on a sheet such as the one shown in 
Figure 5-6 of Method 5.
    11.2 Handle each sample container as follows:
    11.2.1 Container No. 1. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.1, except 
that the filters must be dried at 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 [deg]C (68 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]F) and ambient pressure.
    11.2.2 Containers No. 2 and No. 3. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.2, 
except that evaporation of the samples must be at 20 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>6 [deg]C (68 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]F) and 
ambient pressure.
    11.2.3 Container No. 4. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.3.
    11.2.4 ``Water Blank'' and ``Acetone Blank'' Containers. Determine 
the water and acetone blank values following the procedures for the 
``Acetone Blank'' container in Section 11.2.4 of Method 5. Evaporate the 
samples at ambient temperature (20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 [deg]C (68 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]F)) and pressure.
    11.2.5 Container No. 5. For the determination of total organic 
carbon, perform two analyses on successive identical samples, i.e., 
total carbon and inorganic carbon. The desired quantity is the 
difference between the two values obtained. Both analyses are based on 
conversion of sample carbon into carbon dioxide for measurement by a 
nondispersive infrared analyzer. Results of analyses register as peaks 
on a strip chart recorder.
    11.2.5.1 The principal differences between the operating parameters 
for the two channels involve the combustion tube packing material and 
temperature. In the total carbon channel, a high temperature (950 [deg]C 
(1740 [deg]F)) furnace heats a Hastelloy combustion tube packed with 
cobalt oxide-impregnated asbestos fiber. The oxygen in the carrier gas, 
the elevated temperature, and the catalytic effect of the packing result 
in oxidation of both organic and inorganic carbonaceous material to 
CO<INF>2</INF>, and steam. In the inorganic carbon channel, a low 
temperature (150 [deg]C (300 [deg]F)) furnace heats a glass tube 
containing quartz chips wetted with 85 percent phosphoric acid. The acid 
liberates CO<INF>2</INF> and steam from inorganic carbonates. The 
operating temperature is below that required to oxidize organic matter. 
Follow the manufacturer's instructions for assembly, testing, 
calibration, and operation of the analyzer.
    11.2.5.2 As samples collected in 0.1 N NaOH often contain a high 
measure of inorganic carbon that inhibits repeatable determinations of 
TOC, sample pretreatment is necessary. Measure and record the liquid 
volume of each sample (or impinger contents). If the sample contains 
solids or immiscible liquid matter, homogenize the sample with a blender 
or ultrasonics until satisfactory repeatability is obtained. Transfer a 
representative portion of 10 to 15 ml to a 30-ml beaker, and acidify 
with about 2 drops of concentrated HCl to a pH of 2 or less. Warm the 
acidified sample at 50 [deg]C (120 [deg]F) in a water bath for 15 
minutes.
    11.2.5.3 While stirring the sample with a magnetic stirrer, use a 
hypodermic syringe to withdraw a 20-to 50-[micro]1 aliquot from the 
beaker. Analyze the sample for total carbon and calculate its corrected 
mean peak height according to the procedures outlined in Sections 10.1.2 
and 10.1.3. Similarly analyze an aliquot of the sample for inorganic 
carbon. Repeat the analyses for all the samples and for the 0.1 N NaOH 
blank.
    11.2.5.4 Ascertain the total carbon and inorganic carbon 
concentrations (C<INF>TC</INF> and C<INF>IC</INF>, respectively) of each 
sample and blank by comparing the corrected mean peak heights for each 
sample and blank to the appropriate standard curve.

    Note: If samples must be diluted for analysis, apply an appropriate 
dilution factor.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Method 5, Section 12.0, with the addition of the following:
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>c</INF>=Concentration of condensed particulate matter in stack 
gas, gas dry basis, corrected to standard conditions, g/dscm (gr/dscf).
C<INF>IC</INF>=Concentration of condensed TOC in the liquid sample, from 
Section 11.2.5, mg/L.

[[Page 208]]

C<INF>t</INF>=Total particulate concentration, dry basis, corrected to 
standard conditions, g/dscm (gr/dscf).
C<INF>TC</INF>=Concentration of condensed TOC in the liquid sample, from 
Section 11.2.5, mg/L.
C<INF>TOC</INF>=Concentration of condensed TOC in the liquid sample, mg/
L.
m<INF>TOC</INF>=Mass of condensed TOC collected in the impingers, mg.
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, from Section 12.3 of Method 5, dscm 
(dscf).
V<INF>s</INF>=Total volume of liquid sample, ml.

    12.2 Concentration of Condensed TOC in Liquid Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.148
    
    12.3 Mass of Condensed TOC Collected.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.149
    
Where:

0.001 = Liters per milliliter.

    12.4 Concentration of Condensed Particulate Material.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.150
    
Where:

K<INF>4</INF>=0.001 g/mg for metric units.
    =0.0154 gr/mg for English units.

    12.5 Total Particulate Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.151
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                            16.0 References.

    Same as Section 17.0 of Method 5, with the addition of the 
following:

    1. American Public Health Association, American Water Works 
Association, Water Pollution Control Federation. Standard Methods for 
the Examination of Water and Wastewater. Fifteenth Edition. Washington, 
D.C. 1980.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

Method 5F--Determination of Nonsulfate Particulate Matter Emissions From 
                           Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, and 
Method 5.

                       1.0 Scope and Applications

    1.1 Analyte. Nonsulfate particulate matter (PM). No CAS number 
assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of nonsulfate PM emissions from stationary sources. Use of this method 
must be specified by an applicable subpart of the standards, or approved 
by the Administrator for a particular application.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source and 
collected on a filter maintained at a temperature in the range 160 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (320 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F). 
The collected sample is extracted with water. A portion of the extract 
is analyzed for sulfate content by ion chromatography. The remainder is 
neutralized with ammonium hydroxide (NH<INF>4</INF>OH), dried, and 
weighed. The weight of sulfate in the sample is calculated as ammonium 
sulfate ((NH<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>), and is subtracted 
from the total particulate weight; the result is reported as nonsulfate 
particulate matter.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection and Recovery. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.1 
and 6.2, respectively.
    6.2 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 5, Section 6.3, with the 
addition of the following:
    6.2.1 Erlenmeyer Flasks. 125-ml, with ground glass joints.
    6.2.2 Air Condenser. With ground glass joint compatible with the 
Erlenmeyer flasks.
    6.2.3 Beakers. 600-ml.
    6.2.4 Volumetric Flasks. 1-liter, 500-ml (one for each sample), 200-
ml, and 50-ml (one for each sample and standard).
    6.2.5 Pipet. 5-ml (one for each sample and standard).

[[Page 209]]

    6.2.6 Ion Chromatograph. The ion chromatograph should have at least 
the following components.
    6.2.6.1 Columns. An anion separation column or other column capable 
of resolving the sulfate ion from other species present and a standard 
anion suppressor column. Suppressor columns are produced as proprietary 
items; however, one can be produced in the laboratory using the resin 
available from BioRad Company, 32nd and Griffin Streets, Richmond, 
California. Other systems which do not use suppressor columns may also 
be used.
    6.2.6.2 Pump. Capable of maintaining a steady flow as required by 
the system.
    6.2.6.3 Flow Gauges. Capable of measuring the specified system flow 
rate.
    6.2.6.4 Conductivity Detector.
    6.2.6.5 Recorder. Compatible with the output voltage range of the 
detector.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents conform 
to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 5, Section 7.1.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 7.2, with the 
addition of the following:
    7.2.1 Water. Deionized distilled, to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 91 
Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). The potassium 
permanganate (KMnO<INF>4</INF>) test for oxidizable organic matter may 
be omitted when high concentrations of organic matter are not expected 
to be present.
    7.3 Analysis. Same as Method 5, Section 7.3, with the addition of 
the following:
    7.3.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.2.1.
    7.3.2 Stock Standard Solution, 1 mg 
(NH<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>/ml. Dry an adequate amount of 
primary standard grade ammonium sulfate 
((NH<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>) at 105 to 110 [deg]C (220 
to 230 [deg]F) for a minimum of 2 hours before preparing the standard 
solution. Then dissolve exactly 1.000 g of dried 
(NH<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> in water in a 1-liter 
volumetric flask, and dilute to 1 liter. Mix well.
    7.3.3 Working Standard Solution, 25 [micro]g 
(NH<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>/ml. Pipet 5 ml of the stock 
standard solution into a 200-ml volumetric flask. Dilute to 200 ml with 
water.
    7.3.4 Eluent Solution. Weigh 1.018 g of sodium carbonate 
(Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>) and 1.008 g of sodium bicarbonate 
(NaHCO<INF>3</INF>), and dissolve in 4 liters of water. This solution is 
0.0024 M Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>/0.003 M NaHCO<INF>3</INF>. Other 
eluents appropriate to the column type and capable of resolving sulfate 
ion from other species present may be used.
    7.3.5 Ammonium Hydroxide. Concentrated, 14.8 M.
    7.3.6 Phenolphthalein Indicator. 3,3-Bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1-(3H)-
isobenzo-furanone. Dissolve 0.05 g in 50 ml of ethanol and 50 ml of 
water.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Same as Method 5, Section 8.0, with the exception of the following:
    8.1 Sampling Train Operation. Same as Method 5, Section 8.5, except 
that the probe outlet and filter temperatures shall be maintained at 160 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (320 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F).
    8.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7, except that the 
recovery solvent shall be water instead of acetone, and a clean filter 
from the same lot as those used during testing shall be saved for 
analysis as a blank.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.3, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak     measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.1.2, 11.2.5.3..............  Repetitive         Ensures precise
                                 analyses.          measurement of total
                                                    carbon and inorganic
                                                    carbon concentration
                                                    of samples, blank,
                                                    and standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 5, Section 10.0, with the addition of the following:
    10.1 Determination of Ion Chromatograph Calibration Factor S. 
Prepare a series of five standards by adding 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 6.0, and 
10.0 ml of working standard solution (25 [micro]g/ml) to a series of 
five 50-ml volumetric flasks. (The standard masses will equal 25, 50, 
100, 150, and 250 [micro]g.) Dilute each flask to the mark with water, 
and mix well. Analyze each standard according to the chromatograph 
manufacturer's instructions. Take peak height measurements with 
symmetrical peaks; in all other cases, calculate peak areas. Prepare or 
calculate a linear regression plot of the standard masses in [micro]g 
(x-axis) versus their responses (y-axis). From this line, or equation, 
determine the slope

[[Page 210]]

and calculate its reciprocal which is the calibration factor, S. If any 
point deviates from the line by more than 7 percent of the concentration 
at that point, remake and reanalyze that standard. This deviation can be 
determined by multiplying S times the response for each standard. The 
resultant concentrations must not differ by more than 7 percent from 
each known standard mass (i.e., 25, 50, 100, 150, and 250 [micro]g).
    10.2 Conductivity Detector. Calibrate according to manufacturer's 
specifications prior to initial use.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample Extraction.
    11.1.1 Note on the analytical data sheet, the level of the liquid in 
the container, and whether any sample was lost during shipment. If a 
noticeable amount of leakage has occurred, either void the sample or use 
methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, to correct the 
final results.
    11.1.2 Cut the filter into small pieces, and place it in a 125-ml 
Erlenmeyer flask with a ground glass joint equipped with an air 
condenser. Rinse the shipping container with water, and pour the rinse 
into the flask. Add additional water to the flask until it contains 
about 75 ml, and place the flask on a hot plate. Gently reflux the 
contents for 6 to 8 hours. Cool the solution, and transfer it to a 500-
ml volumetric flask. Rinse the Erlenmeyer flask with water, and transfer 
the rinsings to the volumetric flask including the pieces of filter.
    11.1.3 Transfer the probe rinse to the same 500-ml volumetric flask 
with the filter sample. Rinse the sample bottle with water, and add the 
rinsings to the volumetric flask. Dilute the contents of the flask to 
the mark with water.
    11.1.4 Allow the contents of the flask to settle until all solid 
material is at the bottom of the flask. If necessary, remove and 
centrifuge a portion of the sample.
    11.1.5 Repeat the procedures outlined in Sections 11.1.1 through 
11.1.4 for each sample and for the filter blank.
    11.2 Sulfate (SO<INF>4</INF>) Analysis.
    11.2.1 Prepare a standard calibration curve according to the 
procedures outlined in Section 10.1.
    11.2.2 Pipet 5 ml of the sample into a 50-ml volumetric flask, and 
dilute to 50 ml with water. (Alternatively, eluent solution may be used 
instead of water in all sample, standard, and blank dilutions.) Analyze 
the set of standards followed by the set of samples, including the 
filter blank, using the same injection volume used for the standards.
    11.2.3 Repeat the analyses of the standards and the samples, with 
the standard set being done last. The two peak height or peak area 
responses for each sample must agree within 5 percent of their 
arithmetic mean for the analysis to be valid. Perform this analysis 
sequence on the same day. Dilute any sample and the blank with equal 
volumes of water if the concentration exceeds that of the highest 
standard.
    11.2.4 Document each sample chromatogram by listing the following 
analytical parameters: injection point, injection volume, sulfate 
retention time, flow rate, detector sensitivity setting, and recorder 
chart speed.
    11.3 Sample Residue.
    11.3.1 Transfer the remaining contents of the volumetric flask to a 
tared 600-ml beaker or similar container. Rinse the volumetric flask 
with water, and add the rinsings to the tared beaker. Make certain that 
all particulate matter is transferred to the beaker. Evaporate the water 
in an oven at 105 [deg]C (220 [deg]F) until only about 100 ml of water 
remains. Remove the beakers from the oven, and allow them to cool.
    11.3.2 After the beakers have cooled, add five drops of 
phenolphthalein indicator, and then add concentrated ammonium hydroxide 
until the solution turns pink. Return the samples to the oven at 105 
[deg]C (220 [deg]F), and evaporate the samples to dryness. Cool the 
samples in a desiccator, and weigh the samples to constant weight.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Method 5, Section 12.0, with the addition of the following:
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>W</INF>=Water blank residue concentration, mg/ml.
F=Dilution factor (required only if sample dilution was needed to reduce 
the concentration into the range of calibration).
H<INF>S</INF>=Arithmetic mean response of duplicate sample analyses, mm 
for height or mm2 for area.
H<INF>b</INF>=Arithmetic mean response of duplicate filter blank 
analyses, mm for height or mm2 for area.
m<INF>b</INF>=Mass of beaker used to dry sample, mg.
m<INF>f</INF>=Mass of sample filter, mg.
m<INF>n</INF>=Mass of nonsulfate particulate matter in the sample as 
collected, mg.
m<INF>s</INF>=Mass of ammonium sulfate in the sample as collected, mg.
m<INF>t</INF>=Mass of beaker, filter, and dried sample, mg.
m<INF>w</INF>=Mass of residue after evaporation of water blank, mg.
S=Calibration factor, [micro]g/mm.
V<INF>b</INF>=Volume of water blank, ml.
V<INF>S</INF>=Volume of sample collected, 500 ml.

    12.2 Water Blank Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.152
    
    12.3 Mass of Ammonium Sulfate.

[[Page 211]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.153

Where:

100=Aliquot factor, 495 ml/5 ml
1000=Constant, [micro]g/mg

    12.4 Mass of Nonsulfate Particulate Matter.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.154
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 The following procedure may be used as an alternative to the 
procedure in Section 11.0
    16.1.1 Apparatus. Same as for Method 6, Sections 6.3.3 to 6.3.6 with 
the following additions.
    16.1.1.1 Beakers. 250-ml, one for each sample, and 600-ml.
    16.1.1.2 Oven. Capable of maintaining temperatures of 75 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (167 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F) and 105 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (221 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F).
    16.1.1.3 Buchner Funnel.
    16.1.1.4 Glass Columns. 25-mmx305-mm (1-in.x12-in.) with Teflon 
stopcock.
    16.1.1.5 Volumetric Flasks. 50-ml and 500-ml, one set for each 
sample, and 100-ml, 200-ml, and 1000-ml.
    16.1.1.6 Pipettes. Two 20-ml and one 200-ml, one set for each 
sample, and 5-ml.
    16.1.1.7 Filter Flasks. 500-ml.
    16.1.1.8 Polyethylene Bottle. 500-ml, one for each sample.
    16.1.2 Reagents. Same as Method 6, Sections 7.3.2 to 7.3.5 with the 
following additions:
    16.1.2.1 Water, Ammonium Hydroxide, and Phenolphthalein. Same as 
Sections 7.2.1, 7.3.5, and 7.3.6 of this method, respectively.
    16.1.2.2 Filter. Glass fiber to fit Buchner funnel.
    16.1.2.3 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl), 1 m. Add 8.3 ml of concentrated 
HCl (12 M) to 50 ml of water in a 100-ml volumetric flask. Dilute to 100 
ml with water.
    16.1.2.4 Glass Wool.
    16.1.2.5 Ion Exchange Resin. Strong cation exchange resin, hydrogen 
form, analytical grade.
    16.1.2.6 pH Paper. Range of 1 to 7.
    16.1.3 Analysis.
    16.1.3.1 Ion Exchange Column Preparation. Slurry the resin with 1 M 
HCl in a 250-ml beaker, and allow to stand overnight. Place 2.5 cm (1 
in.) of glass wool in the bottom of the glass column. Rinse the slurried 
resin twice with water. Resuspend the resin in water, and pour 
sufficient resin into the column to make a bed 5.1 cm (2 in.) deep. Do 
not allow air bubbles to become entrapped in the resin or glass wool to 
avoid channeling, which may produce erratic results. If necessary, stir 
the resin with a glass rod to remove air bubbles, after the column has 
been prepared, never let the liquid level fall below the top of the 
upper glass wool plug. Place a 2.5-cm (1-in.) plug of glass wool on top 
of the resin. Rinse the column with water until the eluate gives a pH of 
5 or greater as measured with pH paper.
    16.1.3.2 Sample Extraction. Followup the procedure given in Section 
11.1.3 except do not dilute the sample to 500 ml.
    16.1.3.3 Sample Residue.
    16.1.3.3.1 Place at least one clean glass filter for each sample in 
a Buchner funnel, and rinse the filters with water. Remove the filters 
from the funnel, and dry them in an oven at 105 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]C (221 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F); then cool in a desiccator. 
Weigh each filter to constant weight according to the procedure in 
Method 5, Section 11.0. Record the weight of each filter to the nearest 
0.1 mg.
    16.1.3.3.2 Assemble the vacuum filter apparatus, and place one of 
the clean, tared glass fiber filters in the Buchner funnel. Decant the 
liquid portion of the extracted sample (Section 16.1.3.2) through the 
tared glass fiber filter into a clean, dry, 500-ml filter flask. Rinse 
all the particulate matter remaining in the volumetric flask onto the 
glass fiber filter with water. Rinse the particulate matter with 
additional water. Transfer the filtrate to a 500-ml volumetric flask, 
and dilute to 500 ml with water. Dry the filter overnight at 105 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (221 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F), cool in a 
desiccator, and weigh to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    16.1.3.3.3 Dry a 250-ml beaker at 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C 
(167 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F), and cool in a desiccator; then 
weigh to constant weight to the nearest 0.1 mg. Pipette 200 ml of the 
filtrate that was saved into a tared 250-ml beaker; add five drops of 
phenolphthalein indicator and sufficient concentrated ammonium hydroxide 
to turn the solution pink. Carefully evaporate the contents of the 
beaker to dryness at 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (167 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F). Check for dryness every 30 minutes. Do not 
continue to bake the sample once it has dried. Cool the sample in a 
desiccator, and weigh to constant weight to the nearest 0.1 mg.

[[Page 212]]

    16.1.3.4 Sulfate Analysis. Adjust the flow rate through the ion 
exchange column to 3 ml/min. Pipette a 20-ml aliquot of the filtrate 
onto the top of the ion exchange column, and collect the eluate in a 50-
ml volumetric flask. Rinse the column with two 15-ml portions of water. 
Stop collection of the eluate when the volume in the flask reaches 50-
ml. Pipette a 20-ml aliquot of the eluate into a 250-ml Erlenmeyer 
flask, add 80 ml of 100 percent isopropanol and two to four drops of 
thorin indicator, and titrate to a pink end point using 0.0100 N barium 
perchlorate. Repeat and average the titration volumes. Run a blank with 
each series of samples. Replicate titrations must agree within 1 percent 
or 0.2 ml, whichever is larger. Perform the ion exchange and titration 
procedures on duplicate portions of the filtrate. Results should agree 
within 5 percent. Regenerate or replace the ion exchange resin after 20 
sample aliquots have been analyzed or if the end point of the titration 
becomes unclear.

    Note: Protect the 0.0100 N barium perchlorate solution from 
evaporation at all times.

    16.1.3.5 Blank Determination. Begin with a sample of water of the 
same volume as the samples being processed and carry it through the 
analysis steps described in Sections 16.1.3.3 and 16.1.3.4. A blank 
value larger than 5 mg should not be subtracted from the final 
particulate matter mass. Causes for large blank values should be 
investigated and any problems resolved before proceeding with further 
analyses.
    16.1.4 Calibration. Calibrate the barium perchlorate solutions as in 
Method 6, Section 10.5.
    16.1.5 Calculations.
    16.1.5.1 Nomenclature. Same as Section 12.1 with the following 
additions:

m<INF>a</INF>=Mass of clean analytical filter, mg.
m<INF>d</INF>=Mass of dissolved particulate matter, mg.
m<INF>e</INF>=Mass of beaker and dissolved particulate matter after 
evaporation of filtrate, mg.
m<INF>p</INF>=Mass of insoluble particulate matter, mg.
m<INF>r</INF>=Mass of analytical filter, sample filter, and insoluble 
particulate matter, mg.
m<INF>bk</INF>=Mass of nonsulfate particulate matter in blank sample, 
mg.
m<INF>n</INF>=Mass of nonsulfate particulate matter, mg.
m<INF>s</INF>=Mass of Ammonium sulfate, mg.
N=Normality of Ba(ClO<INF>4</INF>) titrant, meq/ml.
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of aliquot taken for titration, 20 ml.
V<INF>c</INF>=Volume of titrant used for titration blank, ml.
V<INF>d</INF>=Volume of filtrate evaporated, 200 ml.
V<INF>e</INF>=Volume of eluate collected, 50 ml.
V<INF>f</INF>=Volume of extracted sample, 500 ml.
V<INF>i</INF>=Volume of filtrate added to ion exchange column, 20 ml.
V<INF>t</INF>=Volume of Ba(C10<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF> titrant, ml.
W=Equivalent weight of ammonium sulfate, 66.07 mg/meq.
    16.1.5.2 Mass of Insoluble Particulate Matter.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.155
    
    16.1.5.3 Mass of Dissolved Particulate Matter.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.156
    
    16.1.5.4 Mass of Ammonium Sulfate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.157
    
    16.1.5.5 Mass of Nonsulfate Particulate Matter.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.158
    
                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 5, Section 17.0, with the addition of the following:

    1. Mulik, J.D. and E. Sawicki. Ion Chromatographic Analysis of 
Environmental Pollutants. Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Inc. 
Vol. 2, 1979.
    2. Sawicki, E., J.D. Mulik, and E. Wittgenstein. Ion Chromatographic 
Analysis of Environmental Pollutants. Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor Science 
Publishers, Inc. Vol. 1. 1978.
    3. Siemer, D.D. Separation of Chloride and Bromide from Complex 
Matrices Prior to Ion Chromatographic Determination. Analytical 
Chemistry 52(12): 1874-1877. October 1980.
    4. Small, H., T.S. Stevens, and W.C. Bauman. Novel Ion Exchange 
Chromatographic Method Using Conductimetric Determination. Analytical 
Chemistry. 47(11):1801. 1975.

    18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

   Method 5G--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions From Wood 
               Heaters (Dilution Tunnel Sampling Location)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 4, Method 5, Method 5H, and Method 28.

[[Page 213]]

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of PM emissions from wood heaters.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 The exhaust from a wood heater is collected with a total 
collection hood, and is combined with ambient dilution air. Particulate 
matter is withdrawn proportionally from a single point in a sampling 
tunnel, and is collected on two glass fiber filters in series. The 
filters are maintained at a temperature of no greater than 32 [deg]C (90 
[deg]F). The particulate mass is determined gravimetrically after the 
removal of uncombined water.
    2.2 There are three sampling train approaches described in this 
method: (1) One dual-filter dry sampling train operated at about 0.015 
m\3\/min (0.5 cfm), (2) One dual-filter plus impingers sampling train 
operated at about 0.015 m\3\/min (0.5 cfm), and (3) two dual-filter dry 
sampling trains operated simultaneously at any flow rate. Options (2) 
and (3) are referenced in Section 16.0 of this method. The dual-filter 
dry sampling train equipment and operation, option (1), are described in 
detail in this method.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The following items are required for sample 
collection:
    6.1.1 Sampling Train. The sampling train configuration is shown in 
Figure 5G-1 and consists of the following components:
    6.1.1.1 Probe. Stainless steel (e.g., 316 or grade more corrosion 
resistant) or glass about 9.5 mm (\3/8\ in.) I.D., 0.6 m (24 in.) in 
length. If made of stainless steel, the probe shall be constructed from 
seamless tubing.
    6.1.1.2 Pitot Tube. Type S, as described in Section 6.1 of Method 2. 
The Type S pitot tube assembly shall have a known coefficient, 
determined as outlined in Method 2, Section 10. Alternatively, a 
standard pitot may be used as described in Method 2, Section 6.1.2.
    6.1.1.3 Differential Pressure Gauge. Inclined manometer or 
equivalent device, as described in Method 2, Section 6.2. One manometer 
shall be used for velocity head ([Delta]p) readings and another 
(optional) for orifice differential pressure readings ([Delta]H).
    6.1.1.4 Filter Holders. Two each made of borosilicate glass, 
stainless steel, or Teflon, with a glass frit or stainless steel filter 
support and a silicone rubber, Teflon, or Viton gasket. The holder 
design shall provide a positive seal against leakage from the outside or 
around the filters. The filter holders shall be placed in series with 
the backup filter holder located 25 to 100 mm (1 to 4 in.) downstream 
from the primary filter holder. The filter holder shall be capable of 
holding a filter with a 100 mm (4 in.) diameter, except as noted in 
Section 16.
    6.1.1.5 Filter Temperature Monitoring System. A temperature sensor 
capable of measuring temperature to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
[deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 [deg]F). The sensor shall be installed 
at the exit side of the front filter holder so that the sensing tip of 
the temperature sensor is in direct contact with the sample gas or in a 
thermowell as shown in Figure 5G-1. The temperature sensor shall comply 
with the calibration specifications in Method 2, Section 10.3. 
Alternatively, the sensing tip of the temperature sensor may be 
installed at the inlet side of the front filter holder.
    6.1.1.6 Dryer. Any system capable of removing water from the sample 
gas to less than 1.5 percent moisture (volume percent) prior to the 
metering system. The system shall include a temperature sensor for 
demonstrating that sample gas temperature exiting the dryer is less than 
20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F).
    6.1.1.7 Metering System. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.9.
    6.1.2 Barometer. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.2.
    6.1.3 Dilution Tunnel Gas Temperature Measurement. A temperature 
sensor capable of measuring temperature to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 [deg]F).
    6.1.4 Dilution Tunnel. The dilution tunnel apparatus is shown in 
Figure 5G-2 and consists of the following components:
    6.1.4.1 Hood. Constructed of steel with a minimum diameter of 0.3 m 
(1 ft) on the large end and a standard 0.15 to 0.3 m (0.5 to 1 ft) 
coupling capable of connecting to standard 0.15 to 0.3 m (0.5 to 1 ft) 
stove pipe on the small end.
    6.1.4.2 90[deg] Elbows. Steel 90[deg] elbows, 0.15 to 0.3 m (0.5 to 
1 ft) in diameter for connecting mixing duct, straight duct and optional 
damper assembly. There shall be at least two 90[deg] elbows upstream of 
the sampling section (see Figure 5G-2).
    6.1.4.3 Straight Duct. Steel, 0.15 to 0.3 m (0.5 to 1 ft) in 
diameter to provide the ducting for the dilution apparatus upstream of

[[Page 214]]

the sampling section. Steel duct, 0.15 m (0.5 ft) in diameter shall be 
used for the sampling section. In the sampling section, at least 1.2 m 
(4 ft) downstream of the elbow, shall be two holes (velocity traverse 
ports) at 90[deg] to each other of sufficient size to allow entry of the 
pitot for traverse measurements. At least 1.2 m (4 ft) downstream of the 
velocity traverse ports, shall be one hole (sampling port) of sufficient 
size to allow entry of the sampling probe. Ducts of larger diameter may 
be used for the sampling section, provided the specifications for 
minimum gas velocity and the dilution rate range shown in Section 8 are 
maintained. The length of duct from the hood inlet to the sampling ports 
shall not exceed 9.1 m (30 ft).
    6.1.4.4 Mixing Baffles. Steel semicircles (two) attached at 90[deg] 
to the duct axis on opposite sides of the duct midway between the two 
elbows upstream of sampling section. The space between the baffles shall 
be about 0.3 m (1 ft).
    6.1.4.5 Blower. Squirrel cage or other fan capable of extracting gas 
from the dilution tunnel of sufficient flow to maintain the velocity and 
dilution rate specifications in Section 8 and exhausting the gas to the 
atmosphere.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are required for sample 
recovery: probe brushes, wash bottles, sample storage containers, petri 
dishes, and funnel. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.2.1 through 6.2.4, and 
6.2.8, respectively.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. The following items are required for sample 
analysis: glass weighing dishes, desiccator, analytical balance, beakers 
(250-ml or smaller), hygrometer, and temperature sensor. Same as Method 
5, Sections 6.3.1 through 6.3.3 and 6.3.5 through 6.3.7, respectively.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 Filters. Glass fiber filters with a minimum diameter of 100 mm 
(4 in.), without organic binder, exhibiting at least 99.95 percent 
efficiency (<0.05 percent penetration) on 0.3-micron dioctyl phthalate 
smoke particles. Gelman A/E 61631 has been found acceptable for this 
purpose.
    7.1.2 Stopcock Grease. Same as Method 5, Section 7.1.5. 7.2 Sample 
Recovery. Acetone-reagent grade, same as Method 5, Section 7.2.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. Two reagents are required for the sample 
analysis:
    7.3.1 Acetone. Same as in Section 7.2.
    7.3.2 Desiccant. Anhydrous calcium sulfate, calcium chloride, or 
silica gel, indicating type.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Dilution Tunnel Assembly and Cleaning. A schematic of a dilution 
tunnel is shown in Figure 5G-2. The dilution tunnel dimensions and other 
features are described in Section 6.1.4. Assemble the dilution tunnel, 
sealing joints and seams to prevent air leakage. Clean the dilution 
tunnel with an appropriately sized wire chimney brush before each 
certification test.
    8.2 Draft Determination. Prepare the wood heater as in Method 28, 
Section 6.2.1. Locate the dilution tunnel hood centrally over the wood 
heater stack exhaust. Operate the dilution tunnel blower at the flow 
rate to be used during the test run. Measure the draft imposed on the 
wood heater by the dilution tunnel (i.e., the difference in draft 
measured with and without the dilution tunnel operating) as described in 
Method 28, Section 6.2.3. Adjust the distance between the top of the 
wood heater stack exhaust and the dilution tunnel hood so that the 
dilution tunnel induced draft is less than 1.25 Pa (0.005 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O). Have no fire in the wood heater, close the wood heater 
doors, and open fully the air supply controls during this check and 
adjustment.
    8.3 Pretest Ignition. Same as Method 28, Section 8.7.
    8.4 Smoke Capture. During the pretest ignition period, operate the 
dilution tunnel and visually monitor the wood heater stack exhaust. 
Operate the wood heater with the doors closed and determine that 100 
percent of the exhaust gas is collected by the dilution tunnel hood. If 
less than 100 percent of the wood heater exhaust gas is collected, 
adjust the distance between the wood heater stack and the dilution 
tunnel hood until no visible exhaust gas is escaping. Stop the pretest 
ignition period, and repeat the draft determination procedure described 
in Section 8.2.
    8.5 Velocity Measurements. During the pretest ignition period, 
conduct a velocity traverse to identify the point of average velocity. 
This single point shall be used for measuring velocity during the test 
run.
    8.5.1 Velocity Traverse. Measure the diameter of the duct at the 
velocity traverse port location through both ports. Calculate the duct 
area using the average of the two diameters. A pretest leak-check of 
pitot lines as in Method 2, Section 8.1, is recommended. Place the 
calibrated pitot tube at the centroid of the stack in either of the 
velocity traverse ports. Adjust the damper or similar device on the 
blower inlet until the velocity indicated by the pitot is approximately 
220 m/min (720 ft/min). Continue to read the [Delta]p and temperature 
until the velocity has remained constant (less than 5 percent change) 
for 1 minute. Once a constant velocity is obtained at the centroid of 
the

[[Page 215]]

duct, perform a velocity traverse as outlined in Method 2, Section 8.3 
using four points per traverse as outlined in Method 1. Measure the 
[Delta]p and tunnel temperature at each traverse point and record the 
readings. Calculate the total gas flow rate using calculations contained 
in Method 2, Section 12. Verify that the flow rate is 4 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.40 dscm/min (140 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 dscf/min); 
if not, readjust the damper, and repeat the velocity traverse. The 
moisture may be assumed to be 4 percent (100 percent relative humidity 
at 85 [deg]F). Direct moisture measurements (e.g., according to Method 
4) are also permissible.

    Note: If burn rates exceed 3 kg/hr (6.6 lb/hr), dilution tunnel duct 
flow rates greater than 4 dscm/min (140 dscfm) and sampling section duct 
diameters larger than 150 mm (6 in.) are allowed. If larger ducts or 
flow rates are used, the sampling section velocity shall be at least 220 
m/min (720 fpm). In order to ensure measurable particulate mass catch, 
it is recommended that the ratio of the average mass flow rate in the 
dilution tunnel to the average fuel burn rate be less than 150:1 if 
larger duct sizes or flow rates are used.

    8.5.2 Testing Velocity Measurements. After obtaining velocity 
traverse results that meet the flow rate requirements, choose a point of 
average velocity and place the pitot and temperature sensor at that 
location in the duct. Alternatively, locate the pitot and the 
temperature sensor at the duct centroid and calculate a velocity 
correction factor for the centroidal position. Mount the pitot to ensure 
no movement during the test run and seal the port holes to prevent any 
air leakage. Align the pitot opening to be parallel with the duct axis 
at the measurement point. Check that this condition is maintained during 
the test run (about 30-minute intervals). Monitor the temperature and 
velocity during the pretest ignition period to ensure that the proper 
flow rate is maintained. Make adjustments to the dilution tunnel flow 
rate as necessary.
    8.6 Pretest Preparation. Same as Method 5, Section 8.1.
    8.7 Preparation of Sampling Train. During preparation and assembly 
of the sampling train, keep all openings where contamination can occur 
covered until just prior to assembly or until sampling is about to 
begin.
    Using a tweezer or clean disposable surgical gloves, place one 
labeled (identified) and weighed filter in each of the filter holders. 
Be sure that each filter is properly centered and that the gasket is 
properly placed so as to prevent the sample gas stream from 
circumventing the filter. Check each filter for tears after assembly is 
completed.
    Mark the probe with heat resistant tape or by some other method to 
denote the proper distance into the stack or duct. Set up the train as 
shown in Figure 5G-1.
    8.8 Leak-Check Procedures.
    8.8.1 Leak-Check of Metering System Shown in Figure 5G-1. That 
portion of the sampling train from the pump to the orifice meter shall 
be leak-checked prior to initial use and after each certification or 
audit test. Leakage after the pump will result in less volume being 
recorded than is actually sampled. Use the procedure described in Method 
5, Section 8.4.1. Similar leak-checks shall be conducted for other types 
of metering systems (i.e., without orifice meters).
    8.8.2 Pretest Leak-Check. A pretest leak-check of the sampling train 
is recommended, but not required. If the pretest leak check is 
conducted, the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 8.4.2 should be 
used. A vacuum of 130 mm Hg (5 in. Hg) may be used instead of 380 mm Hg 
(15 in. Hg).
    8.8.3 Post-Test Leak-Check. A leak-check of the sampling train is 
mandatory at the conclusion of each test run. The leak-check shall be 
performed in accordance with the procedures outlined in Method 5, 
Section 8.4.2. A vacuum of 130 mm Hg (5 in. Hg) or the highest vacuum 
measured during the test run, whichever is greater, may be used instead 
of 380 mm Hg (15 in. Hg).
    8.9 Preliminary Determinations. Determine the pressure, temperature 
and the average velocity of the tunnel gases as in Section 8.5. Moisture 
content of diluted tunnel gases is assumed to be 4 percent for making 
flow rate calculations; the moisture content may be measured directly as 
in Method 4.
    8.10 Sampling Train Operation. Position the probe inlet at the stack 
centroid, and block off the openings around the probe and porthole to 
prevent unrepresentative dilution of the gas stream. Be careful not to 
bump the probe into the stack wall when removing or inserting the probe 
through the porthole; this minimizes the chance of extracting deposited 
material.
    8.10.1 Begin sampling at the start of the test run as defined in 
Method 28, Section 8.8.1. During the test run, maintain a sample flow 
rate proportional to the dilution tunnel flow rate (within 10 percent of 
the initial proportionality ratio) and a filter holder temperature of no 
greater than 32 [deg]C (90 [deg]F). The initial sample flow rate shall 
be approximately 0.015 m\3\/min (0.5 cfm).
    8.10.2 For each test run, record the data required on a data sheet 
such as the one shown in Figure 5G-3. Be sure to record the initial dry 
gas meter reading. Record the dry gas meter readings at the beginning 
and end of each sampling time increment and when sampling is halted. 
Take other readings as indicated on Figure 5G-3 at least once each 10 
minutes during the test run. Since the manometer level and zero may 
drift because of vibrations and temperature changes, make periodic 
checks during the test run.
    8.10.3 For the purposes of proportional sampling rate 
determinations, data from

[[Page 216]]

calibrated flow rate devices, such as glass rotameters, may be used in 
lieu of incremental dry gas meter readings. Proportional rate 
calculation procedures must be revised, but acceptability limits remain 
the same.
    8.10.4 During the test run, make periodic adjustments to keep the 
temperature between (or upstream of) the filters at the proper level. Do 
not change sampling trains during the test run.
    8.10.5 At the end of the test run (see Method 28, Section 6.4.6), 
turn off the coarse adjust valve, remove the probe from the stack, turn 
off the pump, record the final dry gas meter reading, and conduct a 
post-test leak-check, as outlined in Section 8.8.2. Also, leak-check the 
pitot lines as described in Method 2, Section 8.1; the lines must pass 
this leak-check in order to validate the velocity head data.
    8.11 Calculation of Proportional Sampling Rate. Calculate percent 
proportionality (see Section 12.7) to determine whether the run was 
valid or another test run should be made.
    8.12 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7, with the 
exception of the following:
    8.12.1 An acetone blank volume of about 50-ml or more may be used.
    8.12.2 Treat the samples as follows:
    8.12.2.1 Container Nos. 1 and 1A. Treat the two filters according to 
the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 8.7.6.1. The filters may be 
stored either in a single container or in separate containers. Use the 
sum of the filter tare weights to determine the sample mass collected.
    8.12.2.3 Container No. 2.
    8.12.2.3.1 Taking care to see that dust on the outside of the probe 
or other exterior surfaces does not get into the sample, quantitatively 
recover particulate matter or any condensate from the probe and filter 
holders by washing and brushing these components with acetone and 
placing the wash in a labeled glass container. At least three cycles of 
brushing and rinsing are required.
    8.12.2.3.2 Between sampling runs, keep brushes clean and protected 
from contamination.
    8.12.2.3.3 After all acetone washings and particulate matter have 
been collected in the sample containers, tighten the lids on the sample 
containers so that the acetone will not leak out when transferred to the 
laboratory weighing area. Mark the height of the fluid levels to 
determine whether leakage occurs during transport. Label the containers 
clearly to identify contents.
    8.13 Sample Transport. Whenever possible, containers should be 
shipped in such a way that they remain upright at all times.

    Note: Requirements for capping and transport of sample containers 
are not applicable if sample recovery and analysis occur in the same 
room.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.8, 10.1-10.4................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak     measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.5..........................  Analytical         Ensure accurate and
                                 balance            precise measurement
                                 calibration.       of collected
                                                    particulate.
16.2.5........................  Simultaneous,      Ensure precision of
                                 dual-train         measured particulate
                                 sample             concentration.
                                 collection.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory record of all calibrations.

    10.1 Pitot Tube. The Type S pitot tube assembly shall be calibrated 
according to the procedure outlined in Method 2, Section 10.1, prior to 
the first certification test and checked semiannually, thereafter. A 
standard pitot need not be calibrated but shall be inspected and 
cleaned, if necessary, prior to each certification test.
    10.2 Volume Metering System.
    10.2.1 Initial and Periodic Calibration. Before its initial use and 
at least semiannually thereafter, calibrate the volume metering system 
as described in Method 5, Section 10.3.1, except that the wet test meter 
with a capacity of 3.0 liters/rev (0.1 ft\3\/rev) may be used. Other 
liquid displacement systems accurate to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
percent, may be used as calibration standards.

    Note: Procedures and equipment specified in Method 5, Section 16.0, 
for alternative calibration standards, including calibrated dry gas 
meters and critical orifices, are allowed for calibrating the dry gas 
meter in the sampling train. A dry gas meter used as a calibration 
standard shall be recalibrated at least once annually.

    10.2.2 Calibration After Use. After each certification or audit test 
(four or more test runs conducted on a wood heater at the four burn 
rates specified in Method 28), check calibration of the metering system 
by performing three calibration runs at a single, intermediate flow rate 
as described in Method 5, Section 10.3.2.


[[Page 217]]


    Note: Procedures and equipment specified in Method 5, Section 16.0, 
for alternative calibration standards are allowed for the post-test dry 
gas meter calibration check.

    10.2.3 Acceptable Variation in Calibration. If the dry gas meter 
coefficient values obtained before and after a certification test differ 
by more than 5 percent, the certification test shall either be voided 
and repeated, or calculations for the certification test shall be 
performed using whichever meter coefficient value (i.e., before or 
after) gives the lower value of total sample volume.
    10.3 Temperature Sensors. Use the procedure in Method 2, Section 
10.3, to calibrate temperature sensors before the first certification or 
audit test and at least semiannually, thereafter.
    10.4 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer before the 
first certification test and at least semiannually, thereafter. If a 
mercury barometer is used, no calibration is necessary. Follow the 
manufacturer's instructions for operation.
    10.5 Analytical Balance. Perform a multipoint calibration (at least 
five points spanning the operational range) of the analytical balance 
before the first certification test and semiannually, thereafter. Before 
each certification test, audit the balance by weighing at least one 
calibration weight (class F) that corresponds to 50 to 150 percent of 
the weight of one filter. If the scale cannot reproduce the value of the 
calibration weight to within 0.1 mg, conduct the multipoint calibration 
before use.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Record the data required on a sheet such as the one shown in 
Figure 5G-4. Use the same analytical balance for determining tare 
weights and final sample weights.
    11.2 Handle each sample container as follows:
    11.2.1 Container Nos. 1 and 1A. Treat the two filters according to 
the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 11.2.1.
    11.2.2 Container No. 2. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.2, except 
that the beaker may be smaller than 250 ml.
    11.2.3 Acetone Blank Container. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.4, 
except that the beaker may be smaller than 250 ml.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after the 
final calculation. Other forms of the equations may be used as long as 
they give equivalent results.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream, proportion by volume 
(assumed to be 0.04).
c<INF>s</INF>=Concentration of particulate matter in stack gas, dry 
basis, corrected to standard conditions, g/dscm (gr/dscf).
E=Particulate emission rate, g/hr (lb/hr).
E<INF>adj</INF>=Adjusted particulate emission rate, g/hr (lb/hr).
L<INF>a</INF>=Maximum acceptable leakage rate for either a pretest or 
post-test leak-check, equal to 0.00057 m\3\/min (0.020 cfm) or 4 percent 
of the average sampling rate, whichever is less.
L<INF>p</INF>=Leakage rate observed during the post-test leak-check, 
m\3\/min (cfm).
m<INF>a</INF>=Mass of residue of acetone blank after evaporation, mg.
m<INF>aw</INF>=Mass of residue from acetone wash after evaporation, mg.
m<INF>n</INF>=Total amount of particulate matter collected, mg.
M<INF>w</INF>=Molecular weight of water, 18.0 g/g-mole (18.0 lb/lb-
mole).
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at the sampling site, mm Hg (in. 
Hg).
PR=Percent of proportional sampling rate.
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute gas pressure in dilution tunnel, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Average gas flow rate in dilution tunnel, calculated as 
in Method 2, Equation 2-8, dscm/hr (dscf/hr).
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute average dry gas meter temperature (see Figure 5G-
3), [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>mi</INF>=Absolute average dry gas meter temperature during each 
10-minute interval, i, of the test run, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>s</INF>=Absolute average gas temperature in the dilution tunnel 
(see Figure 5G-3), [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>si</INF>=Absolute average gas temperature in the dilution tunnel 
during each 10 minute interval, i, of the test run, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of acetone blank, ml.
V<INF>aw</INF>=Volume of acetone used in wash, ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by dry gas meter, dcm 
(dcf).
V<INF>mi</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by dry gas meter during 
each 10-minute interval, i, of the test run, dcm.
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>s</INF>=Average gas velocity in the dilution tunnel, calculated by 
Method 2, Equation 2-7, m/sec (ft/sec). The dilution tunnel dry gas 
molecular weight may be assumed to be 29 g/g mole (lb/lb mole).
V<INF>si</INF>=Average gas velocity in dilution tunnel during each 10-
minute interval, i, of the test run, calculated by Method 2, Equation 2-
7, m/sec (ft/sec).
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
[Delta]H=Average pressure differential across the orifice meter, if used 
(see Figure 5G-2), mm H\2\O (in. H\2\O).
U=Total sampling time, min.

[[Page 218]]

10=10 minutes, length of first sampling period.
13.6=Specific gravity of mercury.
100=Conversion to percent.
    12.2 Dry Gas Volume. Same as Method 5, Section 12.2, except that 
component changes are not allowable.
    12.3 Solvent Wash Blank.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.159
    
    12.4 Total Particulate Weight. Determine the total particulate 
catch, mn, from the sum of the weights obtained from Container Nos. 1, 
1A, and 2, less the acetone blank (see Figure 5G-4).
    12.5 Particulate Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.160
    
Where:
K<INF>2</INF>=0.001 g/mg for metric units.
    =0.0154 gr/mg for English units.
    12.6 Particulate Emission Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.161
    
    Note: Particulate emission rate results produced using the sampling 
train described in Section 6 and shown in Figure 5G-1 shall be adjusted 
for reporting purposes by the following method adjustment factor:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.162

Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=constant, 1.82 for metric units.
    =constant, 0.643 for English units.

    12.7 Proportional Rate Variation. Calculate PR for each 10-minute 
interval, i, of the test run.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.163

    Alternate calculation procedures for proportional rate variation may 
be used if other sample flow rate data (e.g., orifice flow meters or 
rotameters) are monitored to maintain proportional sampling rates. The 
proportional rate variations shall be calculated for each 10-minute 
interval by comparing the stack to nozzle velocity ratio for each 10-
minute interval to the average stack to nozzle velocity ratio for the 
test run. Proportional rate variation may be calculated for intervals 
shorter than 10 minutes with appropriate revisions to Equation 5G-5. If 
no more than 10 percent of the PR values for all the intervals exceed 90 
percent <= PR <= 110 percent, and if no PR value for any interval 
exceeds 80 percent <= PR <= 120 percent, the results are acceptable. If 
the PR values for the test run are judged to be unacceptable, report the 
test run emission results, but do not include the results in calculating 
the weighted average emission rate, and repeat the test run.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Method 5H Sampling Train. The sampling train and sample 
collection, recovery, and analysis procedures described in Method 5H, 
Sections 6.1.1, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.10, 8.11, and 11.0, respectively, may 
be used in lieu of similar sections in Method 5G. Operation of the 
Method 5H sampling train in the dilution tunnel is as described in 
Section 8.10 of this method. Filter temperatures and condenser 
conditions are as described in Method 5H. No adjustment to the measured 
particulate matter emission rate (Equation 5G-4, Section 12.6) is to be 
applied to the particulate emission rate measured by this alternative 
method.
    16.2 Dual Sampling Trains. Two sampling trains may be operated 
simultaneously at sample flow rates other than that specified in Section 
8.10, provided that the following specifications are met.
    16.2.1 Sampling Train. The sampling train configuration shall be the 
same as specified in Section 6.1.1, except the probe, filter, and filter 
holder need not be the same sizes as specified in the applicable 
sections. Filter holders of plastic materials such as Nalgene or 
polycarbonate materials may be used (the Gelman 1119 filter holder has 
been found suitable for this purpose). With such materials, it is 
recommended that solvents not be used in sample recovery. The filter 
face velocity shall not exceed 150 mm/sec (30 ft/min) during the test 
run. The dry gas meter shall be calibrated for the same flow rate range 
as encountered during the test runs. Two separate, complete sampling 
trains are required for each test run.

[[Page 219]]

    16.2.2 Probe Location. Locate the two probes in the dilution tunnel 
at the same level (see Section 6.1.4.3). Two sample ports are necessary. 
Locate the probe inlets within the 50 mm (2 in.) diameter centroidal 
area of the dilution tunnel no closer than 25 mm (1 in.) apart.
    16.2.3 Sampling Train Operation. Operate the sampling trains as 
specified in Section 8.10, maintaining proportional sampling rates and 
starting and stopping the two sampling trains simultaneously. The pitot 
values as described in Section 8.5.2 shall be used to adjust sampling 
rates in both sampling trains.
    16.2.4 Recovery and Analysis of Sample. Recover and analyze the 
samples from the two sampling trains separately, as specified in 
Sections 8.12 and 11.0, respectively.
    16.2.4.1 For this alternative procedure, the probe and filter holder 
assembly may be weighed without sample recovery (use no solvents) 
described above in order to determine the sample weight gains. For this 
approach, weigh the clean, dry probe and filter holder assembly upstream 
of the front filter (without filters) to the nearest 0.1 mg to establish 
the tare weights. The filter holder section between the front and second 
filter need not be weighed. At the end of the test run, carefully clean 
the outside of the probe, cap the ends, and identify the sample (label). 
Remove the filters from the filter holder assemblies as described for 
container Nos. 1 and 1A in Section 8.12.2.1. Reassemble the filter 
holder assembly, cap the ends, identify the sample (label), and transfer 
all the samples to the laboratory weighing area for final weighing. 
Requirements for capping and transport of sample containers are not 
applicable if sample recovery and analysis occur in the same room.
    16.2.4.2 For this alternative procedure, filters may be weighed 
directly without a petri dish. If the probe and filter holder assembly 
are to be weighed to determine the sample weight, rinse the probe with 
acetone to remove moisture before desiccating prior to the test run. 
Following the test run, transport the probe and filter holder to the 
desiccator, and uncap the openings of the probe and the filter holder 
assembly. Desiccate for 24 hours and weigh to a constant weight. Report 
the results to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    16.2.5 Calculations. Calculate an emission rate (Section 12.6) for 
the sample from each sampling train separately and determine the average 
emission rate for the two values. The two emission rates shall not 
differ by more than 7.5 percent from the average emission rate, or 7.5 
percent of the weighted average emission rate limit in the applicable 
subpart of the regulations, whichever is greater. If this specification 
is not met, the results are unacceptable. Report the results, but do not 
include the results in calculating the weighted average emission rate. 
Repeat the test run until acceptable results are achieved, report the 
average emission rate for the acceptable test run, and use the average 
in calculating the weighted average emission rate.

                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 5, Section 17.0, References 1 through 11, with the 
addition of the following:

    1. Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. Standard Method for 
Measuring the Emissions and Efficiencies of Woodstoves. June 8, 1984. 
Pursuant to Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter 340, Division 21.
    2. American Society for Testing and Materials. Proposed Test Methods 
for Heating Performance and Emissions of Residential Wood-fired Closed 
Combustion-Chamber Heating Appliances. E-6 Proposal P 180. August 1986.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 220]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.164


[[Page 221]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.165


[[Page 222]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.166


[[Page 223]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.167

   Method 5H--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions From Wood 
                      Heaters From a Stack Location

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 2, Method 3, Method 5, 
Method 5G, Method 6, Method 6C, Method 16A, and Method 28.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.

[[Page 224]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of PM and condensible emissions from wood heaters.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Particulate matter is withdrawn proportionally from the wood 
heater exhaust and is collected on two glass fiber filters separated by 
impingers immersed in an ice water bath. The first filter is maintained 
at a temperature of no greater than 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F). The second 
filter and the impinger system are cooled such that the temperature of 
the gas exiting the second filter is no greater than 20 [deg]C (68 
[deg]F). The particulate mass collected in the probe, on the filters, 
and in the impingers is determined gravimetrically after the removal of 
uncombined water.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as in Method 6C, Section 3.0.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The following items are required for sample 
collection:
    6.1.1 Sampling Train. The sampling train configuration is shown in 
Figure 5H-1. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1, with the exception of the 
following:
    6.1.1.1 Probe Nozzle. The nozzle is optional; a straight sampling 
probe without a nozzle is an acceptable alternative.
    6.1.1.2 Probe Liner. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.2, except that 
the maximum length of the sample probe shall be 0.6 m (2 ft) and probe 
heating is optional.
    6.1.1.3 Filter Holders. Two each of borosilicate glass, with a glass 
frit or stainless steel filter support and a silicone rubber, Teflon, or 
Viton gasket. The holder design shall provide a positive seal against 
leakage from the outside or around the filter. The front filter holder 
shall be attached immediately at the outlet of the probe and prior to 
the first impinger. The second filter holder shall be attached on the 
outlet of the third impinger and prior to the inlet of the fourth 
(silica gel) impinger.
    6.1.2 Barometer. Same as Method 5, Section 6.2.
    6.1.3 Stack Gas Flow Rate Measurement System. A schematic of an 
example test system is shown in Figure 5H-2. The flow rate measurement 
system consists of the following components:
    6.1.3.1 Sample Probe. A glass or stainless steel sampling probe.
    6.1.3.2 Gas Conditioning System. A high density filter to remove 
particulate matter and a condenser capable of lowering the dew point of 
the gas to less than 5 [deg]C (40 [deg]F). Desiccant, such as Drierite, 
may be used to dry the sample gas. Do not use silica gel.
    6.1.3.3 Pump. An inert (e.g., Teflon or stainless steel heads) 
sampling pump capable of delivering more than the total amount of sample 
required in the manufacturer's instructions for the individual 
instruments. A means of controlling the analyzer flow rate and a device 
for determining proper sample flow rate (e.g., precision rotameter, 
pressure gauge downstream of all flow controls) shall be provided at the 
analyzer. The requirements for measuring and controlling the analyzer 
flow rate are not applicable if data are presented that demonstrate that 
the analyzer is insensitive to flow variations over the range 
encountered during the test.
    6.1.3.4 Carbon Monoxide (CO) Analyzer. Any analyzer capable of 
providing a measure of CO in the range of 0 to 10 percent by volume at 
least once every 10 minutes.
    6.1.3.5 Carbon Dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) Analyzer. Any analyzer 
capable of providing a measure of CO<INF>2</INF> in the range of 0 to 25 
percent by volume at least once every 10 minutes.

    Note: Analyzers with ranges less than those specified above may be 
used provided actual concentrations do not exceed the range of the 
analyzer.

    6.1.3.6 Manifold. A sampling tube capable of delivering the sample 
gas to two analyzers and handling an excess of the total amount used by 
the analyzers. The excess gas is exhausted through a separate port.
    6.1.3.7 Recorders (optional). To provide a permanent record of the 
analyzer outputs.
    6.1.4 Proportional Gas Flow Rate System. To monitor stack flow rate 
changes and provide a measurement that can be used to adjust and 
maintain particulate sampling flow rates proportional to the stack gas 
flow rate. A schematic of the proportional flow rate system is shown in 
Figure 5H-2 and consists of the following components:
    6.1.4.1 Tracer Gas Injection System. To inject a known concentration 
of sulfur dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>) into the flue. The tracer gas 
injection system consists of a cylinder of SO<INF>2</INF>, a gas 
cylinder regulator, a stainless steel needle valve or flow controller, a 
nonreactive (stainless steel and glass) rotameter, and an injection loop 
to disperse the SO<INF>2</INF> evenly in the flue.

[[Page 225]]

    6.1.4.2 Sample Probe. A glass or stainless steel sampling probe.
    6.1.4.3 Gas Conditioning System. A combustor as described in Method 
16A, Sections 6.1.5 and 6.1.6, followed by a high density filter to 
remove particulate matter, and a condenser capable of lowering the dew 
point of the gas to less than 5 [deg]C (40 [deg]F). Desiccant, such as 
Drierite, may be used to dry the sample gas. Do not use silica gel.
    6.1.4.4 Pump. Same as described in Section 6.1.3.3.
    6.1.4.5 SO<INF>2</INF> Analyzer. Any analyzer capable of providing a 
measure of the SO<INF>2</INF> concentration in the range of 0 to 1,000 
ppm by volume (or other range necessary to measure the SO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration) at least once every 10 minutes.
    6.1.4.6 Recorder (optional). To provide a permanent record of the 
analyzer outputs.

    Note: Other tracer gas systems, including helium gas systems, are 
acceptable for determination of instantaneous proportional sampling 
rates.

    6.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 6.2.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 5, Section 6.3, with the 
addition of the following:
    6.3.1 Separatory Funnel. Glass or Teflon, 500-ml or greater.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 5, Section 7.1, including 
deionized distilled water.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 7.2.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. The following reagents and standards are 
required for sample analysis:
    7.3.1 Acetone. Same as Method 5 Section 7.2.
    7.3.2 Dichloromethane (Methylene Chloride). Reagent grade, <0.001 
percent residue in glass bottles.
    7.3.3 Desiccant. Anhydrous calcium sulfate, calcium chloride, or 
silica gel, indicating type.
    7.3.4 Cylinder Gases. For the purposes of this procedure, span value 
is defined as the upper limit of the range specified for each analyzer 
as described in Section 6.1.3.4 or 6.1.3.5. If an analyzer with a range 
different from that specified in this method is used, the span value 
shall be equal to the upper limit of the range for the analyzer used 
(see Note in Section 6.1.3.5).
    7.3.4.1 Calibration Gases. The calibration gases for the 
CO<INF>2</INF>, CO, and SO<INF>2</INF> analyzers shall be CO<INF>2</INF> 
in nitrogen (N<INF>2</INF>), CO in N<INF>2</INF>, and SO<INF>2</INF> in 
N<INF>2</INF>, respectively. CO<INF>2</INF> and CO calibration gases may 
be combined in a single cylinder. Use three calibration gases as 
specified in Method 6C, Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.3.
    7.3.4.2 SO<INF>2</INF> Injection Gas. A known concentration of 
SO<INF>2</INF> in N<INF>2</INF>. The concentration must be at least 2 
percent SO<INF>2</INF> with a maximum of 100 percent SO<INF>2</INF>.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Pretest Preparation. Same as Method 5, Section 8.1.
    8.2 Calibration Gas and SO<INF>2</INF> Injection Gas Concentration 
Verification, Sampling System Bias Check, Response Time Test, and Zero 
and Calibration Drift Tests. Same as Method 6C, Sections 8.2.1, 8.2.3, 
8.2.4, and 8.5, respectively, except that for verification of CO and 
CO<INF>2</INF> gas concentrations, substitute Method 3 for Method 6.
    8.3 Preliminary Determinations.
    8.3.1 Sampling Location. The sampling location for the particulate 
sampling probe shall be 2.45 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.15 m (8 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 ft) above the platform upon which the wood heater is 
placed (i.e., the top of the scale).
    8.3.2 Sampling Probe and Nozzle. Select a nozzle, if used, sized for 
the range of velocity heads, such that it is not necessary to change the 
nozzle size in order to maintain proportional sampling rates. During the 
run, do not change the nozzle size. Select a suitable probe liner and 
probe length to effect minimum blockage.
    8.4 Preparation of Particulate Sampling Train. Same as Method 5, 
Section 8.3, with the exception of the following:
    8.4.1 The train should be assembled as shown in Figure 5H-1.
    8.4.2 A glass cyclone may not be used between the probe and filter 
holder.
    8.5 Leak-Check Procedures.
    8.5.1 Leak-Check of Metering System Shown in Figure 5H-1. That 
portion of the sampling train from the pump to the orifice meter shall 
be leak-checked after each certification or audit test. Use the 
procedure described in Method 5, Section 8.4.1.
    8.5.2 Pretest Leak-Check. A pretest leak-check of the sampling train 
is recommended, but not required. If the pretest leak-check is 
conducted, the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 8.5.2 should be 
used. A vacuum of 130 mm Hg (5 in. Hg) may be used instead of 380 mm Hg 
(15 in. Hg).
    8.5.2 Leak-Checks During Sample Run. If, during the sampling run, a 
component (e.g., filter assembly or impinger) change becomes necessary, 
conduct a leak-check as described in Method 5, Section 8.4.3.
    8.5.3 Post-Test Leak-Check. A leak-check is mandatory at the 
conclusion of each sampling run. The leak-check shall be performed in 
accordance with the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 8.4.4, 
except that a vacuum of 130 mm Hg (5 in. Hg) or the greatest vacuum 
measured during the test run, whichever is greater, may be used instead 
of 380 mm Hg (15 in. Hg).

[[Page 226]]

    8.6 Tracer Gas Procedure. A schematic of the tracer gas injection 
and sampling systems is shown in Figure 5H-2.
    8.6.1 SO<INF>2</INF> Injection Probe. Install the SO<INF>2</INF> 
injection probe and dispersion loop in the stack at a location 2.9 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.15 m (9.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 ft) above 
the sampling platform.
    8.6.2 SO<INF>2</INF> Sampling Probe. Install the SO<INF>2</INF> 
sampling probe at the centroid of the stack at a location 4.1 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.15 m (13.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 ft) above the 
sampling platform.
    8.7 Flow Rate Measurement System. A schematic of the flow rate 
measurement system is shown in Figure 5H-2. Locate the flow rate 
measurement sampling probe at the centroid of the stack at a location 
2.3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 m (7.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ft) above 
the sampling platform.
    8.8 Tracer Gas Procedure. Within 1 minute after closing the wood 
heater door at the start of the test run (as defined in Method 28, 
Section 8.8.1), meter a known concentration of SO<INF>2</INF> tracer gas 
at a constant flow rate into the wood heater stack. Monitor the 
SO<INF>2</INF> concentration in the stack, and record the SO<INF>2</INF> 
concentrations at 10-minute intervals or more often. Adjust the 
particulate sampling flow rate proportionally to the SO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration changes using Equation 5H-6 (e.g., the SO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration at the first 10-minute reading is measured to be 100 ppm; 
the next 10 minute SO<INF>2</INF> concentration is measured to be 75 
ppm: the particulate sample flow rate is adjusted from the initial 0.15 
cfm to 0.20 cfm). A check for proportional rate variation shall be made 
at the completion of the test run using Equation 5H-10.
    8.9 Volumetric Flow Rate Procedure. Apply stoichiometric 
relationships to the wood combustion process in determining the exhaust 
gas flow rate as follows:
    8.9.1 Test Fuel Charge Weight. Record the test fuel charge weight 
(wet) as specified in Method 28, Section 8.8.2. The wood is assumed to 
have the following weight percent composition: 51 percent carbon, 7.3 
percent hydrogen, 41 percent oxygen. Record the wood moisture for each 
fuel charge as described in Method 28, Section 8.6.5. The ash is assumed 
to have negligible effect on associated C, H, and O concentrations after 
the test burn.
    8.9.2 Measured Values. Record the CO and CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentrations in the stack on a dry basis every 10 minutes during the 
test run or more often. Average these values for the test run. Use as a 
mole fraction (e.g., 10 percent CO<INF>2</INF> is recorded as 0.10) in 
the calculations to express total flow (see Equation 5H-6).
    8.10 Sampling Train Operation.
    8.10.1 For each run, record the data required on a data sheet such 
as the one shown in Figure 5H-3. Be sure to record the initial dry gas 
meter reading. Record the dry gas meter readings at the beginning and 
end of each sampling time increment, when changes in flow rates are 
made, before and after each leak-check, and when sampling is halted. 
Take other readings as indicated on Figure 5H-3 at least once each 10 
minutes during the test run.
    8.10.2 Remove the nozzle cap, verify that the filter and probe 
heating systems are up to temperature, and that the probe is properly 
positioned. Position the nozzle, if used, facing into gas stream, or the 
probe tip in the 50 mm (2 in.) centroidal area of the stack.
    8.10.3 Be careful not to bump the probe tip into the stack wall when 
removing or inserting the probe through the porthole; this minimizes the 
chance of extracting deposited material.
    8.10.4 When the probe is in position, block off the openings around 
the probe and porthole to prevent unrepresentative dilution of the gas 
stream.
    8.10.5 Begin sampling at the start of the test run as defined in 
Method 28, Section 8.8.1, start the sample pump, and adjust the sample 
flow rate to between 0.003 and 0.014 m\3\/min (0.1 and 0.5 cfm). Adjust 
the sample flow rate proportionally to the stack gas flow during the 
test run according to the procedures outlined in Section 8. Maintain a 
proportional sampling rate (within 10 percent of the desired value) and 
a filter holder temperature no greater than 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F).
    8.10.6 During the test run, make periodic adjustments to keep the 
temperature around the filter holder at the proper level. Add more ice 
to the impinger box and, if necessary, salt to maintain a temperature of 
less than 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) at the condenser/silica gel outlet.
    8.10.7 If the pressure drop across the filter becomes too high, 
making proportional sampling difficult to maintain, either filter may be 
replaced during a sample run. It is recommended that another complete 
filter assembly be used rather than attempting to change the filter 
itself. Before a new filter assembly is installed, conduct a leak-check 
(see Section 8.5.2). The total particulate weight shall include the 
summation of all filter assembly catches. The total time for changing 
sample train components shall not exceed 10 minutes. No more than one 
component change is allowed for any test run.
    8.10.8 At the end of the test run, turn off the coarse adjust valve, 
remove the probe and nozzle from the stack, turn off the pump, record 
the final dry gas meter reading, and conduct a post-test leak-check, as 
outlined in Section 8.5.3.
    8.11 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7, with the 
exception of the following:
    8.11.1 Blanks. The volume of the acetone blank may be about 50-ml, 
rather than 200-ml; a 200-ml water blank shall also be saved for 
analysis.
    8.11.2 Samples.

[[Page 227]]

    8.11.2.1 Container Nos. 1 and 1A. Treat the two filters according to 
the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 8.7.6.1. The filters may be 
stored either in a single container or in separate containers.
    8.11.2.2 Container No. 2. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.2, except 
that the container should not be sealed until the impinger rinse 
solution is added (see Section 8.10.2.4).
    8.11.2.3 Container No. 3. Treat the impingers as follows: Measure 
the liquid which is in the first three impingers to within 1-ml by using 
a graduated cylinder or by weighing it to within 0.5 g by using a 
balance (if one is available). Record the volume or weight of liquid 
present. This information is required to calculate the moisture content 
of the effluent gas. Transfer the water from the first, second, and 
third impingers to a glass container. Tighten the lid on the sample 
container so that water will not leak out.
    8.11.2.4 Rinse impingers and graduated cylinder, if used, with 
acetone three times or more. Avoid direct contact between the acetone 
and any stopcock grease or collection of any stopcock grease in the 
rinse solutions. Add these rinse solutions to sample Container No. 2.
    8.11.2.5 Container No. 4. Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.3
    8.12 Sample Transport. Whenever possible, containers should be 
transferred in such a way that they remain upright at all times.

    Note: Requirements for capping and transport of sample containers 
are not applicable if sample recovery and analysis occur in the same 
room.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2...........................  Sampling system    Ensures that bias
                                 bias check.        introduced by
                                                    measurement system,
                                                    minus analyzer, is
                                                    no greater than 3
                                                    percent of span.
8.2...........................  Analyzer zero and  Ensures that bias
                                 calibration        introduced by drift
                                 drift tests.       in the measurement
                                                    system output during
                                                    the run is no
                                                    greater than 3
                                                    percent of span.
8.5, 10.1, 12.13..............  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration;       sample volume.
                                 proportional
                                 sampling rate
                                 verification.
10.1..........................  Analytical         Ensure accurate and
                                 balance            precise measurement
                                 calibration.       of collected
                                                    particulate.
10.3..........................  Analyzer           Ensures that bias
                                 calibration        introduced by
                                 error check.       analyzer calibration
                                                    error is no greater
                                                    than 2 percent of
                                                    span.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory record of all calibrations.

    10.1 Volume Metering System, Temperature Sensors, Barometer, and 
Analytical Balance. Same as Method 5G, Sections 10.2 through 10.5, 
respectively.
    10.2 SO<INF>2</INF> Injection Rotameter. Calibrate the 
SO<INF>2</INF> injection rotameter system with a soap film flowmeter or 
similar direct volume measuring device with an accuracy of 2 percent. 
Operate the rotameter at a single reading for at least three calibration 
runs for 10 minutes each. When three consecutive calibration flow rates 
agree within 5 percent, average the three flow rates, mark the rotameter 
at the calibrated setting, and use the calibration flow rate as the 
SO<INF>2</INF> injection flow rate during the test run. Repeat the 
rotameter calibration before the first certification test and 
semiannually thereafter.
    10.3. Gas Analyzers. Same as Method 6C, Section 10.0.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Record the data required on a sheet such as the one shown in 
Figure 5H-4.
    11.2 Handle each sample container as follows:
    11.2.1 Container Nos. 1 and 1A. Treat the two filters according to 
the procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 11.2.1.
    11.2.2 Container No. 2. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.2, except 
that the beaker may be smaller than 250-ml.
    11.2.3 Container No. 3. Note the level of liquid in the container 
and confirm on the analysis sheet whether leakage occurred during 
transport. If a noticeable amount of leakage has occurred, either void 
the sample or use methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, 
to correct the final results. Determination of sample leakage is not 
applicable if sample recovery and analysis occur in the same room. 
Measure the liquid in this container either volumetrically to within 1-
ml or gravimetrically to within 0.5 g. Transfer the contents to a 500-ml 
or larger separatory funnel. Rinse the container with water, and add to 
the separatory funnel. Add 25-ml of dichloromethane to the separatory 
funnel, stopper and vigorously shake 1 minute, let

[[Page 228]]

separate and transfer the dichloromethane (lower layer) into a tared 
beaker or evaporating dish. Repeat twice more. It is necessary to rinse 
Container No. 3 with dichloromethane. This rinse is added to the 
impinger extract container. Transfer the remaining water from the 
separatory funnel to a tared beaker or evaporating dish and evaporate to 
dryness at 104 [deg]C (220 [deg]F). Desiccate and weigh to a constant 
weight. Evaporate the combined impinger water extracts at ambient 
temperature and pressure. Desiccate and weigh to a constant weight. 
Report both results to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    11.2.4 Container No. 4. Weigh the spent silica gel (or silica gel 
plus impinger) to the nearest 0.5 g using a balance.
    11.2.5 Acetone Blank Container. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.4, 
except that the beaker may be smaller than 250 ml.
    11.2.6 Dichloromethane Blank Container. Treat the same as the 
acetone blank.
    11.2.7 Water Blank Container. Transfer the water to a tared 250 ml 
beaker and evaporate to dryness at 104 [deg]C (220 [deg]F). Desiccate 
and weigh to a constant weight.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after the 
final calculation. Other forms of the equations may be used as long as 
they give equivalent results.
    12.1 Nomenclature.
a=Sample flow rate adjustment factor.
BR=Dry wood burn rate, kg/hr (lb/hr), from Method 28, Section 8.3.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream, proportion by volume.
C<INF>s</INF>=Concentration of particulate matter in stack gas, dry 
basis, corrected to standard conditions, g/dscm (g/dscf).
E=Particulate emission rate, g/hr (lb/hr).
[Delta]H=Average pressure differential across the orifice meter (see 
Figure 5H-1), mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O).
L<INF>a</INF>=Maximum acceptable leakage rate for either a post-test 
leak-check or for a leak-check following a component change; equal to 
0.00057 cmm (0.020 cfm) or 4 percent of the average sampling rate, 
whichever is less.
L<INF>1</INF>=Individual leakage rate observed during the leak-check 
conducted before a component change, cmm (cfm).
L<INF>p</INF>=Leakage rate observed during the post-test leak-check, cmm 
(cfm).
m<INF>n</INF>=Total amount of particulate matter collected, mg.
M<INF>a</INF>=Mass of residue of solvent after evaporation, mg.
N<INF>C</INF>=Grams of carbon/gram of dry fuel (lb/lb), equal to 0.0425.
N<INF>T</INF>=Total dry moles of exhaust gas/kg of dry wood burned, g-
moles/kg (lb-moles/lb).
PR=Percent of proportional sampling rate.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at the sampling site, mm Hg (in.Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in.Hg).
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Total gas flow rate, dscm/hr (dscf/hr).
S<INF>1</INF>=Concentration measured at the SO<INF>2</INF> analyzer for 
the first 10-minute interval, ppm.
S<INF>i</INF>=Concentration measured at the SO<INF>2</INF> analyzer for 
the ``ith'' 10 minute interval, ppm.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute average dry gas meter temperature (see Figure 5H-
3), [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>a</INF>=volume of solvent blank, ml.
V<INF>aw</INF>=Volume of solvent used in wash, ml.
V<INF>lc</INF>=Total volume of liquid collected in impingers and silica 
gel (see Figure 5H-4), ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by dry gas meter, dcm 
(dcf).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>mi(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample measured by the dry gas meter 
during the ``ith'' 10-minute interval, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>w(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor in the gas sample, corrected to 
standard conditions, scm (scf).
W<INF>a</INF>=Weight of residue in solvent wash, mg.
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
Y<INF>CO</INF>=Measured mole fraction of CO (dry), average from Section 
8.2, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
Y<INF>CO2</INF>=Measured mole fraction of CO<INF>2</INF> (dry), average 
from Section 8.2, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
Y<INF>HC</INF>=Assumed mole fraction of HC (dry), g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole);
    =0.0088 for catalytic wood heaters;
    =0.0132 for non-catalytic wood heaters;
    =0.0080 for pellet-fired wood heaters.
10=Length of first sampling period, min.
13.6=Specific gravity of mercury.
100=Conversion to percent.
[thetas]=Total sampling time, min.
[thetas]<INF>1</INF>=Sampling time interval, from the beginning of a run 
until the first component change, min.
    12.2 Average Dry Gas Meter Temperature and Average Orifice Pressure 
Drop. See data sheet (Figure 5H-3).
    12.3 Dry Gas Volume. Same as Method 5, Section 12.3.
    12.4 Volume of Water Vapor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.168
    
Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=0.001333 m<SUP>3</SUP>/ml for metric units.
K<INF>2</INF>=0.04707 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/ml for English units.

    12.5 Moisture Content.

[[Page 229]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.169

    12.6 Solvent Wash Blank.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.170
    
    12.7 Total Particulate Weight. Determine the total particulate catch 
from the sum of the weights obtained from containers 1, 2, 3, and 4 less 
the appropriate solvent blanks (see Figure 5H-4).

    Note: Refer to Method 5, Section 8.5 to assist in calculation of 
results involving two filter assemblies.

    12.8 Particulate Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.171
    
    12.9 Sample Flow Rate Adjustment.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.172
    
    12.10 Carbon Balance for Total Moles of Exhaust Gas (dry)/kg of Wood 
Burned in the Exhaust Gas.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.173

Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=1000 g/kg for metric units.
K<INF>3</INF>=1.0 lb/lb for English units.

    Note: The NO<INF>X</INF>/SO<INF>X</INF> portion of the gas is 
assumed to be negligible.

    12.11 Total Stack Gas Flow Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.174
    
Where:

K<INF>4</INF>=0.02406 dscm/g-mole for metric units.
K<INF>4</INF>=384.8 dscf/lb-mole for English units.

    12.12 Particulate Emission Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.175
    
    12.13 Proportional Rate Variation. Calculate PR for each 10-minute 
interval, i, of the test run.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.176

    12.14 Acceptable Results. If no more than 15 percent of the PR 
values for all the intervals fall outside the range 90 percent <= PR <= 
110 percent, and if no PR value for any interval falls outside the range 
75 <= PR <= 125 percent, the results are acceptable. If the PR values 
for the test runs are judged to be unacceptable, report the test run 
emission results, but do not include the test run results in calculating 
the weighted average emission rate, and repeat the test.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 5G, Section 17.0.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 230]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.177


[[Page 231]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.178


[[Page 232]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.179


[[Page 233]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.180

Method 5I--Determination of Low Level Particulate Matter Emissions From 
                           Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Certain information is contained in other 
EPA procedures found in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable 
results, persons using this method should have experience with and a 
thorough knowledge of the following Methods: Methods 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.

                        1. Scope and Application.

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.

[[Page 234]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of low level particulate matter (PM) emissions from stationary sources. 
The method is most effective for total PM catches of 50 mg or less. This 
method was initially developed for performing correlation of manual PM 
measurements to PM continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS), 
however it is also useful for other low particulate concentration 
applications.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods. Method 5I requires the use of paired trains. 
Acceptance criteria for the identification of data quality outliers from 
the paired trains are provided in Section 12.2 of this Method.

                          2. Summary of Method.

    2.1. Description. The system setup and operation is essentially 
identical to Method 5. Particulate is withdrawn isokinetically from the 
source and collected on a 47 mm glass fiber filter maintained at a 
temperature of 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14[deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25[deg]F). The PM mass is determined by gravimetric 
analysis after the removal of uncombined water. Specific measures in 
this procedure designed to improve system performance at low particulate 
levels include:
1. Improved sample handling procedures
2 Light weight sample filter assembly
3. Use of low residue grade acetone
Accuracy is improved through the minimization of systemic errors 
associated with sample handling and weighing procedures. High purity 
reagents, all glass, grease free, sample train components, and light 
weight filter assemblies and beakers, each contribute to the overall 
objective of improved precision and accuracy at low particulate 
concentrations.
    2.2 Paired Trains. This method must be performed using a paired 
train configuration. These trains may be operated as co-located trains 
(to trains operating collecting from one port) or as simultaneous trains 
(separate trains operating from different ports at the same time). 
Procedures for calculating precision of the paired trains are provided 
in Section 12.
    2.3 Detection Limit. a. Typical detection limit for manual 
particulate testing is 0.5 mg. This mass is also cited as the accepted 
weight variability limit in determination of ``constant weight'' as 
cited in Section 8.1.2 of this Method. EPA has performed studies to 
provide guidance on minimum PM catch. The minimum detection limit (MDL) 
is the minimum concentration or amount of an analyte that can be 
determined with a specified degree of confidence to be different from 
zero. We have defined the minimum or target catch as a concentration or 
amount sufficiently larger than the MDL to ensure that the results are 
reliable and repeatable. The particulate matter catch is the product of 
the average particulate matter concentration on a mass per volume basis 
and the volume of gas collected by the sample train. The tester can 
generally control the volume of gas collected by increasing the sampling 
time or to a lesser extent by increasing the rate at which sample is 
collected. If the tester has a reasonable estimate of the PM 
concentration from the source, the tester can ensure that the target 
catch is collected by sampling the appropriate gas volume.
    b. However, if the source has a very low particulate matter 
concentration in the stack, the volume of gas sampled may need to be 
very large which leads to unacceptably long sampling times. When 
determining compliance with an emission limit, EPA guidance has been 
that the tester does not always have to collect the target catch. 
Instead, we have suggested that the tester sample enough stack gas, that 
if the source were exactly at the level of the emission standard, the 
sample catch would equal the target catch. Thus, if at the end of the 
test the catch were smaller than the target, we could still conclude 
that the source is in compliance though we might not know the exact 
emission level. This volume of gas becomes a target volume that can be 
translated into a target sampling time by assuming an average sampling 
rate. Because the MDL forms the basis for our guidance on target 
sampling times, EPA has conducted a systematic laboratory study to 
define what is the MDL for Method 5 and determined the Method to have a 
calculated practical quantitation limit (PQL) of 3 mg of PM and an MDL 
of 1 mg.
    c. Based on these results, the EPA has concluded that for PM 
testing, the target catch must be no less than 3 mg. Those sample 
catches between 1 mg and 3 mg are between the detection limit and the 
limit of quantitation. If a tester uses the target catch to estimate a 
target sampling time that results in sample catches that are less than 3 
mg, you should not automatically reject the results. If the tester 
calculated the target sampling time as described above by assuming that 
the source was at the level of the emission limit, the results would 
still be valid for determining that the source was in compliance. For 
purposes other than determining compliance, results should be divided 
into two categories--those that fall between 3 mg and 1 mg and those 
that are below 1 mg. A sample catch between 1 and 3 mg may be used for 
such purposes as calculating emission rates with the understanding that 
the resulting emission rates can have a high degree of uncertainty. 
Results of less than 1 mg should not be used for calculating emission 
rates or pollutant concentrations.
    d. When collecting small catches such as 3 mg, bias becomes an 
important issue. Source testers must use extreme caution to reach the 
PQL of 3 mg by assuring that sampling

[[Page 235]]

probes are very clean (perhaps confirmed by low blank weights) before 
use in the field. They should also use low tare weight sample 
containers, and establish a well-controlled balance room to weigh the 
samples.

                             3. Definitions.

    3.1 Light Weight Filter Housing. A smaller housing that allows the 
entire filtering system to be weighed before and after sample 
collection. (See. 6.1.3)
    3.2 Paired Train. Sample systems trains may be operated as co-
located trains (two sample probes attached to each other in the same 
port) or as simultaneous trains (two separate trains operating from 
different ports at the same time).

                            4. Interferences.

    a. There are numerous potential interferents that may be encountered 
during performance of Method 5I sampling and analyses. This Method 
should be considered more sensitive to the normal interferents typically 
encountered during particulate testing because of the low level 
concentrations of the flue gas stream being sampled.
    b. Care must be taken to minimize field contamination, especially to 
the filter housing since the entire unit is weighed (not just the filter 
media). Care must also be taken to ensure that no sample is lost during 
the sampling process (such as during port changes, removal of the filter 
assemblies from the probes, etc.).
    c. Balance room conditions are a source of concern for analysis of 
the low level samples. Relative humidity, ambient temperatures 
variations, air draft, vibrations and even barometric pressure can 
affect consistent reproducible measurements of the sample media. 
Ideally, the same analyst who performs the tare weights should perform 
the final weights to minimize the effects of procedural differences 
specific to the analysts.
    d. Attention must also be provided to weighing artifacts caused by 
electrostatic charges which may have to be discharged or neutralized 
prior to sample analysis. Static charge can affect consistent and 
reliable gravimetric readings in low humidity environments. Method 5I 
recommends a relative humidity of less than 50 percent in the weighing 
room environment used for sample analyses. However, lower humidity may 
be encountered or required to address sample precision problems. Low 
humidity conditions can increase the effects of static charge.
    e. Other interferences associated with typical Method 5 testing 
(sulfates, acid gases, etc.) are also applicable to Method 5I.

                               5. Safety.

    Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, 
and equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety 
concerns associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user 
to establish appropriate safety and health practices and to determine 
the applicability and observe all regulatory limitations before using 
this method.

                       6. Equipment and Supplies.

    6.1 Sample Collection Equipment and Supplies. The sample train is 
nearly identical in configuration to the train depicted in Figure 5-1 of 
Method 5. The primary difference in the sample trains is the lightweight 
Method 5I filter assembly that attaches directly to the exit to the 
probe. Other exceptions and additions specific to Method 5I include:
    6.1.1 Probe Nozzle. Same as Method 5, with the exception that it 
must be constructed of borosilicate or quartz glass tubing.
    6.1.2 Probe Liner. Same as Method 5, with the exception that it must 
be constructed of borosilicate or quartz glass tubing.
    6.1.3 Filter Holder. The filter holder is constructed of 
borosilicate or quartz glass front cover designed to hold a 47-mm glass 
fiber filter, with a wafer thin stainless steel (SS) filter support, a 
silicone rubber or Viton O-ring, and Teflon tape seal. This holder 
design will provide a positive seal against leakage from the outside or 
around the filter. The filter holder assembly fits into a SS filter 
holder and attaches directly to the outlet of the probe. The tare weight 
of the filter, borosilicate or quartz glass holder, SS filter support, 
O-ring and Teflon tape seal generally will not exceed approximately 35 
grams. The filter holder is designed to use a 47-mm glass fiber filter 
meeting the quality criteria in of Method 5. These units are 
commercially available from several source testing equipment vendors. 
Once the filter holder has been assembled, desiccated and tared, protect 
it from external sources of contamination by covering the front socket 
with a ground glass plug. Secure the plug with an impinger clamp or 
other item that will ensure a leak-free fitting.
    6.2 Sample Recovery Equipment and Supplies. Same as Method 5, with 
the following exceptions:
    6.2.1 Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes. Teflon or nylon bristle 
brushes with stainless steel wire handles, should be used to clean the 
probe. The probe brush must have extensions (at least as long as the 
probe) of Teflon, nylon or similarly inert material. The brushes must be 
properly sized and shaped for brushing out the probe liner and nozzle.
    6.2.2 Wash Bottles. Two Teflon wash bottles are recommended however, 
polyethylene wash bottles may be used at the option of the tester. 
Acetone should not be stored in polyethylene bottles for longer than one 
month.

[[Page 236]]

    6.2.3 Filter Assembly Transport. A system should be employed to 
minimize contamination of the filter assemblies during transport to and 
from the field test location. A carrying case or packet with clean 
compartments of sufficient size to accommodate each filter assembly can 
be used. This system should have an air tight seal to further minimize 
contamination during transport to and from the field.
    6.3 Analysis Equipment and Supplies. Same as Method 5, with the 
following exception:
    6.3.1 Lightweight Beaker Liner. Teflon or other lightweight beaker 
liners are used for the analysis of the probe and nozzle rinses. These 
light weight liners are used in place of the borosilicate glass beakers 
typically used for the Method 5 weighings in order to improve sample 
analytical precision.
    6.3.2 Anti-static Treatment. Commercially available gaseous anti-
static rinses are recommended for low humidity situations that 
contribute to static charge problems.

                       7. Reagents and Standards.

    7.1 Sampling Reagents. The reagents used in sampling are the same as 
Method 5 with the following exceptions:
    7.1.1 Filters. The quality specifications for the filters are 
identical to those cited for Method 5. The only difference is the filter 
diameter of 47 millimeters.
    7.1.2 Stopcock Grease. Stopcock grease cannot be used with this 
sampling train. We recommend that the sampling train be assembled with 
glass joints containing O-ring seals or screw-on connectors, or similar.
    7.1.3 Acetone. Low residue type acetone, <=0.001 percent residue, 
purchased in glass bottles is used for the recovery of particulate 
matter from the probe and nozzle. Acetone from metal containers 
generally has a high residue blank and should not be used. Sometimes, 
suppliers transfer acetone to glass bottles from metal containers; thus, 
acetone blanks must be run prior to field use and only acetone with low 
blank values (<=0.001 percent residue, as specified by the manufacturer) 
must be used. Acetone blank correction is not allowed for this method; 
therefore, it is critical that high purity reagents be purchased and 
verified prior to use.
    7.1.4 Gloves. Disposable, powder-free, latex surgical gloves, or 
their equivalent are used at all times when handling the filter housings 
or performing sample recovery.
    7.2 Standards. There are no applicable standards or audit samples 
commercially available for Method 5I analyses.

       8. Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport.

    8.1 Pretest Preparation. Same as Method 5 with several exceptions 
specific to filter assembly and weighing.
    8.1.1 Filter Assembly. Uniquely identify each filter support before 
loading filters into the holder assembly. This can be done with an 
engraving tool or a permanent marker. Use powder free latex surgical 
gloves whenever handling the filter holder assemblies. Place the O-ring 
on the back of the filter housing in the O-ring groove. Place a 47 mm 
glass fiber filter on the O-ring with the face down. Place a stainless 
steel filter holder against the back of the filter. Carefully wrap 5 mm 
(\1/4\ inch) wide Teflon'' tape one timearound the outside of the filter 
holder overlapping the stainless steel filter support by approximately 
2.5 mm (\1/8\ inch). Gently brush the Teflon tape down on the back of 
the stainless steel filter support. Store the filter assemblies in their 
transport case until time for weighing or field use.
    8.1.2 Filter Weighing Procedures. a. Desiccate the entire filter 
holder assemblies at 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5.6[deg]C (68 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10[deg]F) and ambient pressure for at least 24 hours. 
Weigh at intervals of at least 6 hours to a constant weight, i.e., 0.5 
mg change from previous weighing. Record the results to the nearest 0.1 
mg. During each weighing, the filter holder assemblies must not be 
exposed to the laboratory atmosphere for a period greater than 2 minutes 
and a relative humidity above 50 percent. Lower relative humidity may be 
required in order to improve analytical precision. However, low humidity 
conditions increase static charge to the sample media.
    b. Alternatively (unless otherwise specified by the Administrator), 
the filters holder assemblies may be oven dried at 105[deg]C (220[deg]F) 
for a minimum of 2 hours, desiccated for 2 hours, and weighed. The 
procedure used for the tare weigh must also be used for the final weight 
determination.
    c. Experience has shown that weighing uncertainties are not only 
related to the balance performance but to the entire weighing procedure. 
Therefore, before performing any measurement, establish and follow 
standard operating procedures, taking into account the sampling 
equipment and filters to be used.
    8.2 Preliminary Determinations. Select the sampling site, traverse 
points, probe nozzle, and probe length as specified in Method 5.
    8.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Same as Method 5, Section 8.3, 
with the following exception: During preparation and assembly of the 
sampling train, keep all openings where contamination can occur covered 
until justbefore assembly or until sampling is about to begin. Using 
gloves, place a labeled

[[Page 237]]

(identified) and weighed filter holder assembly into the stainless steel 
holder. Then place this whole unit in the Method 5 hot box, and attach 
it to the probe. Do not use stopcock grease.
    8.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Same as Method 5.
    8.5 Sampling Train Operation.
    8.5.1. Operation. Operate the sampling train in a manner consistent 
with those described in Methods 1, 2, 4 and 5 in terms of the number of 
sample points and minimum time per point. The sample rate and total gas 
volume should be adjusted based on estimated grain loading of the source 
being characterized. The total sampling time must be a function of the 
estimated mass of particulate to be collected for the run. Targeted mass 
to be collected in a typical Method 5I sample train should be on the 
order of 10 to 20 mg. Method 5I is most appropriate for total collected 
masses of less than 50 milligrams, however, there is not an exact 
particulate loading cutoff, and it is likely that some runs may exceed 
50 mg. Exceeding 50 mg (or less than 10 mg) for the sample mass does not 
necessarily justify invalidating a sample run if all other Method 
criteria are met.
    8.5.2 Paired Train. This Method requires PM samples be collected 
with paired trains.
    8.5.2.1 It is important that the systems be operated truly 
simultaneously. This implies that both sample systems start and stop at 
the same times. This also means that if one sample system is stopped 
during the run, the other sample systems must also be stopped until the 
cause has been corrected.
    8.5.2.2 Care should be taken to maintain the filter box temperature 
of the paired trains as close as possible to the Method required 
temperature of 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14[deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25[deg]F). If separate ovens are being used for 
simultaneously operated trains, it is recommended that the oven 
temperature of each train be maintained within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>14[deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 25[deg]F) of each 
other.
    8.5.2.3 The nozzles for paired trains need not be identically sized.
    8.5.2.4 Co-located sample nozzles must be within the same plane 
perpendicular to the gas flow. Co-located nozzles and pitot assemblies 
should be within a 6.0 cm x 6.0 cm square (as cited for a quadruple 
train in Reference Method 301).
    8.5.3 Duplicate gas samples for molecular weight determination need 
not be collected.
    8.6 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5 with several exceptions 
specific to the filter housing.
    8.6.1 Before moving the sampling train to the cleanup site, remove 
the probe from the train and seal the nozzle inlet and outlet of the 
probe. Be careful not to lose any condensate that might be present. Cap 
the filter inlet using a standard ground glass plug and secure the cap 
with an impinger clamp. Remove the umbilical cord from the last impinger 
and cap the impinger. If a flexible line is used between the first 
impinger condenser and the filter holder, disconnect the line at the 
filter holder and let any condensed water or liquid drain into the 
impingers or condenser.
    8.6.2 Transfer the probe and filter-impinger assembly to the cleanup 
area. This area must be clean and protected from the wind so that the 
possibility of losing any of the sample will be minimized.
    8.6.3 Inspect the train prior to and during disassembly and note any 
abnormal conditions such as particulate color, filter loading, impinger 
liquid color, etc.
    8.6.4 Container No. 1, Filter Assembly. Carefully remove the cooled 
filter holder assembly from the Method 5 hot box and place it in the 
transport case. Use a pair of clean gloves to handle the filter holder 
assembly.
    8.6.5 Container No. 2, Probe Nozzle and Probe Liner Rinse. Rinse the 
probe and nozzle components with acetone. Be certain that the probe and 
nozzle brushes have been thoroughly rinsed prior to use as they can be a 
source of contamination.
    8.6.6 All Other Train Components. (Impingers) Same as Method 5.
    8.7 Sample Storage and Transport. Whenever possible, containers 
should be shipped in such a way that they remain upright at all times. 
All appropriate dangerous goods shipping requirements must be observed 
since acetone is a flammable liquid.

                           9. Quality Control.

    9.1 Miscellaneous Field Quality Control Measures.
    9.1.1 A quality control (QC) check of the volume metering system at 
the field site is suggested before collecting the sample using the 
procedures in Method 5, Section 4.4.1.
    9.1.2 All other quality control checks outlined in Methods 1, 2, 4 
and 5 also apply to Method 5I. This includes procedures such as leak-
checks, equipment calibration checks, and independent checks of field 
data sheets for reasonableness and completeness.
    9.2 Quality Control Samples.
    9.2.1 Required QC Sample. A laboratory reagent blank must be 
collected and analyzed for each lot of acetone used for a field program 
to confirm that it is of suitable purity. The particulate samples cannot 
be blank corrected.
    9.2.2 Recommended QC Samples. These samples may be collected and 
archived for future analyses.
    9.2.2.1 A field reagent blank is a recommended QC sample collected 
from a portion of the acetone used for cleanup of the probe and nozzle. 
Take 100 ml of this acetone directly from the wash bottle being used and 
place it in a glass sample container labeled ``field acetone reagent 
blank.'' At least one field reagent blank is recommended for every

[[Page 238]]

five runs completed. The field reagent blank samples demonstrate the 
purity of the acetone was maintained throughout the program.
    9.2.2.2 A field bias blank train is a recommended QC sample. This 
sample is collected by recovering a probe and filter assembly that has 
been assembled, taken to the sample location, leak checked, heated, 
allowed to sit at the sample location for a similar duration of time as 
a regular sample run, leak-checked again, and then recovered in the same 
manner as a regular sample. Field bias blanks are not a Method 
requirement, however, they are recommended and are very useful for 
identifying sources of contamination in emission testing samples. Field 
bias blank train results greater than 5 times the method detection limit 
may be considered problematic.

    10. Calibration and Standardization Same as Method 5, Section 5.

                       11. Analytical Procedures.

    11.1 Analysis. Same as Method 5, Sections 11.1--11.2.4, with the 
following exceptions:
    11.1.1 Container No. 1. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.1, with the 
following exception: Use disposable gloves to remove each of the filter 
holder assemblies from the desiccator, transport container, or sample 
oven (after appropriate cooling).
    11.1.2 Container No. 2. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.2, with the 
following exception: It is recommended that the contents of Container 
No. 2 be transferred to a 250 ml beaker with a Teflon liner or similar 
container that has a minimal tare weight before bringing to dryness.

                   12. Data Analysis and Calculations.

    12.1 Particulate Emissions. The analytical results cannot be blank 
corrected for residual acetone found in any of the blanks. All other 
sample calculations are identical to Method 5.
    12.2 Paired Trains Outliers. a. Outliers are identified through the 
determination of precision and any systemic bias of the paired trains. 
Data that do not meet this criteria should be flagged as a data quality 
problem. The primary reason for performing dual train sampling is to 
generate information to quantify the precision of the Reference Method 
data. The relative standard deviation (RSD) of paired data is the 
parameter used to quantify data precision. RSD for two simultaneously 
gathered data points is determined according to:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.008

where, Ca and Cb are concentration values determined from trains A and B 
respectively. For RSD calculation, the concentration units are 
unimportant so long as they are consistent.
    b. A minimum precision criteria for Reference Method PM data is that 
RSD for any data pair must be less than 10% as long as the mean PM 
concentration is greater than 10 mg/dscm. If the mean PM concentration 
is less than 10 mg/dscm higher RSD values are acceptable. At mean PM 
concentration of 1 mg/dscm acceptable RSD for paired trains is 25%. 
Between 1 and 10 mg/dscm acceptable RSD criteria should be linearly 
scaled from 25% to 10%. Pairs of manual method data exceeding these RSD 
criteria should be eliminated from the data set used to develop a PM 
CEMS correlation or to assess RCA. If the mean PM concentration is less 
than 1 mg/dscm, RSD does not apply and the mean result is acceptable.

                    13. Method Performance [Reserved]

                   14. Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                     15. Waste Management [Reserved]

    16. Alternative Procedures. Same as Method 5.
    17. Bibliography. Same as Method 5.
    18. Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts and Validation Data. Figure 5I-1 is 
a schematic of the sample train.

[[Page 239]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.009


[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-3, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 240]]

           Appendix A-4 to Part 60--Test Methods 6 through 10B

Method 6--Determination of sulfur dioxide emissions from stationary 
sources
Method 6A--Determination of sulfur dioxide, moisture, and carbon dioxide 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion sources
Method 6B--Determination of sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide daily 
average emissions from fossil fuel combustion sources
Method 6C--Determination of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions From Stationary 
Sources (Instrumental Analyzer Procedure)
Method 7--Determination of nitrogen oxide emissions from stationary 
sources
Method 7A--Determination of nitrogen oxide emissions from stationary 
sources--Ion chromatographic method
Method 7B--Determination of nitrogen oxide emissions from stationary 
sources (Ultraviolet spectrophotometry)
Method 7C--Determination of nitrogen oxide emissions from stationary 
sources--Alkaline-permanganate/colorimetric method
Method 7D--Determination of nitrogen oxide emissions from stationary 
sources--Alkaline-permanganate/ion chromatographic method
Method 7E--Determination of Nitrogen Oxides Emissions From Stationary 
Sources (Instrumental Analyzer Procedure)
Method 8--Determination of sulfuric acid mist and sulfur dioxide 
emissions from stationary sources
Method 9--Visual determination of the opacity of emissions from 
stationary sources
Alternate method 1--Determination of the opacity of emissions from 
stationary sources remotely by lidar
Method 10--Determination of carbon monoxide emissions from stationary 
sources
Method 10A--Determination of carbon monoxide emissions in certifying 
continuous emission monitoring systems at petroleum refineries
Method 10B--Determination of carbon monoxide emissions from stationary 
sources
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining to 
any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that

[[Page 241]]

the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are properly 
executed; (2) including a written description of the alternative method 
in the test report (the written method must be clear and must be capable 
of being performed without additional instruction, and the degree of 
detail should be similar to the detail contained in the test methods); 
and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data necessary to show the 
validity of the alternative in the particular application. Failure to 
meet these requirements can result in the Administrator's disapproval of 
the alternative.

  Method 6--Determination of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, and Method 8.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SO2...............................       7449-09-5  3.4 mg SO2/m3
                                                    (2.12 x 10)-7 lb/ft3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method applies to the measurement of sulfur 
dioxide (SO<SUP>2</SUP>) emissions from stationary sources.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from the sampling point in the stack. 
The SO<SUP>2</SUP> and the sulfur trioxide, including those fractions in 
any sulfur acid mist, are separated. The SO<SUP>2</SUP> fraction is 
measured by the barium-thorin titration method.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Free Ammonia. Free ammonia interferes with this method by 
reacting with SO<SUP>2</SUP> to form particulate sulfite and by reacting 
with the indicator. If free ammonia is present (this can be determined 
by knowledge of the process and/or noticing white particulate matter in 
the probe and isopropanol bubbler), alternative methods, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator are required. One approved alternative is 
listed in Reference 13 of Section 17.0.
    4.2 Water-Soluble Cations and Fluorides. The cations and fluorides 
are removed by a glass wool filter and an isopropanol bubbler; 
therefore, they do not affect the SO<INF>2</INF> analysis. When samples 
are collected from a gas stream with high concentrations of metallic 
fumes (i.e., very fine cation aerosols) a high-efficiency glass fiber 
filter must be used in place of the glass wool plug (i.e., the one in 
the probe) to remove the cation interferent.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine 
the applicability of regulatory limitations before performing this test 
method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs. 30% H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> is a strong 
oxidizing agent. Avoid contact with skin, eyes, and combustible 
material. Wear gloves when handling.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.3 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in 
higher concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. 
Reacts violently with metals and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The following items are required for sample 
collection:
    6.1.1 Sampling Train. A schematic of the sampling train is shown in 
Figure 6-1. The sampling equipment described in Method 8 may be 
substituted in place of the midget impinger equipment of Method 6. 
However, the Method 8 train must be modified to include a heated filter 
between the probe and isopropanol impinger, and the operation of the 
sampling train and sample analysis must be at the flow rates and 
solution volumes defined in Method 8. Alternatively, SO<INF>2</INF> may 
be determined simultaneously with particulate

[[Page 242]]

matter and moisture determinations by either (1) replacing the water in 
a Method 5 impinger system with a 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> 
solution, or (2) replacing the Method 5 water impinger system with a 
Method 8 isopropanol-filter-H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> system. The 
analysis for SO<INF>2</INF> must be consistent with the procedure of 
Method 8. The Method 6 sampling train consists of the following 
components:
    6.1.1.1 Probe. Borosilicate glass or stainless steel (other 
materials of construction may be used, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator), approximately 6 mm (0.25 in.) inside diameter, with a 
heating system to prevent water condensation and a filter (either in-
stack or heated out-of-stack) to remove particulate matter, including 
sulfuric acid mist. A plug of glass wool is a satisfactory filter.
    6.1.1.2 Bubbler and Impingers. One midget bubbler with medium-coarse 
glass frit and borosilicate or quartz glass wool packed in top (see 
Figure 6-1) to prevent sulfuric acid mist carryover, and three 30-ml 
midget impingers. The midget bubbler and midget impingers must be 
connected in series with leak-free glass connectors. Silicone grease may 
be used, if necessary, to prevent leakage. A midget impinger may be used 
in place of the midget bubbler.

    Note: Other collection absorbers and flow rates may be used, subject 
to the approval of the Administrator, but the collection efficiency must 
be shown to be at least 99 percent for each test run and must be 
documented in the report. If the efficiency is found to be acceptable 
after a series of three tests, further documentation is not required. To 
conduct the efficiency test, an extra absorber must be added and 
analyzed separately. This extra absorber must not contain more than 1 
percent of the total SO<INF>2</INF>.

    6.1.1.3 Glass Wool. Borosilicate or quartz.
    6.1.1.4 Stopcock Grease. Acetone-insoluble, heat-stable silicone 
grease may be used, if necessary.
    6.1.1.5 Temperature Sensor. Dial thermometer, or equivalent, to 
measure temperature of gas leaving impinger train to within 1 [deg]C (2 
[deg]F).
    6.1.1.6 Drying Tube. Tube packed with 6- to 16- mesh indicating-type 
silica gel, or equivalent, to dry the gas sample and to protect the 
meter and pump. If silica gel is previously used, dry at 177 [deg]C (350 
[deg]F) for 2 hours. New silica gel may be used as received. 
Alternatively, other types of desiccants (equivalent or better) may be 
used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    6.1.1.7 Valve. Needle valve, to regulate sample gas flow rate.
    6.1.1.8 Pump. Leak-free diaphragm pump, or equivalent, to pull gas 
through the train. Install a small surge tank between the pump and rate 
meter to negate the pulsation effect of the diaphragm pump on the rate 
meter.
    6.1.1.9 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, capable of measuring 
flow rate to within 2 percent of the selected flow rate of about 1 
liter/min (0.035 cfm).
    6.1.1.10 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter (DGM), sufficiently accurate to 
measure the sample volume to within 2 percent, calibrated at the 
selected flow rate and conditions actually encountered during sampling, 
and equipped with a temperature sensor (dial thermometer, or equivalent) 
capable of measuring temperature accurately to within 3 [deg]C (5.4 
[deg]F). A critical orifice may be used in place of the DGM specified in 
this section provided that it is selected, calibrated, and used as 
specified in Section 16.0.
    6.1.2 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in. Hg). See the 
Note in Method 5, Section 6.1.2.
    6.1.3 Vacuum Gauge and Rotameter. At least 760-mm Hg (30-in. Hg) 
gauge and 0- to 40-ml/min rotameter, to be used for leak-check of the 
sampling train.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are needed for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Wash Bottles. Two polyethylene or glass bottles, 500-ml.
    6.2.2 Storage Bottles. Polyethylene bottles, 100-ml, to store 
impinger samples (one per sample).
    6.3 Sample Analysis. The following equipment is needed for sample 
analysis:
    6.3.1 Pipettes. Volumetric type, 5-ml, 20-ml (one needed per 
sample), and 25-ml sizes.
    6.3.2 Volumetric Flasks. 100-ml size (one per sample) and 1000-ml 
size.
    6.3.3 Burettes. 5- and 50-ml sizes.
    6.3.4 Erlenmeyer Flasks. 250-ml size (one for each sample, blank, 
and standard).
    6.3.5 Dropping Bottle. 125-ml size, to add indicator.
    6.3.6 Graduated Cylinder. 100-ml size.
    6.3.7 Spectrophotometer. To measure absorbance at 352 nm.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents must conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society. Where such specifications are not 
available, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM Specification D 
1193-77 or 91 Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). The 
KMnO<INF>4</INF> test for oxidizable organic matter may be omitted when 
high concentrations of organic matter are not expected to be present.

[[Page 243]]

    7.1.2 Isopropanol, 80 Percent by Volume. Mix 80 ml of isopropanol 
with 20 ml of water.
    7.1.2.1 Check each lot of isopropanol for peroxide impurities as 
follows: Shake 10 ml of isopropanol with 10 ml of freshly prepared 10 
percent potassium iodide solution. Prepare a blank by similarly treating 
10 ml of water. After 1 minute, read the absorbance at 352 nm on a 
spectrophotometer using a 1-cm path length. If absorbance exceeds 0.1, 
reject alcohol for use.
    7.1.2.2 Peroxides may be removed from isopropanol by redistilling or 
by passage through a column of activated alumina; however, reagent grade 
isopropanol with suitably low peroxide levels may be obtained from 
commercial sources. Rejection of contaminated lots may, therefore, be a 
more efficient procedure.
    7.1.3 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>), 3 Percent by 
Volume. Add 10 ml of 30 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> to 90 ml of 
water. Prepare fresh daily.
    7.1.4 Potassium Iodide Solution, 10 Percent Weight by Volume (w/v). 
Dissolve 10.0 g of KI in water, and dilute to 100 ml. Prepare when 
needed.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. The following reagents are required for sample 
recovery:
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.1.
    7.2.2 Isopropanol, 80 Percent by Volume. Same as in Section 7.1.2.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. The following reagents and standards are 
required for sample analysis:
    7.3.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.1.
    7.3.2 Isopropanol, 100 Percent.
    7.3.3 Thorin Indicator. 1-(o-arsonophenylazo)-2-naphthol-3,6-
disulfonic acid, disodium salt, or equivalent. Dissolve 0.20 g in 100 ml 
of water.
    7.3.4 Barium Standard Solution, 0.0100 N. Dissolve 1.95 g of barium 
perchlorate trihydrate [Ba(ClO<INF>4</INF>)<INF>2</INF> 3H<INF>2</INF>O] 
in 200 ml water, and dilute to 1 liter with isopropanol. Alternatively, 
1.22 g of barium chloride dihydrate [BaCl<INF>2</INF> 2H<INF>2</INF>O] 
may be used instead of the barium perchlorate trihydrate. Standardize as 
in Section 10.5.
    7.3.5 Sulfuric Acid Standard, 0.0100 N. Purchase or standardize to 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.0002 N against 0.0100 N NaOH which has 
previously been standardized against potassium acid phthalate (primary 
standard grade).
    7.3.6 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. When making compliance 
determinations, audit samples, if available must be obtained from the 
appropriate EPA Regional Office or from the responsible enforcement 
authority and analyzed in conjunction with the field samples.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage and Transport

    8.1 Preparation of Sampling Train. Measure 15 ml of 80 percent 
isopropanol into the midget bubbler and 15 ml of 3 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> into each of the first two midget impingers. 
Leave the final midget impinger dry. Assemble the train as shown in 
Figure 6-1. Adjust the probe heater to a temperature sufficient to 
prevent water condensation. Place crushed ice and water around the 
impingers.
    8.2 Sampling Train Leak-Check Procedure. A leak-check prior to the 
sampling run is recommended, but not required. A leak-check after the 
sampling run is mandatory. The leak-check procedure is as follows:
    8.2.1 Temporarily attach a suitable (e.g., 0- to 40- ml/min) 
rotameter to the outlet of the DGM, and place a vacuum gauge at or near 
the probe inlet. Plug the probe inlet, pull a vacuum of at least 250 mm 
Hg (10 in. Hg), and note the flow rate as indicated by the rotameter. A 
leakage rate in excess of 2 percent of the average sampling rate is not 
acceptable.

    Note: Carefully (i.e., slowly) release the probe inlet plug before 
turning off the pump.

    8.2.2 It is suggested (not mandatory) that the pump be leak-checked 
separately, either prior to or after the sampling run. To leak-check the 
pump, proceed as follows: Disconnect the drying tube from the probe-
impinger assembly. Place a vacuum gauge at the inlet to either the 
drying tube or the pump, pull a vacuum of 250 mm Hg (10 in. Hg), plug or 
pinch off the outlet of the flow meter, and then turn off the pump. The 
vacuum should remain stable for at least 30 seconds.
    If performed prior to the sampling run, the pump leak-check shall 
precede the leak-check of the sampling train described immediately 
above; if performed after the sampling run, the pump leak-check shall 
follow the sampling train leak-check.
    8.2.3 Other leak-check procedures may be used, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.
    8.3 Sample Collection.
    8.3.1 Record the initial DGM reading and barometric pressure. To 
begin sampling, position the tip of the probe at the sampling point, 
connect the probe to the bubbler, and start the pump. Adjust the sample 
flow to a constant rate of approximately 1.0 liter/min as indicated by 
the rate meter. Maintain this constant rate (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 
percent) during the entire sampling run.
    8.3.2 Take readings (DGM volume, temperatures at DGM and at impinger 
outlet, and rate meter flow rate) at least every 5 minutes. Add more ice 
during the run to keep the temperature of the gases leaving the last 
impinger at 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) or less.
    8.3.3 At the conclusion of each run, turn off the pump, remove the 
probe from the

[[Page 244]]

stack, and record the final readings. Conduct a leak-check as described 
in Section 8.2. (This leak-check is mandatory.) If a leak is detected, 
void the test run or use procedures acceptable to the Administrator to 
adjust the sample volume for the leakage.
    8.3.4 Drain the ice bath, and purge the remaining part of the train 
by drawing clean ambient air through the system for 15 minutes at the 
sampling rate. Clean ambient air can be provided by passing air through 
a charcoal filter or through an extra midget impinger containing 15 ml 
of 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>. Alternatively, ambient air 
without purification may be used.
    8.4 Sample Recovery. Disconnect the impingers after purging. Discard 
the contents of the midget bubbler. Pour the contents of the midget 
impingers into a leak-free polyethylene bottle for shipment. Rinse the 
three midget impingers and the connecting tubes with water, and add the 
rinse to the same storage container. Mark the fluid level. Seal and 
identify the sample container.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                             Quality control
         Section                 measure                 Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.1.2....................  Isopropanol check..  Ensure acceptable level
                                                 of peroxide impurities
                                                 in isopropanol.
8.2, 10.1-10.4...........  Sampling equipment   Ensure accurate
                            leak-check and       measurement of stack
                            calibration.         gas flow rate, sample
                                                 volume.
10.5.....................  Barium standard      Ensure precision of
                            solution             normality
                            standardization.     determination.
11.2.3...................  Replicate            Ensure precision of
                            titrations.          titration
                                                 determinations
11.3.....................  Audit sample         Evaluate analyst's
                            analysis.            technique and standards
                                                 preparation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Volume Metering System.
    10.1.1 Initial Calibration.
    10.1.1.1 Before its initial use in the field, leak-check the 
metering system (drying tube, needle valve, pump, rate meter, and DGM) 
as follows: Place a vacuum gauge at the inlet to the drying tube and 
pull a vacuum of 250 mm Hg (10 in. Hg). Plug or pinch off the outlet of 
the flow meter, and then turn off the pump. The vacuum must remain 
stable for at least 30 seconds. Carefully release the vacuum gauge 
before releasing the flow meter end.
    10.1.1.2 Remove the drying tube, and calibrate the metering system 
(at the sampling flow rate specified by the method) as follows: Connect 
an appropriately sized wet-test meter (e.g., 1 liter per revolution) to 
the inlet of the needle valve. Make three independent calibration runs, 
using at least five revolutions of the DGM per run. Calculate the 
calibration factor Y (wet-test meter calibration volume divided by the 
DGM volume, both volumes adjusted to the same reference temperature and 
pressure) for each run, and average the results (Y<INF>i</INF>). If any 
Y-value deviates by more than 2 percent from (Y<INF>i</INF>), the 
metering system is unacceptable for use. If the metering system is 
acceptable, use (Y<INF>i</INF>) as the calibration factor for subsequent 
test runs.
    10.1.2 Post-Test Calibration Check. After each field test series, 
conduct a calibration check using the procedures outlined in Section 
10.1.1.2, except that three or more revolutions of the DGM may be used, 
and only two independent runs need be made. If the average of the two 
post-test calibration factors does not deviate by more than 5 percent 
from Y<INF>i</INF>, then Y<INF>i</INF> is accepted as the DGM 
calibration factor (Y), which is used in Equation 6-1 to calculate 
collected sample volume (see Section 12.2). If the deviation is more 
than 5 percent, recalibrate the metering system as in Section 10.1.1, 
and determine a post-test calibration factor (Y<INF>f</INF>). Compare 
Y<INF>i</INF> and Y<INF>f</INF>; the smaller of the two factors is 
accepted as the DGM calibration factor. If recalibration indicates that 
the metering system is unacceptable for use, either void the test run or 
use methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, to determine 
an acceptable value for the collected sample volume.
    10.1.3 DGM as a Calibration Standard. A DGM may be used as a 
calibration standard for volume measurements in place of the wet-test 
meter specified in Section 10.1.1.2, provided that it is calibrated 
initially and recalibrated periodically according to the same procedures 
outlined in Method 5, Section 10.3 with the following exceptions: (a) 
the DGM is calibrated against a wet-test meter having a capacity of 1 
liter/rev (0.035 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/rev) or 3 liters/rev (0.1 
ft<SUP>3</SUP>/rev) and having the capability of measuring volume to 
within 1 percent; (b) the DGM is calibrated at 1 liter/min (0.035 cfm); 
and (c) the meter box of the Method 6 sampling train is calibrated at 
the same flow rate.
    10.2 Temperature Sensors. Calibrate against mercury-in-glass 
thermometers.
    10.3 Rate Meter. The rate meter need not be calibrated, but should 
be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's instructions.
    10.4 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer.
    10.5 Barium Standard Solution. Standardize the barium perchlorate or 
chloride solution against 25 ml of standard sulfuric acid to which 100 
ml of 100 percent isopropanol

[[Page 245]]

has been added. Run duplicate analyses. Calculate the normality using 
the average of duplicate analyses where the titrations agree within 1 
percent or 0.2 ml, whichever is larger.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample Loss Check. Note level of liquid in container and 
confirm whether any sample was lost during shipment; note this finding 
on the analytical data sheet. If a noticeable amount of leakage has 
occurred, either void the sample or use methods, subject to the approval 
of the Administrator, to correct the final results.
    11.2 Sample Analysis.
    11.2.1 Transfer the contents of the storage container to a 100-ml 
volumetric flask, dilute to exactly 100 ml with water, and mix the 
diluted sample.
    11.2.2 Pipette a 20-ml aliquot of the diluted sample into a 250-ml 
Erlenmeyer flask and add 80 ml of 100 percent isopropanol plus two to 
four drops of thorin indicator. While stirring the solution, titrate to 
a pink endpoint using 0.0100 N barium standard solution.
    11.2.3 Repeat the procedures in Section 11.2.2, and average the 
titration volumes. Run a blank with each series of samples. Replicate 
titrations must agree within 1 percent or 0.2 ml, whichever is larger.

    Note: Protect the 0.0100 N barium standard solution from evaporation 
at all times.

    11.3 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.3.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, an audit sample, if 
available, must be analyzed.
    11.3.2 Concurrently analyze the audit sample and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.
    11.3.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
must be used for the compliance samples and the audit sample. If this 
condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance analyses 
for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is waived. An 
audit sample set may not be used to validate different sets of 
compliance samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement 
agencies, unless prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement 
agencies.
    11.4 Audit Sample Results.
    11.4.1 Calculate the audit sample concentrations and submit results 
using the instructions provided with the audit samples.
    11.4.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.4.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst must agree within 5 percent of the actual concentration. If the 
5 percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and audit 
samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test report.
    11.4.4 Failure to meet the 5-percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit 
results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>a</INF>=Actual concentration of SO<INF>2</INF> in audit sample, 
mg/dscm.
C<INF>d</INF>=Determined concentration of SO<INF>2</INF> in audit 
sample, mg/dscm.
C<INF>SO2</INF>=Concentration of SO<INF>2</INF>, dry basis, corrected to 
standard conditions, mg/dscm (lb/dscf).
N=Normality of barium standard titrant, meq/ml.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
RE=Relative error of QA audit sample analysis, percent
T<INF>m</INF>=Average DGM absolute temperature, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of sample aliquot titrated, ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Dry gas volume as measured by the DGM, dcm (dcf).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the DGM, corrected to 
standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>soln</INF>=Total volume of solution in which the SO2 sample is 
contained, 100 ml.
V<INF>t</INF>=Volume of barium standard titrant used for the sample 
(average of replicate titration), ml.
V<INF>tb</INF>=Volume of barium standard titrant used for the blank, ml.
Y=DGM calibration factor.

    12.2 Dry Sample Gas Volume, Corrected to Standard Conditions.

[[Page 246]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.181

Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,
K<INF>1</INF>=17.65 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    12.3 SO<INF>2</INF> Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.182
    
Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=32.03 mg SO<INF>2</INF>/meq for metric units,
K<INF>2</INF>=7.061 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> lb SO<INF>2</INF>/meq for English 
units.

    12.4 Relative Error for QA Audit Samples.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.183
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. The minimum detectable limit of the method has been 
determined to be 3.4 mg SO<INF>2</INF>/m<SUP>3</SUP> (2.12 x 
10<SUP>-7</SUP> lb/ft<SUP>3</SUP>). Although no upper limit has been 
established, tests have shown that concentrations as high as 80,000 mg/
m<SUP>3</SUP> (0.005 lb/ft<SUP>3</SUP>) of SO<INF>2</INF> can be 
collected efficiently at a rate of 1.0 liter/min (0.035 cfm) for 20 
minutes in two midget impingers, each containing 15 ml of 3 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>. Based on theoretical calculations, the upper 
concentration limit in a 20 liter (0.7 ft<SUP>3</SUP>) sample is about 
93,300 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> (0.00583 lb/ft<SUP>3</SUP>).

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Nomenclature. Same as Section 12.1, with the following 
additions:

B<INF>wa</INF>=Water vapor in ambient air, proportion by volume.
M<INF>a</INF>=Molecular weight of the ambient air saturated at impinger 
temperature, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
M<INF>s</INF>=Molecular weight of the sample gas saturated at impinger 
temperature, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
P<INF>c</INF>=Inlet vacuum reading obtained during the calibration run, 
mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>sr</INF>=Inlet vacuum reading obtained during the sampling run, mm 
Hg (in. Hg).
Q<INF>std</INF>=Volumetric flow rate through critical orifice, scm/min 
(scf/min).
Q<INF>std</INF>=Average flow rate of pre-test and post-test calibration 
runs, scm/min (scf/min).
T<INF>amb</INF>=Ambient absolute temperature of air, [deg]K ([deg]R).
V<INF>sb</INF>=Volume of gas as measured by the soap bubble meter, m\3\ 
(ft\3\).
    V<INF>sb(std)</INF>=Volume of gas as measured by the soap bubble 
meter, corrected to standard conditions, scm (scf).
[thetas]=Soap bubble travel time, min.
[thetas]<INF>s</INF>=Time, min.

    16.2 Critical Orifices for Volume and Rate Measurements. A critical 
orifice may be used in place of the DGM specified in Section 6.1.1.10, 
provided that it is selected, calibrated, and used as follows:
    16.2.1 Preparation of Sampling Train. Assemble the sampling train as 
shown in Figure 6-2. The rate meter and surge tank are optional but are 
recommended in order to detect changes in the flow rate.

    Note: The critical orifices can be adapted to a Method 6 type 
sampling train as follows: Insert sleeve type, serum bottle stoppers 
into two reducing unions. Insert the needle into the stoppers as shown 
in Figure 6-3.

    16.2.2 Selection of Critical Orifices.
    16.2.2.1 The procedure that follows describes the use of hypodermic 
needles and stainless steel needle tubings, which have been found 
suitable for use as critical orifices. Other materials and critical 
orifice designs may be used provided the orifices act as true critical 
orifices, (i.e., a critical vacuum can be obtained) as described in this 
section. Select a critical orifice that is sized to operate at the 
desired flow rate. The needle sizes and tubing lengths shown in Table 6-
1 give the following approximate flow rates.
    16.2.2.2 Determine the suitability and the appropriate operating 
vacuum of the critical orifice as follows: If applicable, temporarily 
attach a rate meter and surge tank to the outlet of the sampling train, 
if said equipment is not present (see Section 16.2.1). Turn on the pump 
and adjust the valve to give an outlet vacuum reading corresponding to 
about half of the atmospheric pressure. Observe the rate meter reading. 
Slowly increase the vacuum until a stable reading is

[[Page 247]]

obtained on the rate meter. Record the critical vacuum, which is the 
outlet vacuum when the rate meter first reaches a stable value. Orifices 
that do not reach a critical value must not be used.
    16.2.3 Field Procedures.
    16.2.3.1 Leak-Check Procedure. A leak-check before the sampling run 
is recommended, but not required. The leak-check procedure is as 
follows: Temporarily attach a suitable (e.g., 0-40 ml/min) rotameter and 
surge tank, or a soap bubble meter and surge tank to the outlet of the 
pump. Plug the probe inlet, pull an outlet vacuum of at least 250 mm Hg 
(10 in. Hg), and note the flow rate as indicated by the rotameter or 
bubble meter. A leakage rate in excess of 2 percent of the average 
sampling rate (Q<INF>std</INF>) is not acceptable. Carefully release the 
probe inlet plug before turning off the pump.
    16.2.3.2 Moisture Determination. At the sampling location, prior to 
testing, determine the percent moisture of the ambient air using the wet 
and dry bulb temperatures or, if appropriate, a relative humidity meter.
    16.2.3.3 Critical Orifice Calibration. At the sampling location, 
prior to testing, calibrate the entire sampling train (i.e., determine 
the flow rate of the sampling train when operated at critical 
conditions). Attach a 500-ml soap bubble meter to the inlet of the 
probe, and operate the sampling train at an outlet vacuum of 25 to 50 mm 
Hg (1 to 2 in. Hg) above the critical vacuum. Record the information 
listed in Figure 6-4. Calculate the standard volume of air measured by 
the soap bubble meter and the volumetric flow rate using the equations 
below:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.185

    16.2.3.4 Sampling.
    16.2.3.4.1 Operate the sampling train for sample collection at the 
same vacuum used during the calibration run. Start the watch and pump 
simultaneously. Take readings (temperature, rate meter, inlet vacuum, 
and outlet vacuum) at least every 5 minutes. At the end of the sampling 
run, stop the watch and pump simultaneously.
    16.2.3.4.2 Conduct a post-test calibration run using the calibration 
procedure outlined in Section 16.2.3.3. If the Q<INF>std</INF> obtained 
before and after the test differ by more than 5 percent, void the test 
run; if not, calculate the volume of the gas measured with the critical 
orifice using Equation 6-6 as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.186

    16.2.3.4.3 If the percent difference between the molecular weight of 
the ambient air at saturated conditions and the sample gas is more that 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent, then the molecular weight of the gas 
sample must be considered in the calculations using the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.187

    Note: A post-test leak-check is not necessary because the post-test 
calibration run results will indicate whether there is any leakage.

    16.2.3.4.4 Drain the ice bath, and purge the sampling train using 
the procedure described in Section 8.3.4.

[[Page 248]]

    16.3 Elimination of Ammonia Interference. The following alternative 
procedures must be used in addition to those specified in the method 
when sampling at sources having ammonia emissions.
    16.3.1 Sampling. The probe shall be maintained at 275 [deg]C (527 
[deg]F) and equipped with a high-efficiency in-stack filter (glass 
fiber) to remove particulate matter. The filter material shall be 
unreactive to SO<INF>2</INF>. Whatman 934AH (formerly Reeve Angel 934AH) 
filters treated as described in Reference 10 in Section 17.0 of Method 5 
is an example of a filter that has been shown to work. Where alkaline 
particulate matter and condensed moisture are present in the gas stream, 
the filter shall be heated above the moisture dew point but below 225 
[deg]C (437 [deg]F).
    16.3.2 Sample Recovery. Recover the sample according to Section 8.4 
except for discarding the contents of the midget bubbler. Add the 
bubbler contents, including the rinsings of the bubbler with water, to a 
separate polyethylene bottle from the rest of the sample. Under normal 
testing conditions where sulfur trioxide will not be present 
significantly, the tester may opt to delete the midget bubbler from the 
sampling train. If an approximation of the sulfur trioxide concentration 
is desired, transfer the contents of the midget bubbler to a separate 
polyethylene bottle.
    16.3.3 Sample Analysis. Follow the procedures in Sections 11.1 and 
11.2, except add 0.5 ml of 0.1 N HCl to the Erlenmeyer flask and mix 
before adding the indicator. The following analysis procedure may be 
used for an approximation of the sulfur trioxide concentration. The 
accuracy of the calculated concentration will depend upon the ammonia to 
SO<INF>2</INF> ratio and the level of oxygen present in the gas stream. 
A fraction of the SO<INF>2</INF> will be counted as sulfur trioxide as 
the ammonia to SO<INF>2</INF> ratio and the sample oxygen content 
increases. Generally, when this ratio is 1 or less and the oxygen 
content is in the range of 5 percent, less than 10 percent of the 
SO<INF>2</INF> will be counted as sulfur trioxide. Analyze the peroxide 
and isopropanol sample portions separately. Analyze the peroxide portion 
as described above. Sulfur trioxide is determined by difference using 
sequential titration of the isopropanol portion of the sample. Transfer 
the contents of the isopropanol storage container to a 100-ml volumetric 
flask, and dilute to exactly 100 ml with water. Pipette a 20-ml aliquot 
of this solution into a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask, add 0.5 ml of 0.1 N 
HCl, 80 ml of 100 percent isopropanol, and two to four drops of thorin 
indicator. Titrate to a pink endpoint using 0.0100 N barium perchlorate. 
Repeat and average the titration volumes that agree within 1 percent or 
0.2 ml, whichever is larger. Use this volume in Equation 6-2 to 
determine the sulfur trioxide concentration. From the flask containing 
the remainder of the isopropanol sample, determine the fraction of 
SO<INF>2</INF> collected in the bubbler by pipetting 20-ml aliquots into 
250-ml Erlenmeyer flasks. Add 5 ml of 3 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>, 100 ml of 100 percent isopropanol, and two 
to four drips of thorin indicator, and titrate as before. From this 
titration volume, subtract the titrant volume determined for sulfur 
trioxide, and add the titrant volume determined for the peroxide 
portion. This final volume constitutes V<INF>t</INF>, the volume of 
barium perchlorate used for the SO<INF>2</INF> sample.

                             17.0 References

    1. Atmospheric Emissions from Sulfuric Acid Manufacturing Processes. 
U.S. DHEW, PHS, Division of Air Pollution. Public Health Service 
Publication No. 999-AP-13. Cincinnati, OH. 1965.
    2. Corbett, P.F. The Determination of SO<INF>2</INF> and 
SO<INF>3</INF> in Flue Gases. Journal of the Institute of Fuel. 24:237-
243. 1961.
    3. Matty, R.E., and E.K. Diehl. Measuring Flue-Gas SO<INF>2</INF> 
and SO<INF>3</INF>. Power. 101:94-97. November 1957.
    4. Patton, W.F., and J.A. Brink, Jr. New Equipment and Techniques 
for Sampling Chemical Process Gases. J. Air Pollution Control 
Association. 13:162. 1963.
    5. Rom, J.J. Maintenance, Calibration, and Operation of Isokinetic 
Source Sampling Equipment. Office of Air Programs, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. APTD-0576. March 1972.
    6. Hamil, H.F., and D.E. Camann. Collaborative Study of Method for 
the Determination of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions from Stationary Sources 
(Fossil-Fuel Fired Steam Generators). U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. EPA-650/4-74-024. December 1973.
    7. Annual Book of ASTM Standards. Part 31; Water, Atmospheric 
Analysis. American Society for Testing and Materials. Philadelphia, PA. 
1974. pp. 40-42.
    8. Knoll, J.E., and M.R. Midgett. The Application of EPA Method 6 to 
High Sulfur Dioxide Concentrations. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. EPA-600/4-76-038. July 1976.
    9. Westlin, P.R., and R.T. Shigehara. Procedure for Calibrating and 
Using Dry Gas Volume Meters as Calibration Standards. Source Evaluation 
Society Newsletter. 3(1):17-30. February 1978.
    10. Yu, K.K. Evaluation of Moisture Effect on Dry Gas Meter 
Calibration. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. 5(1):24-28. February 
1980.
    11. Lodge, J.P., Jr., et al. The Use of Hypodermic Needles as 
Critical Orifices in Air Sampling. J. Air Pollution Control Association. 
16:197-200. 1966.
    12. Shigehara, R.T., and C.B. Sorrell. Using Critical Orifices as 
Method 5 CalibrationStandards. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. 
10:4-15. August 1985.

[[Page 249]]

    13. Curtis, F., Analysis of Method 6 Samples in the Presence of 
Ammonia. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. 13(1):9-15 February 1988.

          18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts and Validation Data

       Table 6-1--Approximate Flow Rates for Various Needle Sizes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Needle
             Needle size  (gauge)                  length     Flow rate
                                                    (cm)       (ml/min)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
21............................................          7.6        1,100
22............................................          2.9        1,000
22............................................          3.8          900
23............................................          3.8          500
23............................................          5.1          450
24............................................          3.2          400
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 250]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.188


[[Page 251]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.189


[[Page 252]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.190


[[Page 253]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.191

Method 6A--Determination of Sulfur Dioxide, Moisture, and Carbon Dioxide 
                   From Fossil Fuel Combustion Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, Method 6, and Method 19.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 254]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SO2...............................      7449-09-05  3.4 mg SO2/m3
                                                    (2.12 x 10-7 lb/ft3)
CO2...............................        124-38-9  N/A
H2O...............................       7732-18-5  N/A
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of sulfur dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>) emissions from fossil fuel combustion 
sources in terms of concentration (mg/dscm or lb/dscf) and in terms of 
emission rate (ng/J or lb/10<SUP>6</SUP> Btu) and for the determination 
of carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) concentration (percent). Moisture 
content (percent), if desired, may also be determined by this method.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from a sampling point in the stack. 
The SO<INF>2</INF> and the sulfur trioxide, including those fractions in 
any sulfur acid mist, are separated. The SO<INF>2</INF> fraction is 
measured by the barium-thorin titration method. Moisture and 
CO<INF>2</INF> fractions are collected in the same sampling train, and 
are determined gravimetrically.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Same as Method 6, Section 4.0.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine 
the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to performing this 
test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. Same as Method 6, Section 5.2.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 6, Section 6.1, with the 
exception of the following:
    6.1.1 Sampling Train. A schematic of the sampling train used in this 
method is shown in Figure 6A-1.
    6.1.1.1 Impingers and Bubblers. Two 30=ml midget impingers with a 
1=mm restricted tip and two 30=ml midget bubblers with unrestricted 
tips. Other types of impingers and bubblers (e.g., Mae West for 
SO<INF>2</INF> collection and rigid cylinders containing Drierite for 
moisture absorbers), may be used with proper attention to reagent 
volumes and levels, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    6.1.1.2 CO<INF>2</INF> Absorber. A sealable rigid cylinder or bottle 
with an inside diameter between 30 and 90 mm , a length between 125 and 
250 mm, and appropriate connections at both ends. The filter may be a 
separate heated unit or may be within the heated portion of the probe. 
If the filter is within the sampling probe, the filter should not be 
within 15 cm of the probe inlet or any unheated section of the probe, 
such as the connection to the first bubbler. The probe and filter should 
be heated to at least 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) above the source 
temperature, but not greater than 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F). The filter 
temperature (i.e., the sample gas temperature) should be monitored to 
assure the desired temperature is maintained. A heated Teflon connector 
may be used to connect the filter holder or probe to the first impinger.

    Note: For applications downstream of wet scrubbers, a heated out-of-
stack filter (either borosilicate glass wool or glass fiber mat) is 
necessary.

    6.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 6, Section 6.2.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 6, Section 6.3, with the 
addition of a balance to measure within 0.05 g.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents must conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society. Where such specifications are not 
available, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 6, Section 7.1, with the 
addition of the following:
    7.1.1 Drierite. Anhydrous calcium sulfate (CaSO<INF>4</INF>) 
desiccant, 8 mesh, indicating type is recommended.

    Note: Do not use silica gel or similar desiccant in this 
application.

    7.1.2 CO<INF>2</INF> Absorbing Material. Ascarite II. Sodium 
hydroxide-coated silica, 8- to 20-mesh.
    7.2 Sample Recovery and Analysis. Same as Method 6, Sections 7.2 and 
7.3, respectively.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Preparation of Sampling Train.
    8.1.1 Measure 15 ml of 80 percent isopropanol into the first midget 
bubbler and 15 ml of 3 percent hydrogen peroxide into

[[Page 255]]

each of the two midget impingers (the second and third vessels in the 
train) as described in Method 6, Section 8.1. Insert the glass wool into 
the top of the isopropanol bubbler as shown in Figure 6A-1. Place about 
25 g of Drierite into the second midget bubbler (the fourth vessel in 
the train). Clean the outside of the bubblers and impingers and allow 
the vessels to reach room temperature. Weigh the four vessels 
simultaneously to the nearest 0.1 g, and record this initial weight 
(m<INF>wi</INF>).
    8.1.2 With one end of the CO<INF>2</INF> absorber sealed, place 
glass wool into the cylinder to a depth of about 1 cm (0.5 in.). Place 
about 150 g of CO<INF>2</INF> absorbing material in the cylinder on top 
of the glass wool, and fill the remaining space in the cylinder with 
glass wool. Assemble the cylinder as shown in Figure 6A-2. With the 
cylinder in a horizontal position, rotate it around the horizontal axis. 
The CO<INF>2</INF> absorbing material should remain in position during 
the rotation, and no open spaces or channels should be formed. If 
necessary, pack more glass wool into the cylinder to make the 
CO<INF>2</INF> absorbing material stable. Clean the outside of the 
cylinder of loose dirt and moisture and allow the cylinder to reach room 
temperature. Weigh the cylinder to the nearest 0.1 g, and record this 
initial weight (m<INF>ai</INF>).
    8.1.3 Assemble the train as shown in Figure 6A-1. Adjust the probe 
heater to a temperature sufficient to prevent condensation (see Note in 
Section 6.1). Place crushed ice and water around the impingers and 
bubblers. Mount the CO<INF>2</INF> absorber outside the water bath in a 
vertical flow position with the sample gas inlet at the bottom. Flexible 
tubing (e.g., Tygon) may be used to connect the last SO<INF>2</INF> 
absorbing impinger to the moisture absorber and to connect the moisture 
absorber to the CO<INF>2</INF> absorber. A second, smaller 
CO<INF>2</INF> absorber containing Ascarite II may be added in-line 
downstream of the primary CO<INF>2</INF> absorber as a breakthrough 
indicator. Ascarite II turns white when CO<INF>2</INF> is absorbed.
    8.2 Sampling Train Leak-Check Procedure and Sample Collection. Same 
as Method 6, Sections 8.2 and 8.3, respectively.
    8.3 Sample Recovery.
    8.3.1 Moisture Measurement. Disconnect the isopropanol bubbler, the 
SO<INF>2</INF> impingers, and the moisture absorber from the sample 
train. Allow about 10 minutes for them to reach room temperature, clean 
the outside of loose dirt and moisture, and weigh them simultaneously in 
the same manner as in Section 8.1. Record this final weight 
(m<INF>wf</INF>).
    8.3.2 Peroxide Solution. Discard the contents of the isopropanol 
bubbler and pour the contents of the midget impingers into a leak-free 
polyethylene bottle for shipping. Rinse the two midget impingers and 
connecting tubes with water, and add the washing to the same storage 
container.
    8.3.3 CO<INF>2</INF> Absorber. Allow the CO<INF>2</INF> absorber to 
warm to room temperature (about 10 minutes), clean the outside of loose 
dirt and moisture, and weigh to the nearest 0.1 g in the same manner as 
in Section 8.1. Record this final weight (m<INF>af</INF>). Discard used 
Ascarite II material.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    Same as Method 6, Section 9.0.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 6, Section 10.0.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample Analysis. The sample analysis procedure for 
SO<INF>2</INF> is the same as that specified in Method 6, Section 11.0.
    11.2 Quality Assurance (QA) Audit Samples. Analysis of QA audit 
samples is required only when this method is used for compliance 
determinations. Obtain an audit sample set as directed in Section 7.3.6 
of Method 6. Analyze the audit samples, and report the results as 
directed in Section 11.3 of Method 6. Acceptance criteria for the audit 
results are the same as those in Method 6.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Method 6, Section 12.0, with the addition of the following:
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>w</INF>=Concentration of moisture, percent.
C<INF>CO2</INF>=Concentration of CO<INF>2</INF>, dry basis, percent.
E<INF>SO2</INF>=Emission rate of SO<INF>2</INF>, ng/J (lb/10<SUP>6</SUP> 
Btu).
F<INF>C</INF>=Carbon F-factor from Method 19 for the fuel burned, dscm/J 
(dscf/10<SUP>6</SUP> Btu).
m<INF>wi</INF>=Initial weight of impingers, bubblers, and moisture 
absorber, g.
m<INF>wf</INF>=Final weight of impingers, bubblers, and moisture 
absorber, g.
m<INF>ai</INF>=Initial weight of CO<INF>2</INF> absorber, g.
m<INF>af</INF>=Final weight of CO<INF>2</INF> absorber, g.
m<INF>SO2</INF>=Mass of SO<INF>2</INF> collected, mg.
V<INF>CO2(std)</INF>=Equivalent volume of CO<INF>2</INF> collected at 
standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>w(std)</INF>=Equivalent volume of moisture collected at standard 
conditions, scm (scf).

    12.2 CO<INF>2</INF> Volume Collected, Corrected to Standard 
Conditions.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.192

Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=Equivalent volume of gaseous CO<INF>2</INF> at standard 
conditions, 5.467 x 10<SUP>-4</SUP> dscm/g (1.930 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP> 
dscf/g).

    12.3 Moisture Volume Collected, Corrected to Standard Conditions.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.193
    
Where:


[[Page 256]]


K<INF>4</INF>=Equivalent volume of water vapor at standard conditions, 
1.336 x 10<SUP>-3</SUP> scm/g (4.717 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP> scf/g).

    12.4 SO<INF>2</INF> Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.194
    
Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=32.03 mg SO<INF>2</INF>/meq. SO<INF>2</INF> (7.061 x 
10<SUP>-5</SUP> lb SO<INF>2</INF>/meq. SO<INF>2</INF>)

    12.5 CO<INF>2</INF> Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.195
    
    12.6 Moisture Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.196
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range and Precision. The minimum detectable limit and the upper 
limit for the measurement of SO<INF>2</INF> are the same as for Method 
6. For a 20-liter sample, this method has a precision of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 percent CO<INF>2</INF> for concentrations between 
2.5 and 25 percent CO<INF>2</INF> and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 percent 
moisture for moisture concentrations greater than 5 percent.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                        16.0 Alternative Methods

    If the only emission measurement desired is in terms of emission 
rate of SO<INF>2</INF> (ng/J or lb/10\6\ Btu), an abbreviated procedure 
may be used. The differences between the above procedure and the 
abbreviated procedure are described below.
    16.1 Sampling Train. The sampling train is the same as that shown in 
Figure 6A-1 and as described in Section 6.1, except that the dry gas 
meter is not needed.
    16.2 Preparation of the Sampling Train. Follow the same procedure as 
in Section 8.1, except do not weigh the isopropanol bubbler, the 
SO<INF>2</INF> absorbing impingers, or the moisture absorber.
    16.3 Sampling Train Leak-Check Procedure and Sample Collection. 
Leak-check and operate the sampling train as described in Section 8.2, 
except that dry gas meter readings, barometric pressure, and dry gas 
meter temperatures need not be recorded during sampling.
    16.4 Sample Recovery. Follow the procedure in Section 8.3, except do 
not weigh the isopropanol bubbler, the SO<INF>2</INF> absorbing 
impingers, or the moisture absorber.
    16.5 Sample Analysis. Analysis of the peroxide solution and QA audit 
samples is the same as that described in Sections 11.1 and 11.2, 
respectively.
    16.6 Calculations.
    16.6.1 SO<INF>2</INF> Collected.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.197
    

[[Page 257]]


Where:

K<INF>2</INF>=32.03 mg SO<INF>2</INF>/meq. SO<INF>2</INF>
K<INF>2</INF>=7.061 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> lb SO<INF>2</INF>/meq. 
SO<INF>2</INF>

    16.6.2 Sulfur Dioxide Emission Rate.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.198
    
Where:

K<INF>5</INF>=1.829 x 10\9\ mg/dscm
K<INF>2</INF>=0.1142 lb/dscf

                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 6, Section 17.0, References 1 through 8, with the 
addition of the following:

    1. Stanley, Jon and P.R. Westlin. An Alternate Method for Stack Gas 
Moisture Determination. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. 3(4). 
November 1978.
    2. Whittle, Richard N. and P.R. Westlin. Air Pollution Test Report: 
Development and Evaluation of an Intermittent Integrated SO<INF>2</INF>/
CO<INF>2</INF> Emission Sampling Procedure. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Emission Standard and Engineering Division, Emission Measurement 
Branch. Research Triangle Park, NC. December 1979. 14 pp.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 258]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.199


[[Page 259]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.410

  Method 6B--Determination of Sulfur Dioxide and Carbon Dioxide Daily 
          Average Emissions From Fossil Fuel Combustion Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, Method 6, and Method 6A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 260]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)..............      7449-09-05  3.4 mg SO2/m\3\
                                                    (2.12 x 10-7 lb/
                                                     ft\3\)
Carbon dioxide (CO2)..............        124-38-9  N/A
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of SO<INF>2</INF> emissions from combustion sources in terms of 
concentration (ng/dscm or lb/dscf) and emission rate (ng/J or lb/10\6\ 
Btu), and for the determination of CO<INF>2</INF> concentration 
(percent) on a daily (24 hours) basis.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from the sampling point in the stack 
intermittently over a 24-hour or other specified time period. The 
SO<INF>2</INF> fraction is measured by the barium-thorin titration 
method. Moisture and CO<INF>2</INF> fractions are collected in the same 
sampling train, and are determined gravimetrically.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Same as Method 6, Section 4.0.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine 
the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to performing this 
test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. Same as Method 6, Section 5.2.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Method 6A, Section 6.0, with the following exceptions and 
additions:
    6.1 The isopropanol bubbler is not used. An empty bubbler for the 
collection of liquid droplets, that does not allow direct contact 
between the collected liquid and the gas sample, may be included in the 
sampling train.
    6.2 For intermittent operation, include an industrial timer-switch 
designed to operate in the ``on'' position at least 2 minutes 
continuously and ``off'' the remaining period over a repeating cycle. 
The cycle of operation is designated in the applicable regulation. At a 
minimum, the sampling operation should include at least 12, equal, 
evenly-spaced periods per 24 hours.
    6.3 Stainless steel sampling probes, type 316, are not recommended 
for use with Method 6B because of potential sample contamination due to 
corrosion. Glass probes or other types of stainless steel, e.g., 
Hasteloy or Carpenter 20, are recommended for long-term use.

    Note: For applications downstream of wet scrubbers, a heated out-of-
stack filter (either borosilicate glass wool or glass fiber mat) is 
necessary. Probe and filter heating systems capable of maintaining a 
sample gas temperature of between 20 and 120 [deg]C (68 and 248 [deg]F) 
at the filter are also required in these cases. The electric supply for 
these heating systems should be continuous and separate from the timed 
operation of the sample pump.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Method 6A, Section 7.0, with the following exceptions:
    7.1 Isopropanol is not used for sampling.
    7.2 The hydrogen peroxide absorbing solution shall be diluted to no 
less than 6 percent by volume, instead of 3 percent as specified in 
Methods 6 and 6A.
    7.3 If the Method 6B sampling train is to be operated in a low 
sample flow condition (less than 100 ml/min or 0.21 ft\3\/hr), molecular 
sieve material may be substituted for Ascarite II as the CO<INF>2</INF> 
absorbing material. The recommended molecular sieve material is Union 
Carbide \1/16\ inch pellets, 5 A[deg], or equivalent. Molecular sieve 
material need not be discarded following the sampling run, provided that 
it is regenerated as per the manufacturer's instruction. Use of 
molecular sieve material at flow rates higher than 100 ml/min (0.21 
ft\3\/hr) may cause erroneous CO<INF>2</INF> results.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Preparation of Sampling Train. Same as Method 6A, Section 8.1, 
with the addition of the following:
    8.1.1 The sampling train is assembled as shown in Figure 6A-1 of 
Method 6A, except that the isopropanol bubbler is not included.
    8.1.2 Adjust the timer-switch to operate in the ``on'' position from 
2 to 4 minutes on a 2-hour repeating cycle or other cycle specified in 
the applicable regulation. Other timer sequences may be used with the 
restriction that the total sample volume collected is between 25 and 60 
liters (0.9 and 2.1 ft <SUP>3</SUP>) for the amounts of sampling 
reagents prescribed in this method.
    8.1.3 Add cold water to the tank until the impingers and bubblers 
are covered at least two-thirds of their length. The impingers and 
bubbler tank must be covered and protected from intense heat and direct 
sunlight. If freezing conditions exist, the impinger solution and the 
water bath must be protected.

    Note: Sampling may be conducted continuously if a low flow-rate 
sample pump [20

[[Page 261]]

to 40 ml/min (0.04 to 0.08 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/hr) for the reagent volumes 
described in this method] is used. If sampling is continuous, the timer-
switch is not necessary. In addition, if the sample pump is designed for 
constant rate sampling, the rate meter may be deleted. The total gas 
volume collected should be between 25 and 60 liters (0.9 and 2.1 
ft<SUP>3</SUP>) for the amounts of sampling reagents prescribed in this 
method.

    8.2 Sampling Train Leak-Check Procedure. Same as Method 6, Section 
8.2.
    8.3 Sample Collection.
    8.3.1 The probe and filter (either in-stack, out-of-stack, or both) 
must be heated to a temperature sufficient to prevent water 
condensation.
    8.3.2 Record the initial dry gas meter reading. To begin sampling, 
position the tip of the probe at the sampling point, connect the probe 
to the first impinger (or filter), and start the timer and the sample 
pump. Adjust the sample flow to a constant rate of approximately 1.0 
liter/min (0.035 cfm) as indicated by the rotameter. Observe the 
operation of the timer, and determine that it is operating as intended 
(i.e., the timer is in the ``on'' position for the desired period, and 
the cycle repeats as required).
    8.3.3 One time between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m. during the 24-hour 
sampling period, record the dry gas meter temperature (T<INF>m</INF>) 
and the barometric pressure (P<INF>(bar)</INF>).
    8.3.4 At the conclusion of the run, turn off the timer and the 
sample pump, remove the probe from the stack, and record the final gas 
meter volume reading. Conduct a leak-check as described in Section 8.2. 
If a leak is found, void the test run or use procedures acceptable to 
the Administrator to adjust the sample volume for leakage. Repeat the 
steps in Sections 8.3.1 to 8.3.4 for successive runs.
    8.4 Sample Recovery. The procedures for sample recovery (moisture 
measurement, peroxide solution, and CO<INF>2</INF> absorber) are the 
same as those in Method 6A, Section 8.3.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    Same as Method 6, Section 9.0., with the exception of the 
isopropanol-check.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 6, Section 10.0, with the addition of the following:
    10.1 Periodic Calibration Check. After 30 days of operation of the 
test train, conduct a calibration check according to the same procedures 
as the post-test calibration check (Method 6, Section 10.1.2). If the 
deviation between initial and periodic calibration factors exceeds 5 
percent, use the smaller of the two factors in calculations for the 
preceding 30 days of data, but use the most recent calibration factor 
for succeeding test runs.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Loss Check and Analysis. Same as Method 6, Sections 11.1 
and 11.2, respectively.
    11.2 Quality Assurance (QA) Audit Samples. Analysis of QA audit 
samples is required only when this method is used for compliance 
determinations. Obtain an audit sample set as directed in Section 7.3.6 
of Method 6. Analyze the audit samples at least once for every 30 days 
of sample collection, and report the results as directed in Section 11.3 
of Method 6. The analyst performing the sample analyses shall perform 
the audit analyses. If more than one analyst performs the sample 
analyses during the 30-day sampling period, each analyst shall perform 
the audit analyses and all audit results shall be reported. Acceptance 
criteria for the audit results are the same as those in Method 6.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Method 6A, Section 12.0, except that P<INF>bar</INF> and 
T<INF>m</INF> correspond to the values recorded in Section 8.3.3 of this 
method. The values are as follows:

P<INF>bar</INF>=Initial barometric pressure for the test period, mm Hg.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute meter temperature for the test period, [deg]K.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range.
    13.1.1 Sulfur Dioxide. Same as Method 6.
    13.1.2 Carbon Dioxide. Not determined.
    13.2 Repeatability and Reproducibility. EPA-sponsored collaborative 
studies were undertaken to determine the magnitude of repeatability and 
reproducibility achievable by qualified testers following the procedures 
in this method. The results of the studies evolve from 145 field tests 
including comparisons with Methods 3 and 6. For measurements of emission 
rates from wet, flue gas desulfurization units in (ng/J), the 
repeatability (intra-laboratory precision) is 8.0 percent and the 
reproducibility (inter-laboratory precision) is 11.1 percent.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                        16.0 Alternative Methods

    Same as Method 6A, Section 16.0, except that the timer is needed and 
is operated as outlined in this method.

                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 6A, Section 17.0, with the addition of the following:

    1. Butler, Frank E., et. al. The Collaborative Test of Method 6B: 
Twenty-Four-Hour Analysis of SO<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF>. JAPCA. 
Vol. 33, No. 10. October 1983.

[[Page 262]]

    18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 6C--Determination of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions From Stationary 
                Sources (Instrumental Analyzer Procedure)

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable to the determination of 
sulfur dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>) concentrations in controlled and 
uncontrolled emissions from stationary sources only when specified 
within the regulations.
    1.2 Principle. A gas sample is continuously extracted from a stack, 
and a portion of the sample is conveyed to an instrumental analyzer for 
determination of SO<INF>2</INF> gas concentration using an ultraviolet 
(UV), nondispersive infrared (NDIR), or fluorescence analyzer. 
Performance specifications and test procedures are provided to ensure 
reliable data.

                        2. Range and Sensitivity

    2.1 Analytical Range. The analytical range is determined by the 
instrumental design. For this method, a portion of the analytical range 
is selected by choosing the span of the monitoring system. The span of 
the monitoring system shall be selected such that the pollutant gas 
concentration equivalent to the emission standard is not less than 30 
percent of the span. If at any time during a run the measured gas 
concentration exceeds the span, the run shall be considered invalid.
    2.2 Sensitivity. The minimum detectable limit depends on the 
analytical range, span, and signal-to-noise ratio of the measurement 
system. For a well designed system, the minimum detectable limit should 
be less than 2 percent of the span.

                             3. Definitions

    3.1 Measurement System. The total equipment required for the 
determination of gas concentration. The measurement system consists of 
the following major subsystems:
    3.1.1 Sample Interface. That portion of a system used for one or 
more of the following: sample acquisition, sample transport, sample 
conditioning, or protection of the analyzers from the effects of the 
stack effluent.
    3.1.2 Gas Analyzer. That portion of the system that senses the gas 
to be measured and generates an output proportional to its 
concentration.
    3.1.3 Data Recorder. A strip chart recorder, analog computer, or 
digital recorder for recording measurement data from the analyzer 
output.
    3.2 Span. The upper limit of the gas concentration measurement range 
displayed on the data recorder.
    3.3 Calibration Gas. A known concentration of a gas in an 
appropriate diluent gas.
    3.4 Analyzer Calibration Error. The difference between the gas 
concentration exhibited by the gas analyzer and the known concentration 
of the calibration gas when the calibration gas is introduced directly 
to the analyzer.
    3.5 Sampling System Bias. The difference between the gas 
concentrations exhibited by the measurement system when a known 
concentration gas is introduced at the outlet of the sampling probe and 
when the same gas is introduced directly to the analyzer.
    3.6 Zero Drift. The difference in the measurement system output 
reading from the initial calibration response at the zero concentration 
level after a stated period of operation during which no unscheduled 
maintenance, repair, or adjustment took place.
    3.7 Calibration Drift. The difference in the measurement system 
output reading from the initial calibration response at a mid-range 
calibration value after a stated period of operation during which no 
unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment took place.
    3.8 Response Time. The amount of time required for the measurement 
system to display 95 percent of a step change in gas concentration on 
the data recorder.
    3.9 Interference Check. A method for detecting analytical 
interferences and excessive biases through direct comparison of gas 
concentrations provided by the measurement system and by a modified 
Method 6 procedure. For this check, the modified Method 6 samples are 
acquired at the sample by-pass discharge vent.
    3.10 Calibration Curve. A graph or other systematic method of 
establishing the relationship between the analyzer response and the 
actual gas concentration introduced to the analyzer.

            4. Measurement System Performance Specifications

    4.1 Analyzer Calibration Error. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
percent of the span for the zero, mid-range, and high-range calibration 
gases.
    4.2 Sampling System Bias. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent 
of the span for the zero, and mid- or high-range calibration gases.
    4.3 Zero Drift. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent of the 
span over the period of each run.
    4.4 Calibration Drift. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent of 
the span over the period of each run.
    4.5 Interference Check. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>7 percent of 
the modified Method 6 result for each run.

                        5. Apparatus and Reagents

    5.1 Measurement System. Any measurement system for SO<INF>2</INF> 
that meets the specifications of this method. A schematic of an 
acceptable measurement system is shown in Figure 6C-1. The essential 
components of the measurement system are described below:

[[Page 263]]

    5.1.1 Sample Probe. Glass, stainless steel, or equivalent, of 
sufficient length to traverse the sample points. The sampling probe 
shall be heated to prevent condensation.
    5.1.2 Sample Line. Heated (sufficient to prevent condensation) 
stainless steel or Teflon tubing, to transport the sample gas to the 
moisture removal system.
    5.1.3 Sample Transport Lines. Stainless steel or Teflon tubing, to 
transport the sample from the moisture removal system to the sample 
pump, sample flow rate control, and sample gas manifold.
    5.1.4 Calibration Valve Assembly. A three-way valve assembly, or 
equivalent, for blocking the sample gas flow and introducing calibration 
gases to the measurement system at the outlet of the sampling probe when 
in the calibration mode.
    5.1.5 Moisture Removal System. A refrigerator-type condenser or 
similar device (e.g., permeation dryer), to remove condensate 
continuously from the sample gas while maintaining minimal contact 
between the condensate and the sample gas. The moisture removal system 
is not necessary for analyzers that can measure gas concentrations on a 
wet basis; for these analyzers, (1) heat the sample line and all 
interface components up to the inlet of the analyzer sufficiently to 
prevent condensation, and (2) determine the moisture content and correct 
the measured gas concentrations to a dry basis using appropriate 
methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator. The determination 
of sample moisture content is not necessary for pollutant analyzers that 
measure concentrations on a wet basis when (1) a wet basis 
CO<INF>2</INF> analyzer operated according to Method 3A is used to 
obtain simultaneous measurements, and (2) the pollutant/CO<INF>2</INF> 
measurements are used to determine emissions in units of the standard.
    5.1.6 Particulate Filter. An in-stack or heated (sufficient to 
prevent water condensation) out-of-stack filter. The filter shall be 
borosilicate or quartz glass wool, or glass fiber mat. Additional 
filters at the inlet or outlet of the moisture removal system and inlet 
of the analyzer may be used to prevent accumulation of particulate 
material in the measurement system and extend the useful life of the 
components. All filters shall be fabricated of materials that are 
nonreactive to the gas being sampled.
    5.1.7 Sample Pump. A leak-free pump, to pull the sample gas through 
the system at a flow rate sufficient to minimize the response time of 
the measurement system. The pump may be constructed of any material that 
is nonreactive to the gas being sampled.
    5.1.8 Sample Flow Rate Control. A sample flow rate control valve and 
rotameter, or equivalent, to maintain a constant sampling rate within 10 
percent.

    (Note: The tester may elect to install a back-pressure regulator to 
maintain the sample gas manifold at a constant pressure in order to 
protect the analyzer(s) from overpressurization, and to minimize the 
need for flow rate adjustments.)

    5.1.9 Sample Gas Manifold. A sample gas manifold, to divert a 
portion of the sample gas stream to the analyzer, and the remainder to 
the by-pass discharge vent. The sample gas manifold should also include 
provisions for introducing calibration gases directly to the analyzer. 
The manifold may be constructed of any material that is nonreactive to 
the gas being sampled.
    5.1.10 Gas Analyzer. A UV or NDIR absorption or fluorescence 
analyzer, to determine continuously the SO<INF>2</INF> concentration in 
the sample gas stream. The analyzer shall meet the applicable 
performance specifications of Section 4. A means of controlling the 
analyzer flow rate and a device for determining proper sample flow rate 
(e.g., precision rotameter, pressure gauge downstream of all flow 
controls, etc.) shall be provided at the analyzer.

    (Note: Housing the analyzer(s) in a clean, thermally-stable, 
vibration-free environment will minimize drift in the analyzer 
calibration.)

    5.1.11 Data Recorder. A strip chart recorder, analog computer, or 
digital recorder, for recording measurement data. The data recorder 
resolution (i.e., readability) shall be 0.5 percent of span. 
Alternatively, a digital or analog meter having a resolution of 0.5 
percent of span may be used to obtain the analyzer responses and the 
readings may be recorded manually. If this alternative is used, the 
readings shall be obtained at equally spaced intervals over the duration 
of the sampling run. For sampling run durations of less than 1 hour, 
measurements at 1-minute intervals or a minimum of 30 measurements, 
whichever is less restrictive, shall be obtained. For sampling run 
durations greater than 1 hour, measurements at 2-minute intervals or a 
minimum of 96 measurements, whichever is less restrictive, shall be 
obtained.
    5.2 Method 6 Apparatus and Reagents. The apparatus and reagents 
described in Method 6, and shown by the schematic of the sampling train 
in Figure 6C-2, to conduct the interference check.
    5.3 SO<INF>2</INF> Calibration Gases. The calibration gases for the 
gas analyzer shall be SO<INF>2</INF> in N<INF>2</INF> or SO<INF>2</INF> 
in air. Alternatively, SO<INF>2</INF>/CO<INF>2</INF>, SO<INF>2</INF>/
O<INF>2</INF>, or SO<INF>2</INF>/CO<INF>2</INF>/O<INF>2</INF> gas 
mixtures in N<INF>2</INF> may be used. For fluorescence-based analyzers, 
the O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> concentrations of the calibration 
gases as introduced to the analyzer shall be within 1 percent (absolute) 
O<INF>2</INF> and 1 percent (absolute) CO<INF>2</INF> of the 
O<INF>2</INF> and Co<INF>2</INF> concentrations of the effluent samples 
as introduced to the analyzer. Alternatively, for fluorescence-based 
analyzers, use calibration blends of SO<INF>2</INF> in air and the 
nomographs provided by

[[Page 264]]

the vendor to determine the quenching correction factor (the effluent 
O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> concentrations must be known). Use 
three calibration gases as specified below:
    5.3.1 High-Range Gas. Concentration equivalent to 80 to 100 percent 
of the span.
    5.3.2 Mid-Range Gas. Concentration equivalent to 40 to 60 percent of 
the span.
    5.3.3 Zero Gas. Concentration of less than 0.25 percent of the span. 
Purified ambient air may be used for the zero gas by passing air through 
a charcoal filter, or through one or more impingers containing a 
solution of 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>.

            6. Measurement System Performance Test Procedures

    Perform the following procedures before measurement of emissions 
(Section 7).
    6.1 Calibration Gas Concentration Verification. There are two 
alternatives for establishing the concentrations of calibration gases. 
Alternative Number 1 is preferred.
    6.1.1 Alternative Number 1--Use of calibration gases that are 
analyzed following the Environmental Protection Agency Traceability 
Protocol Number 1 (see Citation 1 in the Bibliography). Obtain a 
certification from the gas manufacturer that Protocol Number 1 was 
followed.
    6.1.2 Alternative Number 2--Use of calibration gases not prepared 
according to Protocol Number 1. If this alternative is chosen, obtain 
gas mixtures with a manufacturer's tolerance not to exceed <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the tag value. Within 6 months before the 
emission test, analyze each of the calibration gases in triplicate using 
Method 6. Citation 2 in the Bibliography describes procedures and 
techniques that may be used for this analysis. Record the results on a 
data sheet (example is shown in Figure 6C-3). Each of the individual 
SO<INF>2</INF> analytical results for each calibration gas shall be 
within 5 percent (or 5 ppm, whichever is greater) of the triplicate set 
average; otherwise, discard the entire set, and repeat the triplicate 
analyses. If the average of the triplicate analyses is within 5 percent 
of the calibration gas manufacturer's cylinder tag value, use the tag 
value; otherwise, conduct at least three additional analyses until the 
results of six consecutive runs agree with 5 percent (or 5 ppm, 
whichever is greater) of their average. Then use this average for the 
cylinder value.
    6.2 Measurement System Preparation. Assemble the measurement system 
by following the manufacturer's written instructions for preparing and 
preconditioning the gas analyzer and, as applicable, the other system 
components. Introduce the calibration gases in any sequence, and make 
all necessary adjustments to calibrate the analyzer and the data 
recorder. Adjust system components to achieve correct sampling rates.
    6.3 Analyzer Calibration Error. Conduct the analyzer calibration 
error check by introducing calibration gases to the measurement system 
at any point upstream of the gas analyzer as follows:
    6.3.1 After the measurement system has been prepared for use, 
introduce the zero, mid-range, and high-range gases to the analyzer. 
During this check, make no adjustments to the system except those 
necessary to achieve the correct calibration gas flow rate at the 
analyzer. Record the analyzer responses to each calibration gas on a 
form similar to Figure 6C-4.

    Note: A calibration curve established prior to the analyzer 
calibration error check may be used to convert the analyzer response to 
the equivalent gas concentration introduced to the analyzer. However, 
the same correction procedure shall be used for all effluent and 
calibration measurements obtained during the test.

    6.3.2 The analyzer calibration error check shall be considered 
invalid if the gas concentration displayed by the analyzer exceeds 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the span for any of the calibration 
gases. If an invalid calibration is exhibited, take corrective action, 
and repeat the analyzer calibration error check until acceptable 
performance is achieved.
    6.4 Sampling System Bias Check. Perform the sampling system bias 
check by introducing calibration gases at the calibration valve 
installed at the outlet of the sampling probe. A zero gas and either the 
mid-range or high-range gas, whichever most closely approximates the 
effluent concentrations, shall be used for this check as follows:
    6.4.1 Introduce the upscale calibration gas, and record the gas 
concentration displayed by the analyzer on a form similar to Figure 6C-
5. Then introduce zero gas, and record the gas concentration displayed 
by the analyzer. During the sampling system bias check, operate the 
system at the normal sampling rate, and make no adjustments to the 
measurement system other than those necessary to achieve proper 
calibration gas flow rates at the analyzer. Alternately introduce the 
zero and upscale gases until a stable response is achieved. The tester 
shall determine the measurement system response time by observing the 
times required to achieve a stable response for both the zero and 
upscale gases. Note the longer of the two times as the response time.
    6.4.2 The sampling system bias check shall be considered invalid if 
the difference between the gas concentrations displayed by the 
measurement system for the analyzer calibration error check and for the 
sampling system bias check exceeds <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of 
the span for either the zero or upscale calibration gas. If an invalid 
calibration is exhibited, take corrective action, and repeat the 
sampling system bias check until acceptable

[[Page 265]]

performance is achieved. If adjustment to the analyzer is required, 
first repeat the analyzer calibration error check, then repeat the 
sampling system bias check.

                       7. Emission Test Procedure

    7.1 Selection of Sampling Site and Sampling Points. Select a 
measurement site and sampling points using the same criteria that are 
applicable to Method 6.
    7.2 Interference Check Preparation. For each individual analyzer, 
conduct an interference check for at least three runs during the initial 
field test on a particular source category. Retain the results, and 
report them with each test performed on that source category.
    If an interference check is being performed, assemble the modified 
Method 6 train (flow control valve, two midget impingers containing 3 
percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>, and dry gas meter) as shown in 
Figure 6C-2. Install the sampling train to obtain a sample at the 
measurement system sample by-pass discharge vent. Record the initial dry 
gas meter reading.
    7.3 Sample Collection. Position the sampling probe at the first 
measurement point, and begin sampling at the same rate as used during 
the sampling system bias check. Maintain constant rate sampling (i.e., 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) during the entire run. The sampling 
time per run shall be the same as for Method 6 plus twice the system 
response time. For each run, use only those measurements obtained after 
twice response time of the measurement system has elapsed, to determine 
the average effluent concentration. If an interference check is being 
performed, open the flow control valve on the modified Method 6 train 
concurrent with the initiation of the sampling period, and adjust the 
flow to 1 liter per minute (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent).

    (Note: If a pump is not used in the modified Method 6 train, caution 
should be exercised in adjusting the flow rate since overpressurization 
of the impingers may cause leakage in the impinger train, resulting in 
positively biased results).

    7.4 Zero and Calibration Drift Tests. Immediately preceding and 
following each run, or if adjustments are necessary for the measurement 
system during the run, repeat the sampling system bias check procedure 
described in Section 6.4 (Make no adjustments to the measurement system 
until after the drift checks are completed.) Record and analyzer's 
responses on a form similar to Figure 6C-5.
    7.4.1 If either the zero or upscale calibration value exceeds the 
sampling system bias specification, then the run is considered invalid. 
Repeat both the analyzer calibration error check procedure (Section 6.3) 
and the sampling system bias check procedure (Section 6.4) before 
repeating the run.
    7.4.2 If both the zero and upscale calibration values are within the 
sampling system bias specification, then use the average of the initial 
and final bias check values to calculate the gas concentration for the 
run. If the zero or upscale calibration drift value exceeds the drift 
limits, based on the difference between the sampling system bias check 
responses immediately before and after the run, repeat both the analyzer 
calibration error check procedure (Section 6.3) and the sampling system 
bias check procedure (Section 6.4) before conducting additional runs.
    7.5 Interference Check (if performed). After completing the run, 
record the final dry gas meter reading, meter temperature, and 
barometric pressure. Recover and analyze the contents of the midget 
impingers, and determine the SO<INF>2</INF> gas concentration using the 
procedures of Method 6. (It is not necessary to analyze EPA performance 
audit samples for Method 6.) Determine the average gas concentration 
exhibited by the analyzer for the run. If the gas concentrations 
provided by the analyzer and the modified Method 6 differ by more than 7 
percent of the modified Method 6 result, the run is invalidated.

                         8. Emission Calculation

    The average gas effluent concentration is determined from the 
average gas concentration displayed by the gas analyzer, and is adjusted 
for the zero and upscale sampling system bias checks, as determined in 
accordance with Section 7.4. The average gas concentration displayed by 
the analyzer may be determined by integration of the area under the 
curve for chart recorders, or by averaging all of the effluent 
measurements. Alternatively, the average may be calculated from 
measurements recorded at equally spaced intervals over the entire 
duration of the run. For sampling run durations of less than 1 hour, 
measurements at 1-minute intervals or a minimum of 30 measurements, 
whichever is less restrictive, shall be used. For sampling run durations 
greater than 1 hour, measurements at 2-minute intervals or a minimum of 
96 measurements, whichever is less restrictive, shall be used. Calculate 
the effluent gas concentration using Equation 6C-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.150

Where:

C<INF>gas</INF>=Effluent gas concentration, dry basis, ppm.
C=Average gas concentration indicated by gas analyzer, dry basis, ppm.
C<INF>o</INF>=Average of initial and final system calibration bias check 
responses for the zero gas, ppm.

[[Page 266]]

C<INF>m</INF>=Average of initial and final system calibration bias check 
responses for the upscale calibration gas, ppm.
C<INF>ma</INF>=Actual concentration of the upscale calibration gas, ppm.

                             9. Bibliography

    1. Traceability Protocol for Establishing True Concentrations of 
Gases Used for Calibrations and Audits of Continuous Source Emission 
Monitors: Protocol Number 1. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Quality Assurance Division. Research Triangle Park, NC. June 1978.
    2. Westlin, Peter R. and J. W. Brown. Methods for Collecting and 
Analyzing Gas Cylinder Samples. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. 
3(3):5-15. September 1978.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.141

               Figure 6C-3--Analysis of Calibration Gases

Date____________________________________________________________________
Analytic method used

[[Page 267]]

________________________________________________________________________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Gas concentration (indicate units)
                                  --------------------------------------
                                                              High-range
                                      Zero a    Mid-range b       c
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sample run:
  1..............................  ...........  ...........  ...........
  2..............................  ...........  ...........  ...........
  3..............................  ...........  ...........  ...........
    Average......................  ...........  ...........  ...........
Maximum percent deviation........  ...........  ...........  ...........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a Average must be less than 0.25 percent of span.
b Average must be 50 to 60 percent of span.
c Average must be 80 to 90 percent of span.

                 Figure 6C-4--Analyzer calibration data

Source identification:__________________________________________________
Test personnel:_________________________________________________________
Date:___________________________________________________________________
Analyzer calibration data for sampling
 runs:__________________________________________________________________
Span:___________________________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             Analyzer
                                                                Cylinder   calibration    Absolute    Difference
                                                                 value       response    difference  (percent of
                                                               (indicate    (indicate    (indicate      span)
                                                                 units)       units)       units)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zero gas....................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........
Mid-range gas...............................................  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........
High-range gas..............................................  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

           Figure 6C-5--System calibration bias and drift data

Source identification:__________________________________________________
Test personnel:_________________________________________________________
Date:___________________________________________________________________
Run number:_____________________________________________________________
Span:___________________________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                      Initial values             Final values
                                                ----------------------------------------------------
                                      Analyzer                System cal.               System cal.     Drift
                                    calibration     System        bias        System        bias     (percent of
                                      response   calibration  (percent of  calibration  (percent of     span)
                                                   response      span)       response      span)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zero gas..........................
Upscale gas.......................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.151

  Method 7--Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1 and Method 5.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nitrogen oxides (NOX), as NO2,
 including:
    Nitric oxide (NO).............      10102-43-9

[[Page 268]]

 
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)........      10102-44-0  2-400 mg/dscm
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the measurement of 
nitrogen oxides (NO<INF>X</INF>) emitted from stationary sources.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sample methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    A grab sample is collected in an evacuated flask containing a dilute 
sulfuric acid-hydrogen peroxide absorbing solution, and the nitrogen 
oxides, except nitrous oxide, are measured colorimetrically using the 
phenoldisulfonic acid (PDS) procedure.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Biased results have been observed when sampling under conditions of 
high sulfur dioxide concentrations (above 2000 ppm).

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and to 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs.
    5.2.2 Phenoldisulfonic Acid. Irritating to eyes and skin.
    5.2.3 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.4 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m <SUP>3</SUP> for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in 
higher concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. 
Reacts violently with metals and organics.
    5.2.5 Phenol. Poisonous and caustic. Do not handle with bare hands 
as it is absorbed through the skin.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. A schematic of the sampling train used in 
performing this method is shown in Figure 7-1. Other grab sampling 
systems or equipment, capable of measuring sample volume to within 2.0 
percent and collecting a sufficient sample volume to allow analytical 
reproducibility to within 5 percent, will be considered acceptable 
alternatives, subject to the approval of the Administrator. The 
following items are required for sample collection:
    6.1.1 Probe. Borosilicate glass tubing, sufficiently heated to 
prevent water condensation and equipped with an in-stack or heated out-
of-stack filter to remove particulate matter (a plug of glass wool is 
satisfactory for this purpose). Stainless steel or Teflon tubing may 
also be used for the probe. Heating is not necessary if the probe 
remains dry during the purging period.
    6.1.2 Collection Flask. Two-liter borosilicate, round bottom flask, 
with short neck and 24/40 standard taper opening, protected against 
implosion or breakage.
    6.1.3 Flask Valve. T-bore stopcock connected to a 24/40 standard 
taper joint.
    6.1.4 Temperature Gauge. Dial-type thermometer, or other temperature 
gauge, capable of measuring 1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F) intervals from -5 to 50 
[deg]C (23 to 122 [deg]F).
    6.1.5 Vacuum Line. Tubing capable of withstanding a vacuum of 75 mm 
(3 in.) Hg absolute pressure, with ``T'' connection and T-bore stopcock.
    6.1.6 Vacuum Gauge. U-tube manometer, 1 meter (39 in.), with 1 mm 
(0.04 in.) divisions, or other gauge capable of measuring pressure to 
within 2.5 mm (0.10 in.) Hg.
    6.1.7 Pump. Capable of evacuating the collection flask to a pressure 
equal to or less than 75 mm (3 in.) Hg absolute.
    6.1.8 Squeeze Bulb. One-way.
    6.1.9 Volumetric Pipette. 25-ml.
    6.1.10 Stopcock and Ground Joint Grease. A high-vacuum, high-
temperature chlorofluorocarbon grease is required. Halocarbon 25-5S has 
been found to be effective.
    6.1.11 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.5 mm (0.1 in.) Hg. See NOTE 
in Method 5, Section 6.1.2.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are required for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Graduated Cylinder. 50-ml with 1 ml divisions.

[[Page 269]]

    6.2.2 Storage Containers. Leak-free polyethylene bottles.
    6.2.3 Wash Bottle. Polyethylene or glass.
    6.2.4 Glass Stirring Rod.
    6.2.5 Test Paper for Indicating pH. To cover the pH range of 7 to 
14.
    6.3 Analysis. The following items are required for analysis:
    6.3.1 Volumetric Pipettes. Two 1-ml, two 2-ml, one 3-ml, one 4-ml, 
two 10-ml, and one 25-ml for each sample and standard.
    6.3.2 Porcelain Evaporating Dishes. 175- to 250-ml capacity with lip 
for pouring, one for each sample and each standard. The Coors No. 45006 
(shallowform, 195-ml) has been found to be satisfactory. Alternatively, 
polymethyl pentene beakers (Nalge No. 1203, 150-ml), or glass beakers 
(150-ml) may be used. When glass beakers are used, etching of the 
beakers may cause solid matter to be present in the analytical step; the 
solids should be removed by filtration.
    6.3.3 Steam Bath. Low-temperature ovens or thermostatically 
controlled hot plates kept below 70 [deg]C (160 [deg]F) are acceptable 
alternatives.
    6.3.4 Dropping Pipette or Dropper. Three required.
    6.3.5 Polyethylene Policeman. One for each sample and each standard.
    6.3.6 Graduated Cylinder. 100-ml with 1-ml divisions.
    6.3.7 Volumetric Flasks. 50-ml (one for each sample and each 
standard), 100-ml (one for each sample and each standard, and one for 
the working standard KNO<INF>3</INF> solution), and 1000-ml (one).
    6.3.8 Spectrophotometer. To measure at 410 nm.
    6.3.9 Graduated Pipette. 10-ml with 0.1-ml divisions.
    6.3.10 Test Paper for Indicating pH. To cover the pH range of 7 to 
14.
    6.3.11 Analytical Balance. To measure to within 0.1 mg.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents conform 
to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sampling:
    7.1.1 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 91 
Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). The 
KMnO<INF>4</INF> test for oxidizable organic matter may be omitted when 
high concentrations of organic matter are not expected to be present.
    7.1.2 Absorbing Solution. Cautiously add 2.8 ml concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> to a 1-liter flask partially filled with 
water. Mix well, and add 6 ml of 3 percent hydrogen peroxide, freshly 
prepared from 30 percent hydrogen peroxide solution. Dilute to 1 liter 
of water and mix well. The absorbing solution should be used within 1 
week of its preparation. Do not expose to extreme heat or direct 
sunlight.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. The following reagents are required for sample 
recovery:
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in 7.1.1.
    7.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide, 1 N. Dissolve 40 g NaOH in water, and dilute 
to 1 liter.
    7.3 Analysis. The following reagents and standards are required for 
analysis:
    7.3.1 Water. Same as in 7.1.1.
    7.3.2 Fuming Sulfuric Acid. 15 to 18 percent by weight free sulfur 
trioxide. HANDLE WITH CAUTION.
    7.3.3 Phenol. White solid.
    7.3.4 Sulfuric Acid. Concentrated, 95 percent minimum assay.
    7.3.5 Potassium Nitrate (KNO<INF>3</INF>). Dried at 105 to 110 
[deg]C (221 to 230 [deg]F) for a minimum of 2 hours just prior to 
preparation of standard solution.
    7.3.6 Standard KNO<INF>3</INF> Solution. Dissolve exactly 2.198 g of 
dried KNO<INF>3</INF> in water, and dilute to 1 liter with water in a 
1000-ml volumetric flask.
    7.3.7 Working Standard KNO<INF>3</INF> Solution. Dilute 10 ml of the 
standard solution to 100 ml with water. One ml of the working standard 
solution is equivalent to 100 [micro]g nitrogen dioxide 
(NO<INF>2</INF>).
    7.3.8 Phenoldisulfonic Acid Solution. Dissolve 25 g of pure white 
phenol solid in 150 ml concentrated sulfuric acid on a steam bath. Cool, 
add 75 ml fuming sulfuric acid (15 to 18 percent by weight free sulfur 
trioxide--HANDLE WITH CAUTION), and heat at 100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F) for 
2 hours. Store in a dark, stoppered bottle.
    7.3.9 Concentrated Ammonium Hydroxide.
    7.3.10 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. When making compliance 
determinations, and upon availability, audit samples may be obtained 
from the appropriate EPA Regional Office or from the responsible 
enforcement authority.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage and Transport

    8.1 Sample Collection.
    8.1.1 Flask Volume. The volume of the collection flask and flask 
valve combination must be known prior to sampling. Assemble the flask 
and flask valve, and fill with water to the stopcock. Measure the volume 
of water to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 ml. Record this volume on the 
flask.
    8.1.2 Pipette 25 ml of absorbing solution into a sample flask, 
retaining a sufficient quantity for use in preparing the calibration 
standards. Insert the flask valve stopper into the flask with the valve 
in the ``purge'' position. Assemble the sampling train as shown

[[Page 270]]

in Figure 7-1, and place the probe at the sampling point. Make sure that 
all fittings are tight and leak-free, and that all ground glass joints 
have been greased properly with a high-vacuum, high temperature 
chlorofluorocarbon-based stopcock grease. Turn the flask valve and the 
pump valve to their ``evacuate'' positions. Evacuate the flask to 75 mm 
(3 in.) Hg absolute pressure, or less. Evacuation to a pressure 
approaching the vapor pressure of water at the existing temperature is 
desirable. Turn the pump valve to its ``vent'' position, and turn off 
the pump. Check for leakage by observing the manometer for any pressure 
fluctuation. (Any variation greater than 10 mm (0.4 in.) Hg over a 
period of 1 minute is not acceptable, and the flask is not to be used 
until the leakage problem is corrected. Pressure in the flask is not to 
exceed 75 mm (3 in.) Hg absolute at the time sampling is commenced.) 
Record the volume of the flask and valve (V<INF>f</INF>), the flask 
temperature (T<INF>i</INF>), and the barometric pressure. Turn the flask 
valve counterclockwise to its ``purge'' position, and do the same with 
the pump valve. Purge the probe and the vacuum tube using the squeeze 
bulb. If condensation occurs in the probe and the flask valve area, heat 
the probe, and purge until the condensation disappears. Next, turn the 
pump valve to its ``vent'' position. Turn the flask valve clockwise to 
its ``evacuate'' position, and record the difference in the mercury 
levels in the manometer. The absolute internal pressure in the flask 
(P<INF>i</INF>) is equal to the barometric pressure less the manometer 
reading. Immediately turn the flask valve to the ``sample'' position, 
and permit the gas to enter the flask until pressures in the flask and 
sample line (i.e., duct, stack) are equal. This will usually require 
about 15 seconds; a longer period indicates a plug in the probe, which 
must be corrected before sampling is continued. After collecting the 
sample, turn the flask valve to its ``purge'' position, and disconnect 
the flask from the sampling train.
    8.1.3 Shake the flask for at least 5 minutes.
    8.1.4 If the gas being sampled contains insufficient oxygen for the 
conversion of NO to NO<INF>2</INF> (e.g., an applicable subpart of the 
standards may require taking a sample of a calibration gas mixture of NO 
in N<INF>2</INF>), then introduce oxygen into the flask to permit this 
conversion. Oxygen may be introduced into the flask by one of three 
methods: (1) Before evacuating the sampling flask, flush with pure 
cylinder oxygen, then evacuate flask to 75 mm (3 in.) Hg absolute 
pressure or less; or (2) inject oxygen into the flask after sampling; or 
(3) terminate sampling with a minimum of 50 mm (2 in.) Hg vacuum 
remaining in the flask, record this final pressure, and then vent the 
flask to the atmosphere until the flask pressure is almost equal to 
atmospheric pressure.
    8.2 Sample Recovery. Let the flask sit for a minimum of 16 hours, 
and then shake the contents for 2 minutes.
    8.2.1 Connect the flask to a mercury filled U-tube manometer. Open 
the valve from the flask to the manometer, and record the flask 
temperature (T<INF>f</INF>), the barometric pressure, and the difference 
between the mercury levels in the manometer. The absolute internal 
pressure in the flask (P<INF>f</INF>) is the barometric pressure less 
the manometer reading. Transfer the contents of the flask to a leak-free 
polyethylene bottle. Rinse the flask twice with 5 ml portions of water, 
and add the rinse water to the bottle. Adjust the pH to between 9 and 12 
by adding 1 N NaOH, dropwise (about 25 to 35 drops). Check the pH by 
dipping a stirring rod into the solution and then touching the rod to 
the pH test paper. Remove as little material as possible during this 
step. Mark the height of the liquid level so that the container can be 
checked for leakage after transport. Label the container to identify 
clearly its contents. Seal the container for shipping.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1..........................  Spectrophotometer  Ensure linearity of
                                 calibration.       spectrophotometer
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
11.4..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 analysis.          technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Spectrophotometer.
    10.1.1 Optimum Wavelength Determination.
    10.1.1.1 Calibrate the wavelength scale of the spectrophotometer 
every 6 months. The calibration may be accomplished by using an energy 
source with an intense line emission such as a mercury lamp, or by using 
a series of glass filters spanning the measuring range of the 
spectrophotometer. Calibration materials are available commercially and 
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Specific 
details on the use of such materials should be supplied by the vendor; 
general information about calibration techniques can be obtained from 
general reference books on analytical chemistry. The wavelength scale of 
the spectrophotometer must read correctly within 5 nm at all calibration 
points; otherwise, repair and recalibrate the spectrophotometer. Once 
the wavelength scale of the spectrophotometer is

[[Page 271]]

in proper calibration, use 410 nm as the optimum wavelength for the 
measurement of the absorbance of the standards and samples.
    10.1.1.2 Alternatively, a scanning procedure may be employed to 
determine the proper measuring wavelength. If the instrument is a 
double-beam spectrophotometer, scan the spectrum between 400 and 415 nm 
using a 200 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> standard solution in the sample cell 
and a blank solution in the reference cell. If a peak does not occur, 
the spectrophotometer is probably malfunctioning and should be repaired. 
When a peak is obtained within the 400 to 415 nm range, the wavelength 
at which this peak occurs shall be the optimum wavelength for the 
measurement of absorbance of both the standards and the samples. For a 
single-beam spectrophotometer, follow the scanning procedure described 
above, except scan separately the blank and standard solutions. The 
optimum wavelength shall be the wavelength at which the maximum 
difference in absorbance between the standard and the blank occurs.
    10.1.2 Determination of Spectrophotometer Calibration Factor 
K<INF>c</INF>. Add 0 ml, 2.0 ml, 4.0 ml, 6.0 ml, and 8.0 ml of the 
KNO<INF>3</INF> working standard solution (1 ml=100 [micro]g 
NO<INF>2</INF>) to a series of five 50-ml volumetric flasks. To each 
flask, add 25 ml of absorbing solution and 10 ml water. Add 1 N NaOH to 
each flask until the pH is between 9 and 12 (about 25 to 35 drops). 
Dilute to the mark with water. Mix thoroughly, and pipette a 25-ml 
aliquot of each solution into a separate porcelain evaporating dish. 
Beginning with the evaporation step, follow the analysis procedure of 
Section 11.2 until the solution has been transferred to the 100-ml 
volumetric flask and diluted to the mark. Measure the absorbance of each 
solution at the optimum wavelength as determined in Section 10.2.1. This 
calibration procedure must be repeated on each day that samples are 
analyzed. Calculate the spectrophotometer calibration factor as shown in 
Section 12.2.
    10.1.3 Spectrophotometer Calibration Quality Control. Multiply the 
absorbance value obtained for each standard by the K<INF>c</INF> factor 
(reciprocal of the least squares slope) to determine the distance each 
calibration point lies from the theoretical calibration line. The 
difference between the calculated concentration values and the actual 
concentrations (i.e., 100, 200, 300, and 400 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>) 
should be less than 7 percent for all standards.
    10.2 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer.
    10.3 Temperature Gauge. Calibrate dial thermometers against mercury-
in-glass thermometers.
    10.4 Vacuum Gauge. Calibrate mechanical gauges, if used, against a 
mercury manometer such as that specified in Section 6.1.6.
    10.5 Analytical Balance. Calibrate against standard weights.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Loss Check. Note the level of the liquid in the 
container, and confirm whether any sample was lost during shipment. Note 
this on the analytical data sheet. If a noticeable amount of leakage has 
occurred, either void the sample or use methods, subject to the approval 
of the Administrator, to correct the final results.
    11.2 Sample Preparation. Immediately prior to analysis, transfer the 
contents of the shipping container to a 50 ml volumetric flask, and 
rinse the container twice with 5 ml portions of water. Add the rinse 
water to the flask, and dilute to mark with water; mix thoroughly. 
Pipette a 25-ml aliquot into the porcelain evaporating dish. Return any 
unused portion of the sample to the polyethylene storage bottle. 
Evaporate the 25-ml aliquot to dryness on a steam bath, and allow to 
cool. Add 2 ml phenoldisulfonic acid solution to the dried residue, and 
triturate thoroughly with a polyethylene policeman. Make sure the 
solution contacts all the residue. Add 1 ml water and 4 drops of 
concentrated sulfuric acid. Heat the solution on a steam bath for 3 
minutes with occasional stirring. Allow the solution to cool, add 20 ml 
water, mix well by stirring, and add concentrated ammonium hydroxide, 
dropwise, with constant stirring, until the pH is 10 (as determined by 
pH paper). If the sample contains solids, these must be removed by 
filtration (centrifugation is an acceptable alternative, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator) as follows: Filter through Whatman No. 41 
filter paper into a 100-ml volumetric flask. Rinse the evaporating dish 
with three 5-ml portions of water. Filter these three rinses. Wash the 
filter with at least three 15-ml portions of water. Add the filter 
washings to the contents of the volumetric flask, and dilute to the mark 
with water. If solids are absent, the solution can be transferred 
directly to the 100-ml volumetric flask and diluted to the mark with 
water.
    11.3 Sample Analysis. Mix the contents of the flask thoroughly, and 
measure the absorbance at the optimum wavelength used for the standards 
(Section 10.2.1), using the blank solution as a zero reference. Dilute 
the sample and the blank with equal volumes of water if the absorbance 
exceeds A<INF>4</INF>, the absorbance of the 400-[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> 
standard (see Section 10.2.2).
    11.4 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.4.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, an audit sample must be 
analyzed, subject to availability.
    11.4.2 Concurrently analyze the audit sample and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.

[[Page 272]]

    11.4.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
must be used for the compliance samples and the audit sample. If this 
condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance analyses 
for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is waived. An 
audit sample set may not be used to validate different sets of 
compliance samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement 
agencies, unless prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement 
agencies.
    11.5 Audit Sample Results.
    11.5.1 Calculate the audit sample concentrations and submit results 
using the instructions provided with the audit samples.
    11.5.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.5.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst must agree within 5 percent of the actual concentration. If the 
5 percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and audit 
samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test report.
    11.5.4 Failure to meet the 5-percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit 
results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out the calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculations.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

A=Absorbance of sample.
A<INF>1</INF>=Absorbance of the 100-[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> standard.
A<INF>2</INF>=Absorbance of the 200-[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> standard.
A<INF>3</INF>=Absorbance of the 300-[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> standard.
A<INF>4</INF>=Absorbance of the 400-[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> standard.
C=Concentration of NO<INF>X</INF> as NO<INF>2</INF>, dry basis, 
corrected to standard conditions, mg/dsm\3\ (lb/dscf).
C<INF>d</INF>=Determined audit sample concentration, mg/dscm.
C<INF>a</INF>=Actual audit sample concentration, mg/dscm.
F=Dilution factor (i.e., 25/5, 25/10, etc., required only if sample 
dilution was needed to reduce the absorbance into the range of the 
calibration).
K<INF>c</INF>=Spectrophotometer calibration factor.
m=Mass of NO<INF>X</INF> as NO<INF>2</INF> in gas sample, [micro]g.
P<INF>f</INF>=Final absolute pressure of flask, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>i</INF>=Initial absolute pressure of flask, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
RE=Relative error for QA audit samples, percent.
T<INF>f</INF>=Final absolute temperature of flask, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>i</INF>=Initial absolute temperature of flask, [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>sc</INF>=Sample volume at standard conditions (dry basis), ml.
V<INF>f</INF>=Volume of flask and valve, ml.
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of absorbing solution, 25 ml.
    12.2 Spectrophotometer Calibration Factor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.200
    
    12.3 Sample Volume, Dry Basis, Corrected to Standard Conditions.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.201
    

[[Page 273]]


Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3858 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,
K<INF>1</INF>=17.65 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    12.4 Total [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> per sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.202
    
Where:
2=50/25, the aliquot factor.

    Note: If other than a 25-ml aliquot is used for analysis, the factor 
2 must be replaced by a corresponding factor.

    12.5 Sample Concentration, Dry Basis, Corrected to Standard 
Conditions.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.203

Where:

K2=10\3\ (mg/m\3\)/([micro]g/ml) for metric units,
K<INF>2</INF>=6.242 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> (lb/scf)/([micro]g/ml) for English 
units.
12.6 Relative Error for QA Audit Samples.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.204

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. The analytical range of the method has been determined 
to be 2 to 400 milligrams NO<INF>X</INF> (as NO<INF>2</INF>) per dry 
standard cubic meter, without having to dilute the sample.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Standard Methods of Chemical Analysis. 6th ed. New York, D. Van 
Nostrand Co., Inc. 1962. Vol. 1, pp. 329-330.
    2. Standard Method of Test for Oxides of Nitrogen in Gaseous 
Combustion Products (Phenoldisulfonic Acid Procedure). In: 1968 Book of 
ASTM Standards, Part 26. Philadelphia, PA. 1968. ASTM Designation D 
1608-60, pp. 725-729.
    3. Jacob, M.B. The Chemical Analysis of Air Pollutants. New York. 
Interscience Publishers, Inc. 1960. Vol. 10, pp. 351-356.
    4. Beatty, R.L., L.B. Berger, and H.H. Schrenk. Determination of 
Oxides of Nitrogen by the Phenoldisulfonic Acid Method. Bureau of Mines, 
U.S. Dept. of Interior. R.I. 3687. February 1943.
    5. Hamil, H.F. and D.E. Camann. Collaborative Study of Method for 
the Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions from Stationary Sources 
(Fossil Fuel-Fired Steam Generators). Southwest Research Institute 
Report for Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. 
October 5, 1973.
    6. Hamil, H.F. and R.E. Thomas. Collaborative Study of Method for 
the Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions from Stationary Sources 
(Nitric Acid Plants). Southwest Research Institute Report for 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. May 8, 
1974.
    7. Stack Sampling Safety Manual (Draft). U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, 
Research Triangle Park, NC. September 1978.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 274]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.205

  Method 7A--Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions From Stationary 
                  Sources (Ion Chromatographic Method)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 3, Method 5, and 
Method 7.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 275]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nitrogen oxides (NOX), as NO2,
 including:
    Nitric oxide (NO).............      10102-43-9  ....................
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)........      10102-44-0  65-655 ppmv
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of NO<INF>X</INF> emissions from stationary sources.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    A grab sample is collected in an evacuated flask containing a dilute 
sulfuric acid-hydrogen peroxide absorbing solution. The nitrogen oxides, 
excluding nitrous oxide (N<INF>2</INF>O), are oxidized to nitrate and 
measured by ion chromatography.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Biased results have been observed when sampling under conditions of 
high sulfur dioxide concentrations (above 2000 ppm).

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
test method to establish appropriate safety and health practices and to 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs.
    5.2.2 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 3 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> will cause lung damage in uninitiated. 1 mg/
m<SUP>3</SUP> for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in higher 
concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts 
violently with metals and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as in Method 7, Section 6.1.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. Same as in Method 7, Section 6.2, except the 
stirring rod and pH paper are not needed.
    6.3 Analysis. For the analysis, the following equipment and supplies 
are required. Alternative instrumentation and procedures will be allowed 
provided the calibration precision requirement in Section 10.1.2 and 
audit accuracy requirement in Section 11.3 can be met.
    6.3.1 Volumetric Pipets. Class A;1-, 2-, 4-, 5-ml (two for the set 
of standards and one per sample), 6-, 10-, and graduated 5-ml sizes.
    6.3.2 Volumetric Flasks. 50-ml (two per sample and one per 
standard), 200-ml, and 1-liter sizes.
    6.3.3 Analytical Balance. To measure to within 0.1 mg.
    6.3.4 Ion Chromatograph. The ion chromatograph should have at least 
the following components:
    6.3.4.1 Columns. An anion separation or other column capable of 
resolving the nitrate ion from sulfate and other species present and a 
standard anion suppressor column (optional). Suppressor columns are 
produced as proprietary items; however, one can be produced in the 
laboratory using the resin available from BioRad Company, 32nd and 
Griffin Streets, Richmond, California. Peak resolution can be optimized 
by varying the eluent strength or column flow rate, or by experimenting 
with alternative columns that may offer more efficient separation. When 
using guard columns with the stronger reagent to protect the separation 
column, the analyst should allow rest periods between injection 
intervals to purge possible sulfate buildup in the guard column.
    6.3.4.2 Pump. Capable of maintaining a steady flow as required by 
the system.
    6.3.4.3 Flow Gauges. Capable of measuring the specified system flow 
rate.
    6.3.4.4 Conductivity Detector.
    6.3.4.5 Recorder. Compatible with the output voltage range of the 
detector.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents conform 
to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 7, Section 7.1.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 7, Section 7.1.1.

[[Page 276]]

    7.3 Analysis. The following reagents and standards are required for 
analysis:
    7.3.1 Water. Same as Method 7, Section 7.1.1.
    7.3.2 Stock Standard Solution, 1 mg NO<INF>2</INF>/ml. Dry an 
adequate amount of sodium nitrate (NaNO<INF>3</INF>) at 105 to 110 
[deg]C (221 to 230 [deg]F) for a minimum of 2 hours just before 
preparing the standard solution. Then dissolve exactly 1.847 g of dried 
NaNO<INF>3</INF> in water, and dilute to l liter in a volumetric flask. 
Mix well. This solution is stable for 1 month and should not be used 
beyond this time.
    7.3.3 Working Standard Solution, 25 [micro]g/ml. Dilute 5 ml of the 
standard solution to 200 ml with water in a volumetric flask, and mix 
well.
    7.3.4 Eluent Solution. Weigh 1.018 g of sodium carbonate 
(Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>) and 1.008 g of sodium bicarbonate 
(NaHCO<INF>3</INF>), and dissolve in 4 liters of water. This solution is 
0.0024 M Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>/0.003 M NaHCO<INF>3</INF>. Other 
eluents appropriate to the column type and capable of resolving nitrate 
ion from sulfate and other species present may be used.
    7.3.5 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. Same as Method 7, Section 
7.3.8.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sampling. Same as in Method 7, Section 8.1.
    8.2 Sample Recovery. Same as in Method 7, Section 8.2, except delete 
the steps on adjusting and checking the pH of the sample. Do not store 
the samples more than 4 days between collection and analysis.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1..........................  Ion chromatograph  Ensure linearity of
                                 calibration.       ion chromatograph
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
11.3..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 analysis.          technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    10.1 Ion Chromatograph.
    10.1.1 Determination of Ion Chromatograph Calibration Factor S. 
Prepare a series of five standards by adding 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 6.0, and 
10.0 ml of working standard solution (25 [micro]g/ml) to a series of 
five 50-ml volumetric flasks. (The standard masses will equal 25, 50, 
100, 150, and 250 [micro]g.) Dilute each flask to the mark with water, 
and mix well. Analyze with the samples as described in Section 11.2, and 
subtract the blank from each value. Prepare or calculate a linear 
regression plot of the standard masses in [micro]g (x-axis) versus their 
peak height responses in millimeters (y-axis). (Take peak height 
measurements with symmetrical peaks; in all other cases, calculate peak 
areas.) From this curve, or equation, determine the slope, and calculate 
its reciprocal to denote as the calibration factor, S.
    10.1.2 Ion Chromatograph Calibration Quality Control. If any point 
on the calibration curve deviates from the line by more than 7 percent 
of the concentration at that point, remake and reanalyze that standard. 
This deviation can be determined by multiplying S times the peak height 
response for each standard. The resultant concentrations must not differ 
by more than 7 percent from each known standard mass (i.e., 25, 50, 100, 
150, and 250 [micro]g).
    10.2 Conductivity Detector. Calibrate according to manufacturer's 
specifications prior to initial use.
    10.3 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer.
    10.4 Temperature Gauge. Calibrate dial thermometers against mercury-
in-glass thermometers.
    10.5 Vacuum Gauge. Calibrate mechanical gauges, if used, against a 
mercury manometer such as that specified in Section 6.1.6 of Method 7.
    10.6 Analytical Balance. Calibrate against standard weights.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Preparation.
    11.1.1 Note on the analytical data sheet, the level of the liquid in 
the container, and whether any sample was lost during shipment. If a 
noticeable amount of leakage has occurred, either void the sample or use 
methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, to correct the 
final results. Immediately before analysis, transfer the contents of the 
shipping container to a 50-ml volumetric flask, and rinse the container 
twice with 5 ml portions of water. Add the rinse water to the flask, and 
dilute to the mark with water. Mix thoroughly.
    11.1.2 Pipet a 5-ml aliquot of the sample into a 50-ml volumetric 
flask, and dilute to the mark with water. Mix thoroughly. For each set 
of determinations, prepare a reagent blank by diluting 5 ml of absorbing 
solution to 50 ml with water. (Alternatively, eluent solution may be 
used instead of water in all sample, standard, and blank dilutions.)
    11.2 Analysis.
    11.2.1 Prepare a standard calibration curve according to Section 
10.1.1. Analyze the set of standards followed by the set of samples 
using the same injection volume for

[[Page 277]]

both standards and samples. Repeat this analysis sequence followed by a 
final analysis of the standard set. Average the results. The two sample 
values must agree within 5 percent of their mean for the analysis to be 
valid. Perform this duplicate analysis sequence on the same day. Dilute 
any sample and the blank with equal volumes of water if the 
concentration exceeds that of the highest standard.
    11.2.2 Document each sample chromatogram by listing the following 
analytical parameters: injection point, injection volume, nitrate and 
sulfate retention times, flow rate, detector sensitivity setting, and 
recorder chart speed.
    11.3 Audit Sample Analysis. Same as Method 7, Section 11.4.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out the calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculations.
    12.1 Sample Volume. Calculate the sample volume Vsc (in ml), on a 
dry basis, corrected to standard conditions, using Equation 7-2 of 
Method 7.
    12.2 Sample Concentration of NO<INF>X</INF> as NO<INF>2</INF>.
    12.2.1 Calculate the sample concentration C (in mg/dscm) as follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.206
    
Where:

H=Sample peak height, mm.
S=Calibration factor, [micro]g/mm.
F=Dilution factor (required only if sample dilution was needed to reduce 
the concentration into the range of calibration), dimensionless.
10<SUP>4</SUP>=1:10 dilution times conversion factor of: (mg/10\3\ 
[micro]g)(10\6\ ml/m\3\).

    12.2.2 If desired, the concentration of NO<INF>2</INF> may be 
calculated as ppm NO<INF>2</INF> at standard conditions as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.207

Where:

0.5228=ml/mg NO<INF>2</INF>.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. The analytical range of the method is from 125 to 1250 
mg NO<INF>X</INF>/m<SUP>3</SUP> as NO<INF>2</INF> (65 to 655 ppmv), and 
higher concentrations may be analyzed by diluting the sample. The lower 
detection limit is approximately 19 mg/m\3\ (10 ppmv), but may vary 
among instruments.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Mulik, J.D., and E. Sawicki. Ion Chromatographic Analysis of 
Environmental Pollutants. Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Inc. 
Vol. 2, 1979.
    2. Sawicki, E., J.D. Mulik, and E. Wittgenstein. Ion Chromatographic 
Analysis of Environmental Pollutants. Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor Science 
Publishers, Inc. Vol. 1. 1978.
    3. Siemer, D.D. Separation of Chloride and Bromide from Complex 
Matrices Prior to Ion Chromatographic Determination. Anal. Chem. 
52(12):1874-1877. October 1980.
    4. Small, H., T.S. Stevens, and W.C. Bauman. Novel Ion Exchange 
Chromatographic Method Using Conductimetric Determination. Anal. Chem. 
47(11):1801. 1975.
    5. Yu, K.K., and P.R. Westlin. Evaluation of Reference Method 7 
Flask Reaction Time. Source Evaluation Society Newsletter. 4(4). 
November 1979. 10 pp.
    6. Stack Sampling Safety Manual (Draft). U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standard, Research 
Triangle Park, NC. September 1978.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 7B--Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions From Stationary 
             Sources (Ultraviolet Spectrophotometric Method)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 5, and Method 7.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nitrogen oxides (NOX), as NO2,
 including:
    Nitric oxide (NO).............      10102-43-9
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)........      10102-44-0  30-786 ppmv
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 278]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of NO<INF>X</INF> emissions from nitric acid plants.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A grab sample is collected in an evacuated flask containing a 
dilute sulfuric acid-hydrogen peroxide absorbing solution; the 
NO<INF>X</INF>, excluding nitrous oxide (N<INF>2</INF>O), are measured 
by ultraviolet spectrophotometry.

                        3.0 Definition [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
test method to establish appropriate safety and health practices and to 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.3 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 3 mg/m \3\ will cause lung damage in uninitiated. 1 mg/m \3\ for 
8 hours will cause lung damage or, in higher concentrations, death. 
Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts violently with metals 
and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 7, Section 6.1.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are required for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Wash Bottle. Polyethylene or glass.
    6.2.2 Volumetric Flasks. 100-ml (one for each sample).
    6.3 Analysis. The following items are required for analysis:
    6.3.1 Volumetric Pipettes. 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-ml to make standards 
and sample dilutions.
    6.3.2 Volumetric Flasks. 1000- and 100-ml for preparing standards 
and dilution of samples.
    6.3.3 Spectrophotometer. To measure ultraviolet absorbance at 210 
nm.
    6.3.4 Analytical Balance. To measure to within 0.1 mg.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents are to conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are available. 
Otherwise, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 7, Section 7.1. It is 
important that the amount of hydrogen peroxide in the absorbing solution 
not be increased. Higher concentrations of peroxide may interfere with 
sample analysis.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 7, Section 7.2.
    7.3 Analysis. Same as Method 7, Sections 7.3.1, 7.3.3, and 7.3.4, 
with the addition of the following:
    7.3.1 Working Standard KNO<INF>3</INF> Solution. Dilute 10 ml of the 
standard solution to 1000 ml with water. One milliliter of the working 
standard is equivalent to 10 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 7, Section 8.1.
    8.2 Sample Recovery.
    8.2.1 Let the flask sit for a minimum of 16 hours, and then shake 
the contents for 2 minutes.
    8.2.2 Connect the flask to a mercury filled U-tube manometer. Open 
the valve from the flask to the manometer, and record the flask 
temperature (T<INF>f</INF>), the barometric pressure, and the difference 
between the mercury levels in the manometer. The absolute internal 
pressure in the flask (P<INF>f</INF>) is the barometric pressure less 
the manometer reading.
    8.2.3 Transfer the contents of the flask to a leak-free wash bottle. 
Rinse the flask three times with 10-ml portions of water, and add to the 
bottle. Mark the height of the liquid level so that the container can be 
checked for leakage after transport. Label the container to identify 
clearly its contents. Seal the container for shipping.

                           9.0 Quality Control

[[Page 279]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1..........................  Spectrophometer    Ensures linearity of
                                 calibration.       spectrophotometer
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
11.4..........................  Audit sample       Evaluates analytical
                                 analysis.          technique and
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    Same as Method 7, Sections 10.2 through 10.5, with the addition of 
the following:
    10.1 Determination of Spectrophotometer Standard Curve. Add 0 ml, 5 
ml, 10 ml, 15 ml, and 20 ml of the KNO<INF>3</INF> working standard 
solution (1 ml=10 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>) to a series of five 100-ml 
volumetric flasks. To each flask, add 5 ml of absorbing solution. Dilute 
to the mark with water. The resulting solutions contain 0.0, 50, 100, 
150, and 200 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>, respectively. Measure the 
absorbance by ultraviolet spectrophotometry at 210 nm, using the blank 
as a zero reference. Prepare a standard curve plotting absorbance vs. 
[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>.

    Note: If other than a 20-ml aliquot of sample is used for analysis, 
then the amount of absorbing solution in the blank and standards must be 
adjusted such that the same amount of absorbing solution is in the blank 
and standards as is in the aliquot of sample used.

    10.1.1 Calculate the spectrophotometer calibration factor as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.208

Where:

Mi=Mass of NO<INF>2</INF> in standard i, [micro]g.
Ai=Absorbance of NO<INF>2</INF> standard i.
n=Total number of calibration standards.

    10.1.2 For the set of calibration standards specified here, Equation 
7B-1 simplifies to the following:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.209

    10.2 Spectrophotometer Calibration Quality Control. Multiply the 
absorbance value obtained for each standard by the K<INF>c</INF> factor 
(reciprocal of the least squares slope) to determine the distance each 
calibration point lies from the theoretical calibration line. The 
difference between the calculated concentration values and the actual 
concentrations (i.e., 50, 100, 150, and 200 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>) 
should be less than 7 percent for all standards.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Loss Check. Note the level of the liquid in the 
container, and confirm whether any sample was lost during shipment. Note 
this on the analytical data sheet. If a noticeable amount of leakage has 
occurred, either void the sample or use methods, subject to the approval 
of the Administrator, to correct the final results.
    11.2 Sample Preparation. Immediately prior to analysis, transfer the 
contents of the shipping container to a 100-ml volumetric flask, and 
rinse the container twice with 5-ml portions of water. Add the rinse 
water to the flask, and dilute to mark with water.
    11.3 Sample Analysis. Mix the contents of the flask thoroughly and 
pipette a 20 ml-aliquot of sample into a 100-ml volumetric flask. Dilute 
to the mark with water. Using the blank as zero reference, read the 
absorbance of the sample at 210 nm.
    11.4 Audit Sample Analysis. Same as Method 7, Section 11.4, except 
that a set of audit samples must be analyzed with each set of compliance 
samples or once per analysis day, or once per week when averaging 
continuous samples.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Method 7, Section 12.0, except replace Section 12.3 with the 
following:
    12.1 Total [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> Per Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.211
    
Where:

5=100/20, the aliquot factor.

    Note: If other than a 20-ml aliquot is used for analysis, the factor 
5 must be replaced by a corresponding factor.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. The analytical range of the method as outlined has been 
determined to be 57 to 1500 milligrams NO<INF>X</INF> (as 
NO<INF>2</INF>) per dry

[[Page 280]]

standard cubic meter, or 30 to 786 parts per million by volume (ppmv) 
NO<INF>X</INF>.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 
Recommendations for Occupational Exposure to Nitric Acid. In: 
Occupational Safety and Health Reporter. Washington, D.C. Bureau of 
National Affairs, Inc. 1976. p. 149.
    2. Rennie, P.J., A.M. Sumner, and F.B. Basketter. Determination of 
Nitrate in Raw, Potable, and Waste Waters by Ultraviolet 
Spectrophotometry. Analyst. 104:837. September 1979.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 7C--Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions From Stationary 
           Sources (Alkaline Permanganate/Colorimetric Method)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 3, Method 6 and 
Method 7.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS no.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nitrogen oxides (NOX), as NO2,
 including:
    Nitric oxide (NO).............      10102-43-9  ....................
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)........     10102-44-07  ppmv
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method applies to the measurement of 
NO<INF>X</INF> emissions from fossil-fuel fired steam generators, 
electric utility plants, nitric acid plants, or other sources as 
specified in the regulations.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    An integrated gas sample is extracted from the stack and passed 
through impingers containing an alkaline potassium permanganate 
solution; NO<INF>X</INF> (NO + NO<INF>2</INF>) emissions are oxidized to 
NO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>3</INF>. Then NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>is 
reduced to NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>with cadmium, and the 
NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>is analyzed colorimetrically.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Possible interferents are sulfur dioxides (SO<INF>2</INF>) and 
ammonia (NH<INF>3</INF>).
    4.1 High concentrations of SO<INF>2</INF> could interfere because 
SO<INF>2</INF> consumes MnO<INF>4</INF> (as does NO<INF>X</INF>) and, 
therefore, could reduce the NO<INF>X</INF> collection efficiency. 
However, when sampling emissions from a coal-fired electric utility 
plant burning 2.1 percent sulfur coal with no control of SO<INF>2</INF> 
emissions, collection efficiency was not reduced. In fact, calculations 
show that sampling 3000 ppm SO<INF>2</INF> will reduce the 
MnO<INF>4</INF> concentration by only 5 percent if all the 
SO<INF>2</INF> is consumed in the first impinger.
    4.2 Ammonia (NH<INF>3</INF>) is slowly oxidized to 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> by the absorbing solution. At 100 ppm 
NH<INF>3</INF> in the gas stream, an interference of 6 ppm 
NO<INF>X</INF> (11 mg NO<INF>2</INF>/m\3\) was observed when the sample 
was analyzed 10 days after collection. Therefore, the method may not be 
applicable to plants using NH<INF>3</INF> injection to control 
NO<INF>X</INF> emissions unless means are taken to correct the results. 
An equation has been developed to allow quantification of the 
interference and is discussed in Reference 5 of Section 16.0.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl). Highly toxic and corrosive. Causes 
severe damage to skin. Vapors are highly irritating to eyes, skin, nose, 
and lungs, causing severe damage. May cause bronchitis, pneumonia, or

[[Page 281]]

edema of lungs. Exposure to vapor concentrations of 0.13 to 0.2 percent 
can be lethal in minutes. Will react with metals, producing hydrogen.
    5.2.2 Oxalic Acid (COOH)<INF>2</INF>. Poisonous. Irritating to eyes, 
skin, nose, and throat.
    5.2.3 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eye tissues 
and to skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. 
Reacts exothermically with small amounts of water.
    5.2.4 Potassium Permanganate (KMnO<INF>4</INF>). Caustic, strong 
oxidizer. Avoid bodily contact with.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection and Sample Recovery. A schematic of the Method 
7C sampling train is shown in Figure 7C-1, and component parts are 
discussed below. Alternative apparatus and procedures are allowed 
provided acceptable accuracy and precision can be demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the Administrator.
    6.1.1 Probe. Borosilicate glass tubing, sufficiently heated to 
prevent water condensation and equipped with an in-stack or heated out-
of-stack filter to remove particulate matter (a plug of glass wool is 
satisfactory for this purpose). Stainless steel or Teflon tubing may 
also be used for the probe.
    6.1.2 Impingers. Three restricted-orifice glass impingers, having 
the specifications given in Figure 7C-2, are required for each sampling 
train. The impingers must be connected in series with leak-free glass 
connectors. Stopcock grease may be used, if necessary, to prevent 
leakage. (The impingers can be fabricated by a glass blower if not 
available commercially.)
    6.1.3 Glass Wool, Stopcock Grease, Drying Tube, Valve, Pump, 
Barometer, and Vacuum Gauge and Rotameter. Same as in Method 6, Sections 
6.1.1.3, 6.1.1.4, 6.1.1.6, 6.1.1.7, 6.1.1.8, 6.1.2, and 6.1.3, 
respectively.
    6.1.4 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, accurate to within 2 
percent at the selected flow rate of between 400 and 500 ml/min (0.014 
to 0.018 cfm). For rotameters, a range of 0 to 1 liter/min (0 to 0.035 
cfm) is recommended.
    6.1.5 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter (DGM) capable of measuring the 
sample volume under the sampling conditions of 400 to 500 ml/min (0.014 
to 0.018 cfm) for 60 minutes within an accuracy of 2 percent.
    6.1.6 Filter. To remove NO<INF>X</INF> from ambient air, prepared by 
adding 20 g of 5-angstrom molecular sieve to a cylindrical tube (e.g., a 
polyethylene drying tube).
    6.1.7 Polyethylene Bottles. 1-liter, for sample recovery.
    6.1.8 Funnel and Stirring Rods. For sample recovery.
    6.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    6.2.1 Hot Plate. Stirring type with 50- by 10-mm Teflon-coated 
stirring bars.
    6.2.2 Beakers. 400-, 600-, and 1000-ml capacities.
    6.2.3 Filtering Flask. 500-ml capacity with side arm.
    6.2.4 Buchner Funnel. 75-mm ID, with spout equipped with a 13-mm ID 
by 90-mm long piece of Teflon tubing to minimize possibility of 
aspirating sample solution during filtration.
    6.2.5 Filter Paper. Whatman GF/C, 7.0-cm diameter.
    6.2.6 Stirring Rods.
    6.2.7 Volumetric Flasks. 100-, 200- or 250-, 500-, and 1000-ml 
capacity.
    6.2.8 Watch Glasses. To cover 600- and 1000-ml beakers.
    6.2.9 Graduated Cylinders. 50- and 250-ml capacities.
    6.2.10 Pipettes. Class A.
    6.2.11 pH Meter. To measure pH from 0.5 to 12.0.
    6.2.12 Burette. 50-ml with a micrometer type stopcock. (The stopcock 
is Catalog No. 8225-t-05, Ace Glass, Inc., Post Office Box 996, 
Louisville, Kentucky 50201.) Place a glass wool plug in bottom of 
burette. Cut off burette at a height of 43 cm (17 in.) from the top of 
plug, and have a blower attach a glass funnel to top of burette such 
that the diameter of the burette remains essentially unchanged. Other 
means of attaching the funnel are acceptable.
    6.2.13 Glass Funnel. 75-mm ID at the top.
    6.2.14 Spectrophotometer. Capable of measuring absorbance at 540 nm; 
1-cm cells are adequate.
    6.2.15 Metal Thermometers. Bimetallic thermometers, range 0 to 150 
[deg]C (32 to 300 [deg]F).
    6.2.16 Culture Tubes. 20-by 150-mm, Kimax No. 45048.
    6.2.17 Parafilm ``M.'' Obtained from American Can Company, 
Greenwich, Connecticut 06830.
    6.2.18 CO<INF>2</INF> Measurement Equipment. Same as in Method 3, 
Section 6.0.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents conform 
to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection.
    7.1.1 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM Specification D 
1193-77 or 91 Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).
    7.1.2 Potassium Permanganate, 4.0 Percent (w/w), Sodium Hydroxide, 
2.0 Percent (w/w) solution (KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution). Dissolve 
40.0 g of KMnO<INF>4</INF> and 20.0 g of NaOH in 940 ml of water.
    7.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.1.
    7.2.2 Oxalic Acid Solution. Dissolve 48 g of oxalic acid 
[(COOH)<INF>2</INF>[middot]2H<INF>2</INF>O] in water, and dilute to 500 
ml. Do not heat the solution.

[[Page 282]]

    7.2.3 Sodium Hydroxide, 0.5 N. Dissolve 20 g of NaOH in water, and 
dilute to 1 liter.
    7.2.4 Sodium Hydroxide, 10 N. Dissolve 40 g of NaOH in water, and 
dilute to 100 ml.
    7.2.5 Ethylenediamine Tetraacetic Acid (EDTA) Solution, 6.5 percent 
(w/v). Dissolve 6.5 g of EDTA (disodium salt) in water, and dilute to 
100 ml. Dissolution is best accomplished by using a magnetic stirrer.
    7.2.6 Column Rinse Solution. Add 20 ml of 6.5 percent EDTA solution 
to 960 ml of water, and adjust the pH to between 11.7 and 12.0 with 0.5 
N NaOH.
    7.2.7 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl), 2 N. Add 86 ml of concentrated HCl to 
a 500 ml-volumetric flask containing water, dilute to volume, and mix 
well. Store in a glass-stoppered bottle.
    7.2.8 Sulfanilamide Solution. Add 20 g of sulfanilamide (melting 
point 165 to 167 [deg]C (329 to 333 [deg]F)) to 700 ml of water. Add, 
with mixing, 50 ml concentrated phosphoric acid (85 percent), and dilute 
to 1000 ml. This solution is stable for at least 1 month, if 
refrigerated.
    7.2.9 N-(1-Naphthyl)-Ethylenediamine Dihydrochloride (NEDA) 
Solution. Dissolve 0.5 g of NEDA in 500 ml of water. An aqueous solution 
should have one absorption peak at 320 nm over the range of 260 to 400 
nm. NEDA that shows more than one absorption peak over this range is 
impure and should not be used. This solution is stable for at least 1 
month if protected from light and refrigerated.
    7.2.10 Cadmium. Obtained from Matheson Coleman and Bell, 2909 
Highland Avenue, Norwood, Ohio 45212, as EM Laboratories Catalog No. 
2001. Prepare by rinsing in 2 N HCl for 5 minutes until the color is 
silver-grey. Then rinse the cadmium with water until the rinsings are 
neutral when tested with pH paper. CAUTION: H<INF>2</INF> is liberated 
during preparation. Prepare in an exhaust hood away from any flame or 
combustion source.
    7.2.11 Sodium Sulfite (NaNO<INF>2</INF>) Standard Solution, Nominal 
Concentration, 1000 [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml. Desiccate 
NaNO2 overnight. Accurately weigh 1.4 to 1.6 g of NaNO<INF>2</INF> 
(assay of 97 percent NaNO<INF>2</INF> or greater), dissolve in water, 
and dilute to 1 liter. Calculate the exact NO<INF>2</INF>-concentration 
using Equation 7C-1 in Section 12.2. This solution is stable for at 
least 6 months under laboratory conditions.
    7.2.12 Potassium Nitrate (KNO<INF>3</INF>) Standard Solution. Dry 
KNO<INF>3</INF> at 110 [deg]C (230 [deg]F) for 2 hours, and cool in a 
desiccator. Accurately weigh 9 to 10 g of KNO<INF>3</INF> to within 0.1 
mg, dissolve in water, and dilute to 1 liter. Calculate the exact 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> concentration using Equation 7C-2 in Section 
12.3. This solution is stable for 2 months without preservative under 
laboratory conditions.
    7.2.13 Spiking Solution. Pipette 7 ml of the KNO<INF>3</INF> 
standard into a 100-ml volumetric flask, and dilute to volume.
    7.2.14 Blank Solution. Dissolve 2.4 g of KMnO<INF>4</INF> and 1.2 g 
of NaOH in 96 ml of water. Alternatively, dilute 60 ml of 
KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution to 100 ml.
    7.2.15 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. Same as in Method 7, Section 
7.3.10. When requesting audit samples, specify that they be in the 
appropriate concentration range for Method 7C.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Preparation of Sampling Train. Add 200 ml of KMnO<INF>4</INF>/
NaOH solution (Section 7.1.2) to each of three impingers, and assemble 
the train as shown in Figure 7C-1. Adjust the probe heater to a 
temperature sufficient to prevent water condensation.
    8.2 Leak-Checks. Same as in Method 6, Section 8.2.
    8.3 Sample Collection.
    8.3.1 Record the initial DGM reading and barometric pressure. 
Determine the sampling point or points according to the appropriate 
regulations (e.g., Sec. 60.46(b)(5) of 40 CFR Part 60). Position the 
tip of the probe at the sampling point, connect the probe to the first 
impinger, and start the pump. Adjust the sample flow to a value between 
400 and 500 ml/min (0.014 and 0.018 cfm). CAUTION: DO NOT EXCEED THESE 
FLOW RATES. Once adjusted, maintain a constant flow rate during the 
entire sampling run. Sample for 60 minutes. For relative accuracy (RA) 
testing of continuous emission monitors, the minimum sampling time is 1 
hour, sampling 20 minutes at each traverse point.

    Note: When the SO<INF>2</INF> concentration is greater than 1200 
ppm, the sampling time may have to be reduced to 30 minutes to eliminate 
plugging of the impinger orifice with MnO<INF>2</INF>. For RA tests with 
SO<INF>2</INF> greater than 1200 ppm, sample for 30 minutes (10 minutes 
at each point).

    8.3.2 Record the DGM temperature, and check the flow rate at least 
every 5 minutes. At the conclusion of each run, turn off the pump, 
remove the probe from the stack, and record the final readings. Divide 
the sample volume by the sampling time to determine the average flow 
rate. Conduct the mandatory post-test leak-check. If a leak is found, 
void the test run, or use procedures acceptable to the Administrator to 
adjust the sample volume for the leakage.
    8.4 CO<INF>2</INF> Measurement. During sampling, measure the 
CO<INF>2</INF> content of the stack gas near the sampling point using 
Method 3. The single-point grab sampling procedure is adequate, provided 
the measurements are made at least three times (near the start, midway, 
and before the end of a run), and the average CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration is computed. The Orsat or Fyrite analyzer may be used for 
this analysis.

[[Page 283]]

    8.5 Sample Recovery. Disconnect the impingers. Pour the contents of 
the impingers into a 1-liter polyethylene bottle using a funnel and a 
stirring rod (or other means) to prevent spillage. Complete the 
quantitative transfer by rinsing the impingers and connecting tubes with 
water until the rinsings are clear to light pink, and add the rinsings 
to the bottle. Mix the sample, and mark the solution level. Seal and 
identify the sample container.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2, 10.1-10.3................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of
                                 check and          sample volume.
                                 calibration.
10.4..........................  Spectrophotometer  Ensure linearity of
                                 calibration.       spectrophotometer
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
11.3..........................  Spiked sample      Ensure reduction
                                 analysis.          efficiency of
                                                    column.
11.6..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 analysis.          technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    10.1 Volume Metering System. Same as Method 6, Section 10.1. For 
detailed instructions on carrying out these calibrations, it is 
suggested that Section 3.5.2 of Reference 4 of Section 16.0 be 
consulted.
    10.2 Temperature Sensors and Barometer. Same as in Method 6, 
Sections 10.2 and 10.4, respectively.
    10.3 Check of Rate Meter Calibration Accuracy (Optional). Disconnect 
the probe from the first impinger, and connect the filter. Start the 
pump, and adjust the rate meter to read between 400 and 500 ml/min 
(0.014 and 0.018 cfm). After the flow rate has stabilized, start 
measuring the volume sampled, as recorded by the dry gas meter and the 
sampling time. Collect enough volume to measure accurately the flow 
rate. Then calculate the flow rate. This average flow rate must be less 
than 500 ml/min (0.018 cfm) for the sample to be valid; therefore, it is 
recommended that the flow rate be checked as above prior to each test.
    10.4 Spectrophotometer.
    10.4.1 Dilute 5.0 ml of the NaNO<INF>2</INF> standard solution to 
200 ml with water. This solution nominally contains 25 [micro]g 
NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml. Use this solution to prepare calibration 
standards to cover the range of 0.25 to 3.00 [micro]g 
NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml. Prepare a minimum of three standards each 
for the linear and slightly nonlinear (described below) range of the 
curve. Use pipettes for all additions.
    10.4.2 Measure the absorbance of the standards and a water blank as 
instructed in Section 11.5. Plot the net absorbance vs. [micro]g 
NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml. Draw a smooth curve through the points. 
The curve should be linear up to an absorbance of approximately 1.2 with 
a slope of approximately 0.53 absorbance units/[micro]g 
NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml. The curve should pass through the origin. 
The curve is slightly nonlinear from an absorbance of 1.2 to 1.6.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Stability. Collected samples are stable for at least 
four weeks; thus, analysis must occur within 4 weeks of collection.
    11.2 Sample Preparation.
    11.2.1 Prepare a cadmium reduction column as follows: Fill the 
burette with water. Add freshly prepared cadmium slowly, with tapping, 
until no further settling occurs. The height of the cadmium column 
should be 39 cm (15 in). When not in use, store the column under rinse 
solution.

    Note: The column should not contain any bands of cadmium fines. This 
may occur if regenerated cadmium is used and will greatly reduce the 
column lifetime.

    11.2.2 Note the level of liquid in the sample container, and 
determine whether any sample was lost during shipment. If a noticeable 
amount of leakage has occurred, the volume lost can be determined from 
the difference between initial and final solution levels, and this value 
can then be used to correct the analytical result. Quantitatively 
transfer the contents to a 1-liter volumetric flask, and dilute to 
volume.
    11.2.3 Take a 100-ml aliquot of the sample and blank (unexposed 
KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH) solutions, and transfer to 400-ml beakers 
containing magnetic stirring bars. Using a pH meter, add concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> with stirring until a pH of 0.7 is obtained. 
Allow the solutions to stand for 15 minutes. Cover the beakers with 
watch glasses, and bring the temperature of the solutions to 50 [deg]C 
(122 [deg]F). Keep the temperature below 60 [deg]C (140 [deg]F). 
Dissolve 4.8 g of oxalic acid in a minimum volume of water, 
approximately 50 ml, at room temperature. Do not heat the solution. Add 
this solution slowly, in increments, until the KMnO<INF>4</INF> solution 
becomes colorless. If the color is not completely removed, prepare some 
more of the above oxalic acid solution, and add until a colorless 
solution is obtained. Add an excess of oxalic acid by dissolving 1.6 g 
of oxalic acid in 50 ml of water, and add 6 ml of this solution to the 
colorless

[[Page 284]]

solution. If suspended matter is present, add concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> until a clear solution is obtained.
    11.2.4 Allow the samples to cool to near room temperature, being 
sure that the samples are still clear. Adjust the pH to between 11.7 and 
12.0 with 10 N NaOH. Quantitatively transfer the mixture to a Buchner 
funnel containing GF/C filter paper, and filter the precipitate. Filter 
the mixture into a 500-ml filtering flask. Wash the solid material four 
times with water. When filtration is complete, wash the Teflon tubing, 
quantitatively transfer the filtrate to a 500-ml volumetric flask, and 
dilute to volume. The samples are now ready for cadmium reduction. 
Pipette a 50-ml aliquot of the sample into a 150-ml beaker, and add a 
magnetic stirring bar. Pipette in 1.0 ml of 6.5 percent EDTA solution, 
and mix.
    11.3 Determine the correct stopcock setting to establish a flow rate 
of 7 to 9 ml/min of column rinse solution through the cadmium reduction 
column. Use a 50-ml graduated cylinder to collect and measure the 
solution volume. After the last of the rinse solution has passed from 
the funnel into the burette, but before air entrapment can occur, start 
adding the sample, and collect it in a 250-ml graduated cylinder. 
Complete the quantitative transfer of the sample to the column as the 
sample passes through the column. After the last of the sample has 
passed from the funnel into the burette, start adding 60 ml of column 
rinse solution, and collect the rinse solution until the solution just 
disappears from the funnel. Quantitatively transfer the sample to a 200-
ml volumetric flask (a 250-ml flask may be required), and dilute to 
volume. The samples are now ready for NO<INF>2</INF>-analysis.

    Note: Two spiked samples should be run with every group of samples 
passed through the column. To do this, prepare two additional 50-ml 
aliquots of the sample suspected to have the highest NO<INF>2</INF>-
concentration, and add 1 ml of the spiking solution to these aliquots. 
If the spike recovery or column efficiency (see Section 12.2) is below 
95 percent, prepare a new column, and repeat the cadmium reduction.

    11.4 Repeat the procedures outlined in Sections 11.2 and 11.3 for 
each sample and each blank.
    11.5 Sample Analysis. Pipette 10 ml of sample into a culture tube. 
Pipette in 10 ml of sulfanilamide solution and 1.4 ml of NEDA solution. 
Cover the culture tube with parafilm, and mix the solution. Prepare a 
blank in the same manner using the sample from treatment of the 
unexposed KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution. Also, prepare a calibration 
standard to check the slope of the calibration curve. After a 10-minute 
color development interval, measure the absorbance at 540 nm against 
water. Read [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml from the calibration 
curve. If the absorbance is greater than that of the highest calibration 
standard, use less than 10 ml of sample, and repeat the analysis. 
Determine the NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>concentration using the 
calibration curve obtained in Section 10.4.

    Note: Some test tubes give a high blank NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP> 
value but culture tubes do not.

    11.6 Audit Sample Analysis. Same as in Method 7, Section 11.4.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.
B=Analysis of blank, [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml.
C=Concentration of NO<INF>X</INF> as NO<INF>2</INF>, dry basis, mg/
dsm<SUP>3</SUP>.
E=Column efficiency, dimensionless
K<INF>2</INF>=10<SUP>-3</SUP> mg/[micro]g.
m=Mass of NO<INF>X</INF>, as NO<INF>2</INF>, in sample, [micro]g.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
s=Concentration of spiking solution, [micro]g NO<INF>3</INF>/ml.
S=Analysis of sample, [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml.
T<INF>m</INF>=Average dry gas meter absolute temperature, [deg]K.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>m</INF>=Dry gas volume as measured by the dry gas meter, scm 
(scf).
x=Analysis of spiked sample, [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml.
X=Correction factor for CO<INF>2</INF> collection=100/(100 - 
%CO<INF>2</INF>(V/V)).
y=Analysis of unspiked sample, [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml.
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
1.0 ppm NO=1.247 mg NO/m<SUP>3</SUP> at STP.
1.0 ppm NO<INF>2</INF>=1.912 mg NO<INF>2</INF>/m<SUP>3</SUP> at STP.
1 ft<SUP>3</SUP>=2.832 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP> m<SUP>3</SUP>.

    12.2 NO<INF>2</INF> Concentration. Calculate the NO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration of the solution (see Section 7.2.11) using the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.212


[[Page 285]]


    12.3 NO<INF>3</INF> Concentration. Calculate the NO<INF>3</INF> 
concentration of the KNO<INF>3</INF> solution (see Section 7.2.12) using 
the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.213

    12.4 Sample Volume, Dry Basis, Corrected to Standard Conditions.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.214
    
Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units.
K<INF>1</INF>=17.65 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    12.5 Efficiency of Cadmium Reduction Column. Calculate this value as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.215

Where:

200=Final volume of sample and blank after passing through the column, 
ml.
1.0=Volume of spiking solution added, ml.
46.01=[micro]g NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]mole.
62.01=[micro]g NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]mole.

    12.6 Total [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF>.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.216
    
Where:

500=Total volume of prepared sample, ml.
50=Aliquot of prepared sample processed through cadmium column, ml.
100=Aliquot of KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution, ml.
1000=Total volume of KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution, ml.

    12.7 Sample Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.217
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision. The intra-laboratory relative standard deviation for 
a single measurement is 2.8 and 2.9 percent at 201 and 268 ppm 
NO<INF>X</INF>, respectively.
    13.2 Bias. The method does not exhibit any bias relative to Method 
7.
    13.3 Range. The lower detectable limit is 13 mg NO<INF>X</INF>/
m<SUP>3</SUP>, as NO<INF>2</INF> (7 ppm NO<INF>X</INF>) when sampling at 
500 ml/min for 1 hour. No upper limit has been established; however, 
when using the recommended sampling conditions, the method has been 
found to collect NO<INF>X</INF> emissions quantitatively up to 1782 mg 
NO<INF>X</INF>/m<SUP>3</SUP>, as NO<INF>2</INF> (932 ppm 
NO<INF>X</INF>).

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Margeson, J.H., W.J. Mitchell, J.C. Suggs, and M.R. Midgett. 
Integrated Sampling and Analysis Methods for Determining NO<INF>X</INF> 
Emissions at Electric Utility Plants. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. Journal of the Air Pollution Control 
Association. 32:1210-1215. 1982.

[[Page 286]]

    2. Memorandum and attachment from J.H. Margeson, Source Branch, 
Quality Assurance Division, Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory, 
to The Record, EPA. March 30, 1983. NH<INF>3</INF> Interference in 
Methods 7C and 7D.
    3. Margeson, J.H., J.C. Suggs, and M.R. Midgett. Reduction of 
Nitrate to Nitrite with Cadmium. Anal. Chem. 52:1955-57. 1980.
    4. Quality Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems. 
Volume III--Stationary Source Specific Methods. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication No. EPA-600/
4-77-027b. August 1977.
    5. Margeson, J.H., et al. An Integrated Method for Determining 
NO<INF>X</INF> Emissions at Nitric Acid Plants. Analytical Chemistry. 47 
(11):1801. 1975.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 287]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.218


[[Page 288]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.219

  Method 7D--Determination of Nitrogen Oxide Emissions From Stationary 
       Sources (Alkaline-Permanganate/Ion Chromatographic Method)

    Note: This method is not inclusive with respect to specifications 
(e.g., equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and 
analytical) essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated 
by reference from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain 
reliable results, persons using this method should have a thorough 
knowledge of at least the following additional test methods: Method 1, 
Method 3, Method 6, Method 7, and Method 7C.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 289]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nitrogen oxides (NOX), as NO2,
 including:
    Nitric oxide (NO).............      10102-43-9
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)........      10102-44-0  7 ppmv
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method applies to the measurement of 
NO<INF>X</INF> emissions from fossil-fuel fired steam generators, 
electric utility plants, nitric acid plants, or other sources as 
specified in the regulations.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    An integrated gas sample is extracted from the stack and passed 
through impingers containing an alkaline-potassium permanganate 
solution; NO<INF>X</INF> (NO + NO<INF>2</INF>) emissions are oxidized to 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>. Then NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> is analyzed 
by ion chromatography.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Same as in Method 7C, Section 4.0.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs. 30% H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> is a strong 
oxidizing agent; avoid contact with skin, eyes, and combustible 
material. Wear gloves when handling.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eye tissues 
and to skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. 
Reacts exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.3 Potassium Permanganate (KMnO<INF>4</INF>). Caustic, strong 
oxidizer. Avoid bodily contact with.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection and Sample Recovery. Same as Method 7C, 
Section 6.1. A schematic of the sampling train used in performing this 
method is shown in Figure 7C-1 of Method 7C.
    6.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    6.2.1 Magnetic Stirrer. With 25- by 10-mm Teflon-coated stirring 
bars.
    6.2.2 Filtering Flask. 500-ml capacity with sidearm.
    6.2.3 Buchner Funnel. 75-mm ID, with spout equipped with a 13-mm ID 
by 90-mm long piece of Teflon tubing to minimize possibility of 
aspirating sample solution during filtration.
    6.2.4 Filter Paper. Whatman GF/C, 7.0-cm diameter.
    6.2.5 Stirring Rods.
    6.2.6 Volumetric Flask. 250-ml.
    6.2.7 Pipettes. Class A.
    6.2.8 Erlenmeyer Flasks. 250-ml.
    6.2.9 Ion Chromatograph. Equipped with an anion separator column to 
separate NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>, H<INF>3</INF><SUP>+</SUP> 
suppressor, and necessary auxiliary equipment. Nonsuppressed and other 
forms of ion chromatography may also be used provided that adequate 
resolution of NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> is obtained. The system must 
also be able to resolve and detect NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP>.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents 
conform to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection.
    7.1.1 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM specification D 
1193-77 or 91 Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).
    7.1.2 Potassium Permanganate, 4.0 Percent (w/w), Sodium Hydroxide, 
2.0 Percent (w/w). Dissolve 40.0 g of KMnO<INF>4</INF> and 20.0 g of 
NaOH in 940 ml of water.
    7.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.1.
    7.2.2 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>), 5 Percent. 
Dilute 30 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> 1:5 (v/v) with water.
    7.2.3 Blank Solution. Dissolve 2.4 g of KMnO<INF>4</INF> and 1.2 g 
of NaOH in 96 ml of water. Alternatively, dilute 60 ml of 
KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution to 100 ml.
    7.2.4 KNO<INF>3</INF> Standard Solution. Dry KNO<INF>3</INF> at 110 
[deg]C for 2 hours, and cool in a desiccator. Accurately weigh 9 to 10 g 
of KNO<INF>3</INF> to within 0.1 mg, dissolve in water, and dilute to 1 
liter. Calculate the exact NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> concentration 
using Equation 7D-1 in Section 12.2.

[[Page 290]]

This solution is stable for 2 months without preservative under 
laboratory conditions.
    7.2.5 Eluent, 0.003 M NaHCO<INF>3</INF>/0.0024 M 
Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>. Dissolve 1.008 g NaHCO<INF>3</INF> and 
1.018 g Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF> in water, and dilute to 4 liters. 
Other eluents capable of resolving nitrate ion from sulfate and other 
species present may be used.
    7.2.6 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. Same as Method 7, Section 
7.3.10. When requesting audit samples, specify that they be in the 
appropriate concentration range for Method 7D.

      8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage.

    8.1 Sampling. Same as in Method 7C, Section 8.1.
    8.2 Sample Recovery. Same as in Method 7C, Section 8.2.
    8.3 Sample Preparation for Analysis.

    Note: Samples must be analyzed within 28 days of collection.

    8.3.1 Note the level of liquid in the sample container, and 
determine whether any sample was lost during shipment. If a noticeable 
amount of leakage has occurred, the volume lost can be determined from 
the difference between initial and final solution levels, and this value 
can then be used to correct the analytical result. Quantitatively 
transfer the contents to a 1-liter volumetric flask, and dilute to 
volume.
    8.3.2 Sample preparation can be started 36 hours after collection. 
This time is necessary to ensure that all NO<INF>2</INF><SUP>-</SUP> is 
converted to NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> in the collection solution. Take 
a 50-ml aliquot of the sample and blank, and transfer to 250-ml 
Erlenmeyer flasks. Add a magnetic stirring bar. Adjust the stirring rate 
to as fast a rate as possible without loss of solution. Add 5 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> in increments of approximately 5 ml using a 
5-ml pipette. When the KMnO<INF>4</INF> color appears to have been 
removed, allow the precipitate to settle, and examine the supernatant 
liquid. If the liquid is clear, the H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> addition 
is complete. If the KMnO<INF>4</INF> color persists, add more 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>, with stirring, until the supernatant liquid 
is clear.

    Note: The faster the stirring rate, the less volume of 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> that will be required to remove the 
KMnO<INF>4</INF>.) Quantitatively transfer the mixture to a Buchner 
funnel containing GF/C filter paper, and filter the precipitate. The 
spout of the Buchner funnel should be equipped with a 13-mm ID by 90-mm 
long piece of Teflon tubing. This modification minimizes the possibility 
of aspirating sample solution during filtration. Filter the mixture into 
a 500-ml filtering flask. Wash the solid material four times with water. 
When filtration is complete, wash the Teflon tubing, quantitatively 
transfer the filtrate to a 250-ml volumetric flask, and dilute to 
volume. The sample and blank are now ready for 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>analysis.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2, 10.1-10.3................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of
                                 check and          sample volume.
                                 calibration.
10.4..........................  Spectrophotometer  Ensure linearity of
                                 calibration.       spectrophotometer
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
11.3..........................  Spiked sample      Ensure reduction
                                 analysis.          efficiency of
                                                    column.
11.6..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 analysis.          technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    10.1 Dry Gas Meter (DGM) System.
    10.1.1 Initial Calibration. Same as in Method 6, Section 10.1.1. For 
detailed instructions on carrying out this calibration, it is suggested 
that Section 3.5.2 of Citation 4 in Section 16.0 of Method 7C be 
consulted.
    10.1.2 Post-Test Calibration Check. Same as in Method 6, Section 
10.1.2.
    10.2 Thermometers for DGM and Barometer. Same as in Method 6, 
Sections 10.2 and 10.4, respectively.
    10.3 Ion Chromatograph.
    10.3.1 Dilute a given volume (1.0 ml or greater) of the 
KNO<INF>3</INF> standard solution to a convenient volume with water, and 
use this solution to prepare calibration standards. Prepare at least 
four standards to cover the range of the samples being analyzed. Use 
pipettes for all additions. Run standards as instructed in Section 11.2. 
Determine peak height or area, and plot the individual values versus 
concentration in [micro]g NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>/ml.
    10.3.2 Do not force the curve through zero. Draw a smooth curve 
through the points. The curve should be linear. With the linear curve, 
use linear regression to determine the calibration equation.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 The following chromatographic conditions are recommended: 0.003 
M NaHCO<INF>3</INF>/0.0024 Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF> eluent solution 
(Section 7.2.5), full scale range, 3 [micro]MHO; sample loop, 0.5 ml; 
flow rate, 2.5 ml/min. These conditions should give a 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> retention time of approximately 15 minutes 
(Figure 7D-1).

[[Page 291]]

    11.2 Establish a stable baseline. Inject a sample of water, and 
determine whether any NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> appears in the 
chromatogram. If NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> is present, repeat the water 
load/injection procedure approximately five times; then re-inject a 
water sample and observe the chromatogram. When no 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> is present, the instrument is ready for use. 
Inject calibration standards. Then inject samples and a blank. Repeat 
the injection of the calibration standards (to compensate for any drift 
in response of the instrument). Measure the NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> 
peak height or peak area, and determine the sample concentration from 
the calibration curve.
    11.3 Audit Analysis. Same as in Method 7, Section 11.4

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature. Same as in Method 7C, Section 12.1.
    12.2 NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> concentration. Calculate the 
NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> concentration in the KNO<INF>3</INF> standard 
solution (see Section 7.2.4) using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.220

    12.3 Sample Volume, Dry Basis, Corrected to Standard Conditions. 
Same as in Method 7C, Section 12.4.
    12.4 Total [micro]g NO<INF>2</INF> Per Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.221
    
Where:

250=Volume of prepared sample, ml.
1000=Total volume of KMnO<INF>4</INF> solution, ml.
50=Aliquot of KMnO<INF>4</INF>/NaOH solution, ml.
46.01=Molecular weight of NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>.
62.01=Molecular weight of NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>.

    12.5 Sample Concentration. Same as in Method 7C, Section 12.7.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision. The intra-laboratory relative standard deviation for 
a single measurement is approximately 6 percent at 200 to 270 ppm 
NO<INF>X</INF>.
    13.2 Bias. The method does not exhibit any bias relative to Method 
7.
    13.3 Range. The lower detectable limit is similar to that of Method 
7C. No upper limit has been established; however, when using the 
recommended sampling conditions, the method has been found to collect 
NO<INF>X</INF> emissions quantitatively up to 1782 mg NO<INF>X</INF>/
m\3\, as NO<INF>2</INF> (932 ppm NO<INF>X</INF>).

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 7C, Section 16.0, References 1, 2, 4, and 5.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 292]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.222

 Method 7E--Determination of Nitrogen Oxides Emissions From Stationary 
                Sources (Instrumental Analyzer Procedure)

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable to the determination of 
nitrogen oxides (NO<INF>X</INF>) concentrations in emissions from 
stationary sources only when specified within the regulations.
    1.2 Principle. A gas simple is continuously extracted from a stack, 
and a portion of the sample is conveyed to an instrumental 
chemiluminescent analyzer for determination of NO<INF>X</INF> 
concentration. Performance specifications and test procedures are 
provided to ensure reliable data.

                        2. Range and Sensitivity

    Same as Method 6C, Sections 2.1 and 2.2.

                             3. Definitions

    3.1 Measurement System. The total equipment required for the 
determination of NO<INF>X</INF> concentration. The measurement system 
consists of the following major subsystems:
    3.1.1 Sample Interface, Gas Analyzer, and Data Recorder. Same as 
Method 6C, Sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.1.3.
    3.1.2 NO<INF>2</INF> to NO Converter. A device that converts the 
nitrogen dioxide (NO<INF>2</INF>) in the sample gas to nitrogen oxide 
(NO).
    3.2 Span, Calibration Gas, Analyzer Calibration Error, Sampling 
System Bias, Zero Drift, Calibration Drift, and Response Time. Same as 
Method 6C, Sections 3.2 through 3.8.
    3.3 Interference Response. The output response of the measurement 
system to a component in the sample gas, other than the gas component 
being measured.

            4. Measurement System Performance Specifications

    Same as Method 6C, Sections 4.1 through 4.4.

                        5. Apparatus and Reagents

    5.1 Measurement System. Any measurement system for NO<INF>X</INF> 
that meets the specifications of this method. A schematic of an 
acceptable measurement system is shown in Figure 6C-1 of Method 6C. The 
essential components of the measurement system are described below:

[[Page 293]]

    5.1.1 Sample Probe, Sample Line, Calibration Valve Assembly, 
Moisture Removal System, Particulate Filter, Sample Pump, Sample Flow 
Rate Control, Sample Gas Manifold, and Data Recorder. Same as Method 6C, 
Sections 5.1.1 through 5.1.9, and 5.1.11.
    5.1.2 NO<INF>2</INF> to NO Converter. That portion of the system 
that converts the nitrogen dioxide (NO<INF>2</INF>) in the sample gas to 
nitrogen oxide (NO). An NO<INF>2</INF> to NO converter is not necessary 
if data are presented to demonstrate that the NO<INF>2</INF> portion of 
the exhaust gas is less than 5 percent of the total NO<INF>X</INF> 
concentration.
    5.1.3 NO<INF>X</INF> Analyzer. An analyzer based on the principles 
of chemiluminescence, to determine continuously the NO<INF>X</INF> 
concentration in the sample gas stream. The analyzer shall meet the 
applicable performance specifications of Section 4. A means of 
controlling the analyzer flow rate and a device for determining proper 
sample flow rate (e.g., precision rotameter, pressure gauge downstream 
of all flow controls, etc.) shall be provided at the analyzer.
    5.2 NO<INF>X</INF> Calibration Gases. The calibration gases for the 
NO<INF>X</INF> analyzer shall be NO in N<INF>2</INF>. Three calibration 
gases, as specified in Sections 5.3.1 through 5.3.3. of Method 6C, shall 
be used. Ambient air may be used for the zero gas.

            6. Measurement System Performance Test Procedures

    Perform the following procedures before measurement of emissions 
(Section 7).
    6.1 Calibration Gas Concentration Verification. Follow Section 6.1 
of Method 6C, except if calibration gas analysis is required, use Method 
7, and change all 5 percent performance values to 10 percent (or 10 ppm, 
whichever is greater).
    6.2 Interference Response. Conduct an interference response test of 
the analyzer prior to its initial use in the field. Thereafter, recheck 
the measurement system if changes are made in the instrumentation that 
could alter the interference response (e.g., changes in the gas 
detector). Conduct the interference response in accordance with Section 
5.4 of Method 20.
    6.3 Measurement System Preparation, Analyzer Calibration Error, and 
Sample System Bias Check. Follow Sections 6.2 through 6.4 of Method 6C.
    6.4 NO<INF>2</INF> to NO Conversion Efficiency. Unless data are 
presented to demonstrate that the NO<INF>2</INF> concentration within 
the sample stream is not greater than 5 percent of the NO<INF>X</INF> 
concentration, conduct an NO<INF>2</INF> to NO conversion efficiency 
test in accordance with Section 5.6 of Method 20.

                       7. Emission Test Procedure

    7.1 Selection of Sampling Site and Sampling Points. Select a 
measurement site and sampling points using the same criteria that are 
applicable to tests performed using Method 7.
    7.2 Sample Collection. Position the sampling probe at the first 
measurement point, and begin sampling at the same rate as used during 
the system calibration drift test. Maintain constant rate sampling 
(i.e., <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) during the entire run. The 
sampling time per run shall be the same as the total time required to 
perform a run using Method 7, plus twice the system response time. For 
each run, use only those measurements obtained after twice the response 
time of the measurement system has elapsed, to determine the average 
effluent concentration.
    7.3 Zero and Calibration Drift Test. Follow Section 7.4 of Method 
6C.

                         8. Emission Calculation

    Follow Section 8 of Method 6C.

                             9. Bibliography

    Same as bibliography of Method 6C.

 Method 8--Determination of Sulfuric Acid and Sulfur Dioxide Emissions 
                         From Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, and Method 6.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.            Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sulfuric acid, including:       7664-93-9, 7449-   0.05 mg/m3 (0.03 x 10-
 Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) mist,     11-9.              7 lb/ft3).
 Sulfur trioxide (SO3).
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)..........  7449-09-5........  1.2 mg/m3 (3 x 10-9
                                                    lb/ft3).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> (including H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> 
mist and SO<INF>3</INF>) and gaseous SO<INF>2</INF> emissions from 
stationary sources.


[[Page 294]]


    Note: Filterable particulate matter may be determined along with 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> and SO<INF>2</INF> (subject to the approval 
of the Administrator) by inserting a heated glass fiber filter between 
the probe and isopropanol impinger (see Section 6.1.1 of Method 6). If 
this option is chosen, particulate analysis is gravimetric only; 
sulfuric acid is not determined separately.

    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    A gas sample is extracted isokinetically from the stack. The 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> and the SO<INF>2</INF> are separated, and 
both fractions are measured separately by the barium-thorin titration 
method.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Possible interfering agents of this method are fluorides, free 
ammonia, and dimethyl aniline. If any of these interfering agents is 
present (this can be determined by knowledge of the process), 
alternative methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, are 
required.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. Same as Method 6, Section 5.2.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1, with the 
following additions and exceptions:
    6.1.1 Sampling Train. A schematic of the sampling train used in this 
method is shown in Figure 8-1; it is similar to the Method 5 sampling 
train, except that the filter position is different, and the filter 
holder does not have to be heated. See Method 5, Section 6.1.1, for 
details and guidelines on operation and maintenance.
    6.1.1.1 Probe Liner. Borosilicate or quartz glass, with a heating 
system to prevent visible condensation during sampling. Do not use metal 
probe liners.
    6.1.1.2 Filter Holder. Borosilicate glass, with a glass frit filter 
support and a silicone rubber gasket. Other gasket materials (e.g., 
Teflon or Viton) may be used, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator. The holder design shall provide a positive seal against 
leakage from the outside or around the filter. The filter holder shall 
be placed between the first and second impingers. Do not heat the filter 
holder.
    6.1.1.3 Impingers. Four, of the Greenburg-Smith design, as shown in 
Figure 8-1. The first and third impingers must have standard tips. The 
second and fourth impingers must be modified by replacing the insert 
with an approximately 13-mm (\1/2\-in.) ID glass tube, having an 
unconstricted tip located 13 mm (\1/2\ in.) from the bottom of the 
impinger. Similar collection systems, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator, may be used.
    6.1.1.4 Temperature Sensor. Thermometer, or equivalent, to measure 
the temperature of the gas leaving the impinger train to within 1 [deg]C 
(2 [deg]F).
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are required for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Wash Bottles. Two polyethylene or glass bottles, 500-ml.
    6.2.2 Graduated Cylinders. Two graduated cylinders (volumetric 
flasks may be used), 250-ml, 1-liter.
    6.2.3 Storage Bottles. Leak-free polyethylene bottles, 1-liter size 
(two for each sampling run).
    6.2.4 Trip Balance. 500-g capacity, to measure to <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g (necessary only if a moisture content analysis is 
to be done).
    6.3 Analysis. The following items are required for sample analysis:
    6.3.1 Pipettes. Volumetric 10-ml, 100-ml.
    6.3.2 Burette. 50-ml.
    6.3.3 Erlenmeyer Flask. 250-ml (one for each sample, blank, and 
standard).
    6.3.4 Graduated Cylinder. 100-ml.
    6.3.5 Dropping Bottle. To add indicator solution, 125-ml size.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents are to conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are available. 
Otherwise, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 Filters and Silica Gel. Same as in Method 5, Sections 7.1.1 
and 7.1.2, respectively.
    7.1.2 Water. Same as in Method 6, Section 7.1.1.
    7.1.3 Isopropanol, 80 Percent by Volume. Mix 800 ml of isopropanol 
with 200 ml of water.

    Note: Check for peroxide impurities using the procedure outlined in 
Method 6, Section 7.1.2.1.

    7.1.4 Hydrogen Peroxide (H\2\O\2\), 3 Percent by Volume. Dilute 100 
ml of 30 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>) to 1 liter with water. 
Prepare fresh daily.
    7.1.5 Crushed Ice.

[[Page 295]]

    7.2 Sample Recovery. The reagents and standards required for sample 
recovery are:
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.2.
    7.2.2 Isopropanol, 80 Percent. Same as in Section 7.1.3.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. Same as Method 6, Section 7.3.
    7.3.1 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. When making compliance 
determinations, and upon availability, audit samples may be obtained 
from the appropriate EPA Regional Office or from the responsible 
enforcement authority.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Preparation. Same as Method 5, Section 8.1, except that 
filters should be inspected but need not be desiccated, weighed, or 
identified. If the effluent gas can be considered dry (i.e., moisture-
free), the silica gel need not be weighed.
    8.2 Preliminary Determinations. Same as Method 5, Section 8.2.
    8.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Same as Method 5, Section 8.3, 
with the following exceptions:
    8.3.1 Use Figure 8-1 instead of Figure 5-1.
    8.3.2 Replace the second sentence of Method 5, Section 8.3.1 with: 
Place 100 ml of 80 percent isopropanol in the first impinger, 100 ml of 
3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> in both the second and third 
impingers; retain a portion of each reagent for use as a blank solution. 
Place about 200 g of silica gel in the fourth impinger.
    8.3.3 Ignore any other statements in Section 8.3 of Method 5 that 
are obviously not applicable to the performance of Method 8.

    Note: If moisture content is to be determined by impinger analysis, 
weigh each of the first three impingers (plus absorbing solution) to the 
nearest 0.5 g, and record these weights. Weigh also the silica gel (or 
silica gel plus container) to the nearest 0.5 g, and record.)

    8.4 Metering System Leak-Check Procedure. Same as Method 5, Section 
8.4.1.
    8.5 Pretest Leak-Check Procedure. Follow the basic procedure in 
Method 5, Section 8.4.2, noting that the probe heater shall be adjusted 
to the minimum temperature required to prevent condensation, and also 
that verbage such as ``* * * plugging the inlet to the filter holder * * 
* '' found in Section 8.4.2.2 of Method 5 shall be replaced by `` * * * 
plugging the inlet to the first impinger * * * ''. The pretest leak-
check is recommended, but is not required.
    8.6 Sampling Train Operation. Follow the basic procedures in Method 
5, Section 8.5, in conjunction with the following special instructions:
    8.6.1 Record the data on a sheet similar to that shown in Figure 8-2 
(alternatively, Figure 5-2 in Method 5 may be used). The sampling rate 
shall not exceed 0.030 m\3\/min (1.0 cfm) during the run. Periodically 
during the test, observe the connecting line between the probe and first 
impinger for signs of condensation. If condensation does occur, adjust 
the probe heater setting upward to the minimum temperature required to 
prevent condensation. If component changes become necessary during a 
run, a leak-check shall be performed immediately before each change, 
according to the procedure outlined in Section 8.4.3 of Method 5 (with 
appropriate modifications, as mentioned in Section 8.5 of this method); 
record all leak rates. If the leakage rate(s) exceeds the specified 
rate, the tester shall either void the run or plan to correct the sample 
volume as outlined in Section 12.3 of Method 5. Leak-checks immediately 
after component changes are recommended, but not required. If these 
leak-checks are performed, the procedure in Section 8.4.2 of Method 5 
(with appropriate modifications) shall be used.
    8.6.2 After turning off the pump and recording the final readings at 
the conclusion of each run, remove the probe from the stack. Conduct a 
post-test (mandatory) leak-check as outlined in Section 8.4.4 of Method 
5 (with appropriate modifications), and record the leak rate. If the 
post-test leakage rate exceeds the specified acceptable rate, either 
correct the sample volume, as outlined in Section 12.3 of Method 5, or 
void the run.
    8.6.3 Drain the ice bath and, with the probe disconnected, purge the 
remaining part of the train by drawing clean ambient air through the 
system for 15 minutes at the average flow rate used for sampling.

    Note: Clean ambient air can be provided by passing air through a 
charcoal filter. Alternatively, ambient air (without cleaning) may be 
used.

    8.7 Calculation of Percent Isokinetic. Same as Method 5, Section 
8.6.
    8.8 Sample Recovery. Proper cleanup procedure begins as soon as the 
probe is removed from the stack at the end of the sampling period. Allow 
the probe to cool. Treat the samples as follows:
    8.8.1 Container No. 1.
    8.8.1.1 If a moisture content analysis is to be performed, clean and 
weigh the first impinger (plus contents) to the nearest 0.5 g, and 
record this weight.
    8.8.1.2 Transfer the contents of the first impinger to a 250-ml 
graduated cylinder. Rinse the probe, first impinger, all connecting 
glassware before the filter, and the front half of the filter holder 
with 80 percent isopropanol. Add the isopropanol rinse solution to the 
cylinder. Dilute the contents of the cylinder to 225 ml with 80 percent

[[Page 296]]

isopropanol, and transfer the cylinder contents to the storage 
container. Rinse the cylinder with 25 ml of 80 percent isopropanol, and 
transfer the rinse to the storage container. Add the filter to the 
solution in the storage container and mix. Seal the container to protect 
the solution against evaporation. Mark the level of liquid on the 
container, and identify the sample container.
    8.8.2 Container No. 2.
    8.8.2.1 If a moisture content analysis is to be performed, clean and 
weigh the second and third impingers (plus contents) to the nearest 0.5 
g, and record the weights. Also, weigh the spent silica gel (or silica 
gel plus impinger) to the nearest 0.5 g, and record the weight.
    8.8.2.2 Transfer the solutions from the second and third impingers 
to a 1-liter graduated cylinder. Rinse all connecting glassware 
(including back half of filter holder) between the filter and silica gel 
impinger with water, and add this rinse water to the cylinder. Dilute 
the contents of the cylinder to 950 ml with water. Transfer the solution 
to a storage container. Rinse the cylinder with 50 ml of water, and 
transfer the rinse to the storage container. Mark the level of liquid on 
the container. Seal and identify the sample container.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.1.3.........................  Isopropanol check  Ensure acceptable
                                                    level of peroxide
                                                    impurities in
                                                    isopropanol.
8.4, 8.5, 10.1................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.2..........................  Barium standard    Ensure normality
                                 solution           determination.
                                 standardization.
11.2..........................  Replicate          Ensure precision of
                                 titrations.        titration
                                                    determinations.
11.3..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analyst's
                                 analysis.          technique and
                                                    standards
                                                    preparation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Sampling Equipment. Same as Method 5, Section 10.0.
    10.2 Barium Standard Solution. Same as Method 6, Section 10.5.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1. Sample Loss. Same as Method 6, Section 11.1.
    11.2. Sample Analysis.
    11.2.1 Container No. 1. Shake the container holding the isopropanol 
solution and the filter. If the filter breaks up, allow the fragments to 
settle for a few minutes before removing a sample aliquot. Pipette a 
100-ml aliquot of this solution into a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask, add 2 to 
4 drops of thorin indicator, and titrate to a pink endpoint using 0.0100 
N barium standard solution. Repeat the titration with a second aliquot 
of sample, and average the titration values. Replicate titrations must 
agree within 1 percent or 0.2 ml, whichever is greater.
    11.2.2 Container No. 2. Thoroughly mix the solution in the container 
holding the contents of the second and third impingers. Pipette a 10-ml 
aliquot of sample into a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 40 ml of 
isopropanol, 2 to 4 drops of thorin indicator, and titrate to a pink 
endpoint using 0.0100 N barium standard solution. Repeat the titration 
with a second aliquot of sample, and average the titration values. 
Replicate titrations must agree within 1 percent or 0.2 ml, whichever is 
greater.
    11.2.3 Blanks. Prepare blanks by adding 2 to 4 drops of thorin 
indicator to 100 ml of 80 percent isopropanol. Titrate the blanks in the 
same manner as the samples.
    11.3 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.3.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, EPA audit samples must be 
analyzed, subject to availability.
    11.3.2 Concurrently analyze audit samples and the compliance samples 
in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and the 
standards preparation.

    Note: It is recommended that known quality control samples be 
analyzed prior to the compliance and audit sample analyses to optimize 
the system accuracy and precision. These quality control samples may be 
obtained by contacting the appropriate EPA regional Office or the 
responsible enforcement authority.

    11.3.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
shall be used for the compliance samples and the EPA audit samples. If 
this condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance 
analyses for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is 
waived. Audit samples may not be used to validate different compliance 
samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement agencies, unless 
prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement agencies.

[[Page 297]]

    11.4 Audit Sample Results.
    11.4.1 Calculate the audit sample concentrations in mg/dscm and 
submit results using the instructions provided with the audit samples.
    11.4.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.4.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst shall agree within 5 percent of the actual concentrations. If 
the 5 percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and 
audit samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test 
report.
    11.4.4 Failure to meet the 5 percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit 
results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature. Same as Method 5, Section 12.1, with the 
following additions and exceptions:

C<INF>a</INF>=Actual concentration of SO<INF>2</INF> in audit sample, 
mg/dscm.
C<INF>d</INF>=Determined concentration of SO<INF>2</INF> in audit 
sample, mg/dscm.
C<INF>H2SO4</INF>=Sulfuric acid (including SO<INF>3</INF>) 
concentration, g/dscm (lb/dscf).
C<INF>SO2</INF>=Sulfur dioxide concentration, g/dscm (lb/dscf).
N=Normality of barium perchlorate titrant, meq/ml.
RE=Relative error of QA audit sample analysis, percent
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of sample aliquot titrated, 100 ml for 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> and 10 ml for SO<INF>2</INF>.
V<INF>soln</INF>=Total volume of solution in which the sample is 
contained, 250 ml for the SO<INF>2</INF> sample and 1000 ml for the 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> sample.
V<INF>t</INF>=Volume of barium standard solution titrant used for the 
sample, ml.
V<INF>tb</INF>=Volume of barium standard solution titrant used for the 
blank, ml.

    12.2 Average Dry Gas Meter Temperature and Average Orifice Pressure 
Drop. See data sheet (Figure 8-2).
    12.3 Dry Gas Volume. Same as Method 5, Section 12.3.
    12.4 Volume of Water Vapor Condensed and Moisture Content. Calculate 
the volume of water vapor using Equation 5-2 of Method 5; the weight of 
water collected in the impingers and silica gel can be converted 
directly to milliliters (the specific gravity of water is 1 g/ml). 
Calculate the moisture content of the stack gas (B<INF>ws</INF>) using 
Equation 5-3 of Method 5. The Note in Section 12.5 of Method 5 also 
applies to this method. Note that if the effluent gas stream can be 
considered dry, the volume of water vapor and moisture content need not 
be calculated.
    12.5 Sulfuric Acid Mist (Including SO<INF>3</INF>) Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.223
    
Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=0.04904 g/meq for metric units,
K<INF>3</INF>=1.081 x 10<SUP>-4</SUP> lb/meq for English units.

    12.6 Sulfur Dioxide Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.224
    
Where:

K<INF>4</INF>=0.03203 g/meq for metric units,
K<INF>4</INF>=7.061 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> lb/meq for English units.

    12.7 Isokinetic Variation. Same as Method 5, Section 12.11.
    12.8 Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate. Calculate the 
average stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate, if needed, using 
data obtained in this method and the equations in Sections 12.6 and 12.7 
of Method 2.
    12.9 Relative Error (RE) for QA Audit Samples. Same as Method 6, 
Section 12.4.

[[Page 298]]

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Analytical Range. Collaborative tests have shown that the 
minimum detectable limits of the method are 0.06 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> (4 x 
10<SUP>-9</SUP> lb/ft<SUP>3</SUP>) for H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> and 
1.2 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> (74 x 10<SUP>-9</SUP> lb/ft<SUP>3</SUP>) for 
SO<INF>2</INF>. No upper limits have been established. Based on 
theoretical calculations for 200 ml of 3 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> solution, the upper concentration limit for 
SO<INF>2</INF> in a 1.0 m<SUP>3</SUP> (35.3 ft<SUP>3</SUP>) gas sample 
is about 12,000 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> (7.7 x 10<SUP>-4</SUP> lb/
ft<SUP>3</SUP>). The upper limit can be extended by increasing the 
quantity of peroxide solution in the impingers.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Section 17.0 of Methods 5 and 6.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 299]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.225


[[Page 300]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.226

    Method 9--Visual Determination of the Opacity of Emissions From 
                           Stationary Sources

    Many stationary sources discharge visible emissions into the 
atmosphere; these emissions are usually in the shape of a plume. This 
method involves the determination of plume opacity by qualified 
observers. The method includes procedures for the training and 
certification of observers, and procedures to be used in the field for 
determination of plume opacity. The appearance of a plume as viewed by 
an observer depends upon a number of variables, some of which may be 
controllable and some of which may not be controllable in the field. 
Variables which can be controlled to an extent to which they no longer 
exert a significant influence upon

[[Page 301]]

plume appearance include: Angle of the observer with respect to the 
plume; angle of the observer with respect to the sun; point of 
observation of attached and detached steam plume; and angle of the 
observer with respect to a plume emitted from a rectangular stack with a 
large length to width ratio. The method includes specific criteria 
applicable to these variables.
    Other variables which may not be controllable in the field are 
luminescence and color contrast between the plume and the background 
against which the plume is viewed. These variables exert an influence 
upon the appearance of a plume as viewed by an observer, and can affect 
the ability of the observer to accurately assign opacity values to the 
observed plume. Studies of the theory of plume opacity and field studies 
have demonstrated that a plume is most visible and presents the greatest 
apparent opacity when viewed against a contrasting background. It 
follows from this, and is confirmed by field trials, that the opacity of 
a plume, viewed under conditions where a contrasting background is 
present can be assigned with the greatest degree of accuracy. However, 
the potential for a positive error is also the greatest when a plume is 
viewed under such contrasting conditions. Under conditions presenting a 
less contrasting background, the apparent opacity of a plume is less and 
approaches zero as the color and luminescence contrast decrease toward 
zero. As a result, significant negative bias and negative errors can be 
made when a plume is viewed under less contrasting conditions. A 
negative bias decreases rather than increases the possibility that a 
plant operator will be cited for a violation of opacity standards due to 
observer error.
    Studies have been undertaken to determine the magnitude of positive 
errors which can be made by qualified observers while reading plumes 
under contrasting conditions and using the procedures set forth in this 
method. The results of these studies (field trials) which involve a 
total of 769 sets of 25 readings each are as follows:
    (1) For black plumes (133 sets at a smoke generator), 100 percent of 
the sets were read with a positive error \1\ of less than 7.5 percent 
opacity; 99 percent were read with a positive error of less than 5 
percent opacity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ For a set, positive error=average opacity determined by 
observers' 25 observations--average opacity determined from trans mis 
someter's 25 recordings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) For white plumes (170 sets at a smoke generator, 168 sets at a 
coal-fired power plant, 298 sets at a sulfuric acid plant), 99 percent 
of the sets were read with a positive error of less than 7.5 percent 
opacity; 95 percent were read with a positive error of less than 5 
percent opacity.
    The positive observational error associated with an average of 
twenty-five readings is therefore established. The accuracy of the 
method must be taken into account when determining possible violations 
of applicable opacity standards.

                     1. Principle and Applicability

    1.1 Principle. The opacity of emissions from stationary sources is 
determined visually by a qualified observer.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of the opacity of emissions from stationary sources pursuant to Sec. 
60.11(b) and for qualifying observers for visually determining opacity 
of emissions.

                              2. Procedures

    The observer qualified in accordance with section 3 of this method 
shall use the following procedures for visually determining the opacity 
of emissions:
    2.1 Position. The qualified observer shall stand at a distance 
sufficient to provide a clear view of the emissions with the sun 
oriented in the 140[deg] sector to his back. Consistent with maintaining 
the above requirement, the observer shall, as much as possible, make his 
observations from a position such that his line of vision is 
approximately perpendicular to the plume direction, and when observing 
opacity of emissions from rectangular outlets (e.g., roof monitors, open 
baghouses, noncircular stacks), approximately perpendicular to the 
longer axis of the outlet. The observer's line of sight should not 
include more than one plume at a time when multiple stacks are involved, 
and in any case the observer should make his observations with his line 
of sight perpendicular to the longer axis of such a set of multiple 
stacks (e.g., stub stacks on bag houses).
    2.2 Field Records. The observer shall record the name of the plant, 
emission location, type facility, observer's name and affiliation, a 
sketch of the observer's position relative to the source, and the date 
on a field data sheet (Figure 9-1). The time, estimated distance to the 
emission location, approximate wind direction, estimated wind speed, 
description of the sky condition (presence and color of clouds), and 
plume background are recorded on a field data sheet at the time opacity 
readings are initiated and completed.
    2.3 Observations. Opacity observations shall be made at the point of 
greatest opacity in that portion of the plume where condensed water 
vapor is not present. The observer shall not look continuously at the 
plume, but instead shall observe the plume momentarily at 15-second 
intervals.
    2.3.1 Attached Steam Plumes. When condensed water vapor is present 
within the

[[Page 302]]

plume as it emerges from the emission outlet, opacity observations shall 
be made beyond the point in the plume at which condensed water vapor is 
no longer visible. The observer shall record the approximate distance 
from the emission outlet to the point in the plume at which the 
observations are made.
    2.3.2 Detached Steam Plume. When water vapor in the plume condenses 
and becomes visible at a distinct distance from the emission outlet, the 
opacity of emissions should be evaluated at the emission outlet prior to 
the condensation of water vapor and the formation of the steam plume.
    2.4 Recording Observations. Opacity observations shall be recorded 
to the nearest 5 percent at 15-second intervals on an observational 
record sheet. (See Figure 9-2 for an example.) A minimum of 24 
observations shall be recorded. Each momentary observation recorded 
shall be deemed to represent the average opacity of emissions for a 15-
second period.
    2.5 Data Reduction. Opacity shall be determined as an average of 24 
consecutive observations recorded at 15-second intervals. Divide the 
observations recorded on the record sheet into sets of 24 consecutive 
observations. A set is composed of any 24 consecutive observations. Sets 
need not be consecutive in time and in no case shall two sets overlap. 
For each set of 24 observations, calculate the average by summing the 
opacity of the 24 observations and dividing this sum by 24. If an 
applicable standard specifies an averaging time requiring more than 24 
observations, calculate the average for all observations made during the 
specified time period. Record the average opacity on a record sheet. 
(See Figure 9-1 for an example.)

                      3. Qualifications and Testing

    3.1 Certification Requirements. To receive certification as a 
qualified observer, a candidate must be tested and demonstrate the 
ability to assign opacity readings in 5 percent increments to 25 
different black plumes and 25 different white plumes, with an error not 
to exceed 15 percent opacity on any one reading and an average error not 
to exceed 7.5 percent opacity in each category. Candidates shall be 
tested according to the procedures described in section 3.2. Smoke 
generators used pursuant to section 3.2 shall be equipped with a smoke 
meter which meets the requirements of section 3.3.
    The certification shall be valid for a period of 6 months, at which 
time the qualification procedure must be repeated by any observer in 
order to retain certification.
    3.2 Certification Procedure. The certification test consists of 
showing the candidate a complete run of 50 plumes--25 black plumes and 
25 white plumes--generated by a smoke generator. Plumes within each set 
of 25 black and 25 white runs shall be presented in random order. The 
candidate assigns an opacity value to each plume and records his 
observation on a suitable form. At the completion of each run of 50 
readings, the score of the candidate is determined. If a candidate fails 
to qualify, the complete run of 50 readings must be repeated in any 
retest. The smoke test may be administered as part of a smoke school or 
training program, and may be preceded by training or familiarization 
runs of the smoke generator during which candidates are shown black and 
white plumes of known opacity.
    3.3 Smoke Generator Specifications. Any smoke generator used for the 
purposes of section 3.2 shall be equipped with a smoke meter installed 
to measure opacity across the diameter of the smoke generator stack. The 
smoke meter output shall display instack opacity based upon a pathlength 
equal to the stack exit diameter, on a full 0 to 100 percent chart 
recorder scale. The smoke meter optical design and performance shall 
meet the specifications shown in Table 9-1. The smoke meter shall be 
calibrated as prescribed in section 3.3.1 prior to the conduct of each 
smoke reading test. At the completion of each test, the zero and span 
drift shall be checked and if the drift exceeds <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
percent opacity, the condition shall be corrected prior to conducting 
any subsequent test runs. The smoke meter shall be demonstrated, at the 
time of installation, to meet the specifications listed in Table 9-1. 
This demonstration shall be repeated following any subsequent repair or 
replacement of the photocell or associated electronic circuitry 
including the chart recorder or output meter, or every 6 months, 
whichever occurs first.

      Table 9-1--Smoke Meter Design and Performance Specifications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Parameter                          Specification
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Light source..........................  Incandescent lamp operated at
                                            nominal rated voltage.
b. Spectral response of photocell........  Photopic (daylight spectral
                                            response of the human eye--
                                            Citation 3).
c. Angle of view.........................  15[deg] maximum total angle.
d. Angle of projection...................  15[deg] maximum total angle.
e. Calibration error.....................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3%
                                            opacity, maximum.
f. Zero and span drift...................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1%
                                            opacity, 30 minutes.
g. Response time.........................  5 seconds.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    3.3.1 Calibration. The smoke meter is calibrated after allowing a 
minimum of 30 minutes warmup by alternately producing simulated opacity 
of 0 percent and 100 percent. When stable response at 0 percent or 100 
percent is noted, the smoke meter is adjusted to produce an output of 0 
percent or 100 percent, as appropriate. This calibration shall be 
repeated until stable 0 percent and 100

[[Page 303]]

percent readings are produced without adjustment. Simulated 0 percent 
and 100 percent opacity values may be produced by alternately switching 
the power to the light source on and off while the smoke generator is 
not producing smoke.
    3.3.2 Smoke Meter Evaluation. The smoke meter design and performance 
are to be evaluated as follows:
    3.3.2.1 Light Source. Verify from manufacturer's data and from 
voltage measurements made at the lamp, as installed, that the lamp is 
operated within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the nominal rated 
voltage.
    3.3.2.2 Spectral Response of Photocell. Verify from manufacturer's 
data that the photocell has a photopic response; i.e., the spectral 
sensitivity of the cell shall closely approximate the standard spectral-
luminosity curve for photopic vision which is referenced in (b) of Table 
9-1.

[[Page 304]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.154


                     Figure 9-2--Observation Record
                            Page ---- of ----
Company...........................   Observer.................  ........
Location..........................   Type facility............  ........
Test Number.......................   Point of emissions.......  ........
Date..............................
 


[[Page 305]]


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Seconds                  Steam plume (check if applicable)
 Hr.    Min. -----------------------------------------------------------------------------        Comments
                0      15     30     45           Attached                Detached
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           0
------
           1
------
           2
------
           3
------
           4
------
           5
------
           6
------
           7
------
           8
------
           9
------
          10
------
          11
------
          12
------
          13
------
          14
------
          15
------
          16
------
          17
------
          18
------
          19
------
          20
------
          21
------
          22
------
          23
------
          24
------
          25
------
          26
------
          27
------
          28
------
          29
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


               Figure 9-2--Observation Record (Continued)
                            Page ---- of ----
Company...........................   Observer.................  ........
Location..........................   Type facility............  ........
Test Number.......................   Point of emissions.......  ........
Date..............................
 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Seconds                  Steam plume (check if applicable)
 Hr.    Min. -----------------------------------------------------------------------------        Comments
                0      15     30     45           Attached                Detached
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          30
------

[[Page 306]]

 
          31
------
          32
------
          33
------
          34
------
          35
------
          36
------
          37
------
          38
------
          39
------
          40
------
          41
------
          42
------
          43
------
          44
------
          45
------
          46
------
          47
------
          48
------
          49
------
          50
------
          51
------
          52
------
          53
------
          54
------
          55
------
          56
------
          57
------
          58
------
          59
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    3.3.2.3 Angle of View. Check construction geometry to ensure that 
the total angle of view of the smoke plume, as seen by the photocell, 
does not exceed 15[deg]. The total angle of view may be calculated from: 
[thetas]= 2 tan<SUP>-1</SUP>d/2L, where [thetas]=total angle of view; 
d=the sum of the photocell diameter+the diameter of the limiting 
aperture; and L=the distance from the photocell to the limiting 
aperture. The limiting aperture is the point in the path between the 
photocell and the smoke plume where the angle of view is most 
restricted. In smoke generator smoke meters this is normally an orifice 
plate.
    3.3.2.4 Angle of Projection. Check construction geometry to ensure 
that the total angle of projection of the lamp on the smoke plume does 
not exceed 15[deg]. The total angle of projection may be calculated 
from: [thetas]=2 tan<SUP>-1</SUP>d/2L, where [thetas]=total angle of 
projection; d=the sum of the length of the lamp filament + the diameter 
of the limiting aperture; and

[[Page 307]]

L=the distance from the lamp to the limiting aperture.
    3.3.2.5 Calibration Error. Using neutral-density filters of known 
opacity, check the error between the actual response and the theoretical 
linear response of the smoke meter. This check is accomplished by first 
calibrating the smoke meter according to 3.3.1 and then inserting a 
series of three neutral-density filters of nominal opacity of 20, 50, 
and 75 percent in the smoke meter pathlength. Filters calibrated within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent shall be used. Care should be taken when 
inserting the filters to prevent stray light from affecting the meter. 
Make a total of five nonconsecutive readings for each filter. The 
maximum error on any one reading shall be 3 percent opacity.
    3.3.2.6 Zero and Span Drift. Determine the zero and span drift by 
calibrating and operating the smoke generator in a normal manner over a 
1-hour period. The drift is measured by checking the zero and span at 
the end of this period.
    3.3.2.7 Response Time. Determine the response time by producing the 
series of five simulated 0 percent and 100 percent opacity values and 
observing the time required to reach stable response. Opacity values of 
0 percent and 100 percent may be simulated by alternately switching the 
power to the light source off and on while the smoke generator is not 
operating.

                             4. Bibliography

    1. Air Pollution Control District Rules and Regulations, Los Angeles 
County Air Pollution Control District, Regulation IV, Prohibitions, Rule 
50.
    2. Weisburd, Melvin I., Field Operations and Enforcement Manual for 
Air, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. 
APTD-1100, August 1972, pp. 4.1-4.36.
    3. Condon, E.U., and Odishaw, H., Handbook of Physics, McGraw-Hill 
Co., New York, NY, 1958, Table 3.1, p. 6-52.

   Alternate Method 1--Determination of the Opacity of Emissions From 
                  Stationary Sources Remotely by Lidar

    This alternate method provides the quantitative determination of the 
opacity of an emissions plume remotely by a mobile lidar system (laser 
radar; Light Detection and Ranging). The method includes procedures for 
the calibration of the lidar and procedures to be used in the field for 
the lidar determination of plume opacity. The lidar is used to measure 
plume opacity during either day or nighttime hours because it contains 
its own pulsed light source or transmitter. The operation of the lidar 
is not dependent upon ambient lighting conditions (light, dark, sunny or 
cloudy).
    The lidar mechanism or technique is applicable to measuring plume 
opacity at numerous wavelengths of laser radiation. However, the 
performance evaluation and calibration test results given in support of 
this method apply only to a lidar that employs a ruby (red light) laser 
[Reference 5.1].

                     1. Principle and Applicability

    1.1 Principle. The opacity of visible emissions from stationary 
sources (stacks, roof vents, etc.) is measured remotely by a mobile 
lidar (laser radar).
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the remote 
measurement of the opacity of visible emissions from stationary sources 
during both nighttime and daylight conditions, pursuant to 40 CFR Sec. 
60.11(b). It is also applicable for the calibration and performance 
verification of the mobile lidar for the measurement of the opacity of 
emissions. A performance/design specification for a basic lidar system 
is also incorporated into this method.
    1.3 Definitions.
    Azimuth angle: The angle in the horizontal plane that designates 
where the laser beam is pointed. It is measured from an arbitrary fixed 
reference line in that plane.
    Backscatter: The scattering of laser light in a direction opposite 
to that of the incident laser beam due to reflection from particulates 
along the beam's atmospheric path which may include a smoke plume.
    Backscatter signal: The general term for the lidar return signal 
which results from laser light being backscattered by atmospheric and 
smoke plume particulates.
    Convergence distance: The distance from the lidar to the point of 
overlap of the lidar receiver's field-of-view and the laser beam.
    Elevation angle: The angle of inclination of the laser beam 
referenced to the horizontal plane.
    Far region: The region of the atmosphere's path along the lidar 
line-of-sight beyond or behind the plume being measured.
    Lidar: Acronym for Light Detection and Ranging.
    Lidar range: The range or distance from the lidar to a point of 
interest along the lidar line-of-sight.
    Near region: The region of the atmospheric path along the lidar 
line-of-sight between the lidar's convergence distance and the plume 
being measured.
    Opacity: One minus the optical transmittance of a smoke plume, 
screen target, etc.
    Pick interval: The time or range intervals in the lidar backscatter 
signal whose minimum average amplitude is used to calculate opacity. Two 
pick intervals are required, one in the near region and one in the far 
region.
    Plume: The plume being measured by lidar.
    Plume signal: The backscatter signal resulting from the laser light 
pulse passing through a plume.

[[Page 308]]

    1/R\2\Correction: The correction made for the systematic decrease in 
lidar backscatter signal amplitude with range.
    Reference signal: The backscatter signal resulting from the laser 
light pulse passing through ambient air.
    Sample interval: The time period between successive samples for a 
digital signal or between successive measurements for an analog signal.
    Signal spike: An abrupt, momentary increase and decrease in signal 
amplitude.
    Source: The source being tested by lidar.
    Time reference: The time (t<INF>o</INF>) when the laser pulse 
emerges from the laser, used as the reference in all lidar time or range 
measurements.

                              2. Procedures

    The mobile lidar calibrated in accordance with Paragraph 3 of this 
method shall use the following procedures for remotely measuring the 
opacity of stationary source emissions:
    2.1 Lidar Position. The lidar shall be positioned at a distance from 
the plume sufficient to provide an unobstructed view of the source 
emissions. The plume must be at a range of at least 50 meters or three 
consecutive pick intervals (whichever is greater) from the lidar's 
transmitter/receiver convergence distance along the line-of-sight. The 
maximum effective opacity measurement distance of the lidar is a 
function of local atmospheric conditions, laser beam diameter, and plume 
diameter. The test position of the lidar shall be selected so that the 
diameter of the laser beam at the measurement point within the plume 
shall be no larger than three-fourths the plume diameter. The beam 
diameter is calculated by Equation (AM1-1):

D(lidar)=A+R[phis]<=0.75 D(Plume) (AM1-1)

Where:

D(Plume)=diameter of the plume (cm),
[phis]=laser beam divergence measured in radians
R=range from the lidar to the source (cm)
D(Lidar)=diameter of the laser beam at range R (cm),
A=diameter of the laser beam or pulse where it leaves the laser.

The lidar range, R, is obtained by aiming and firing the laser at the 
emissions source structure immediately below the outlet. The range value 
is then determined from the backscatter signal which consists of a 
signal spike (return from source structure) and the atmospheric 
backscatter signal [Reference 5.1]. This backscatter signal should be 
recorded.
    When there is more than one source of emissions in the immediate 
vicinity of the plume, the lidar shall be positioned so that the laser 
beam passes through only a single plume, free from any interference of 
the other plumes for a minimum of 50 meters or three consecutive pick 
intervals (whichever is greater) in each region before and beyond the 
plume along the line-of-sight (determined from the backscatter signals). 
The lidar shall initially be positioned so that its line-of-sight is 
approximately perpendicular to the plume.
    When measuring the opacity of emissions from rectangular outlets 
(e.g., roof monitors, open baghouses, noncircular stacks, etc.), the 
lidar shall be placed in a position so that its line-of-sight is 
approximately perpendicular to the longer (major) axis of the outlet.
    2.2 Lidar Operational Restrictions. The lidar receiver shall not be 
aimed within an angle of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15[deg] (cone angle) of 
the sun.
    This method shall not be used to make opacity measurements if 
thunderstorms, snowstorms, hail storms, high wind, high-ambient dust 
levels, fog or other atmospheric conditions cause the reference signals 
to consistently exceed the limits specified in Section 2.3.
    2.3 Reference Signal Requirements. Once placed in its proper 
position for opacity measurement, the laser is aimed and fired with the 
line-of-sight near the outlet height and rotated horizontally to a 
position clear of the source structure and the associated plume. The 
backscatter signal obtained from this position is called the ambient-air 
or reference signal. The lidar operator shall inspect this signal 
[Section V of Reference 5.1] to: (1) determine if the lidar line-of-
sight is free from interference from other plumes and from physical 
obstructions such as cables, power lines, etc., for a minimum of 50 
meters or three consecutive pick intervals (whichever is greater) in 
each region before and beyond the plume, and (2) obtain a qualitative 
measure of the homogeneity of the ambient air by noting any signal 
spikes.
    Should there be any signal spikes on the reference signal within a 
minimum of 50 meters or three consecutive pick intervals (whichever is 
greater) in each region before and beyond the plume, the laser shall be 
fired three more times and the operator shall inspect the reference 
signals on the display. If the spike(s) remains, the azimuth angle shall 
be changed and the above procedures conducted again. If the spike(s) 
disappears in all three reference signals, the lidar line-of-sight is 
acceptable if there is shot-to-shot consistency and there is no 
interference from other plumes.
    Shot-to-shot consistency of a series of reference signals over a 
period of twenty seconds is verified in either of two ways. (1) The 
lidar operator shall observe the reference signal amplitudes. For shot-
to-shot consistency the ratio of R<INF>f</INF> to R<INF>n</INF> 
[amplitudes of the near and far region pick intervals (Section 2.6.1)] 
shall vary by not more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6% between shots; or 
(2) the lidar operator shall accept any one of the reference signals and 
treat the other two as plume signals; then

[[Page 309]]

the opacity for each of the subsequent reference signals is calculated 
(Equation AM1-2). For shot-to-shot consistency, the opacity values shall 
be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3% of 0% opacity and the associated 
S<INF>o</INF> values less than or equal to 8% (full scale) [Section 
2.6].
    If a set of reference signals fails to meet the requirements of this 
section, then all plume signals [Section 2.4] from the last set of 
acceptable reference signals to the failed set shall be discarded.
    2.3.1 Initial and Final Reference Signals. Three reference signals 
shall be obtained within a 90-second time period prior to any data run. 
A final set of three reference signals shall be obtained within three 
(3) minutes after the completion of the same data run.
    2.3.2 Temporal Criterion for Additional Reference Signals. An 
additional set of reference signals shall be obtained during a data run 
if there is a change in wind direction or plume drift of 30[deg] or more 
from the direction that was prevalent when the last set of reference 
signals was obtained. An additional set of reference signals shall also 
be obtained if there is an increase in value of S<INF>In</INF> (near 
region standard deviation, Equation AM1-5) or S<INF>If</INF> (far region 
standard deviation, Equation AM1-6) that is greater than 6% (full scale) 
over the respective values calculated from the immediately previous 
plume signal, and this increase in value remains for 30 seconds or 
longer. An additional set of reference signals shall also be obtained if 
there is a change in amplitude in either the near or the far region of 
the plume signal, that is greater than 6% of the near signal amplitude 
and this change in amplitude remains for 30 seconds or more.
    2.4 Plume Signal Requirements. Once properly aimed, the lidar is 
placed in operation with the nominal pulse or firing rate of six pulses/
minute (1 pulse/10 seconds). The lidar operator shall observe the plume 
backscatter signals to determine the need for additional reference 
signals as required by Section 2.3.2. The plume signals are recorded 
from lidar start to stop and are called a data run. The length of a data 
run is determined by operator discretion. Short-term stops of the lidar 
to record additional reference signals do not constitute the end of a 
data run if plume signals are resumed within 90 seconds after the 
reference signals have been recorded, and the total stop or interrupt 
time does not exceed 3 minutes.
    2.4.1 Non-hydrated Plumes. The laser shall be aimed at the region of 
the plume which displays the greatest opacity. The lidar operator must 
visually verify that the laser is aimed clearly above the source exit 
structure.
    2.4.2 Hydrated Plumes. The lidar will be used to measure the opacity 
of hydrated or so-called steam plumes. As listed in the reference 
method, there are two types, i.e., attached and detached steam plumes.
    2.4.2.1 Attached Steam Plumes. When condensed water vapor is present 
within a plume, lidar opacity measurements shall be made at a point 
within the residual plume where the condensed water vapor is no longer 
visible. The laser shall be aimed into the most dense region (region of 
highest opacity) of the residual plume.
    During daylight hours the lidar operator locates the most dense 
portion of the residual plume visually. During nighttime hours a high-
intensity spotlight, night vision scope, or low light level TV, etc., 
can be used as an aid to locate the residual plume. If visual 
determination is ineffective, the lidar may be used to locate the most 
dense region of the residual plume by repeatedly measuring opacity, 
along the longitudinal axis or center of the plume from the emissions 
outlet to a point just beyond the steam plume. The lidar operator should 
also observe color differences and plume reflectivity to ensure that the 
lidar is aimed completely within the residual plume. If the operator 
does not obtain a clear indication of the location of the residual 
plume, this method shall not be used.
    Once the region of highest opacity of the residual plume has been 
located, aiming adjustments shall be made to the laser line-of-sight to 
correct for the following: movement to the region of highest opacity out 
of the lidar line-of-sight (away from the laser beam) for more than 15 
seconds, expansion of the steam plume (air temperature lowers and/or 
relative humidity increases) so that it just begins to encroach on the 
field-of-view of the lidar's optical telescope receiver, or a decrease 
in the size of the steam plume (air temperature higher and/or relative 
humidity decreases) so that regions within the residual plume whose 
opacity is higher than the one being monitored, are present.
    2.4.2.2 Detached Steam Plumes. When the water vapor in a hydrated 
plume condenses and becomes visible at a finite distance from the stack 
or source emissions outlet, the opacity of the emissions shall be 
measured in the region of the plume clearly above the emissions outlet 
and below condensation of the water vapor.
    During daylight hours the lidar operators can visually determine if 
the steam plume is detached from the stack outlet. During nighttime 
hours a high-intensity spotlight, night vision scope, low light level 
TV, etc., can be used as an aid in determining if the steam plume is 
detached. If visual determination is ineffective, the lidar may be used 
to determine if the steam plume is detached by repeatedly measuring 
plume opacity from the outlet to the steam plume along the plume's 
longitudinal axis or center line. The lidar operator should also observe 
color differences and plume reflectivity to detect a

[[Page 310]]

detached plume. If the operator does not obtain a clear indication of 
the location of the detached plume, this method shall not be used to 
make opacity measurements between the outlet and the detached plume.
    Once the determination of a detached steam plume has been confirmed, 
the laser shall be aimed into the region of highest opacity in the plume 
between the outlet and the formation of the steam plume. Aiming 
adjustments shall be made to the lidar's line-of-sight within the plume 
to correct for changes in the location of the most dense region of the 
plume due to changes in wind direction and speed or if the detached 
steam plume moves closer to the source outlet encroaching on the most 
dense region of the plume. If the detached steam plume should move too 
close to the source outlet for the lidar to make interference-free 
opacity measurements, this method shall not be used.
    2.5 Field Records. In addition to the recording recommendations 
listed in other sections of this method the following records should be 
maintained. Each plume measured should be uniquely identified. The name 
of the facility, type of facility, emission source type, geographic 
location of the lidar with respect to the plume, and plume 
characteristics should be recorded. The date of the test, the time 
period that a source was monitored, the time (to the nearest second) of 
each opacity measurement, and the sample interval should also be 
recorded. The wind speed, wind direction, air temperature, relative 
humidity, visibility (measured at the lidar's position), and cloud cover 
should be recorded at the beginning and end of each time period for a 
given source. A small sketch depicting the location of the laser beam 
within the plume should be recorded.
    If a detached or attached steam plume is present at the emissions 
source, this fact should be recorded. Figures AM1-I and AM1-II are 
examples of logbook forms that may be used to record this type of data. 
Magnetic tape or paper tape may also be used to record data.

[[Page 311]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.155


[[Page 312]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.156


[[Page 313]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.157

    2.6 Opacity Calculation and Data Analysis. Referring to the 
reference signal and plume signal in Figure AM1-III, the measured 
opacity (O<INF>p</INF>) in percent for each lidar measurement is 
calculated using Equation AM1-2. (O<INF>p</INF>=1-T<INF>p</INF>; 
T<INF>p</INF> is the plume transmittance.)

[[Page 314]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.158

Where:

I<INF>n</INF>=near-region pick interval signal amplitude, plume signal, 
1/R\2\ corrected,
I<INF>f</INF>=far-region pick interval signal amplitude, plume signal, 
1/R\2\ corrected,
R<INF>n</INF>=near-region pick interval signal amplitude, reference 
signal, 1/R\2\ corrected, and
R<INF>f</INF>=far-region pick interval signal amplitude, reference 
signal, 1/R\2\ corrected.

    The 1/R\2\ correction to the plume and reference signal amplitudes 
is made by multiplying the amplitude for each successive sample interval 
from the time reference, by the square of the lidar time (or range) 
associated with that sample interval [Reference 5.1].
    The first step in selecting the pick intervals for Equation AM1-2 is 
to divide the plume signal amplitude by the reference signal amplitude 
at the same respective ranges to obtain a ``normalized'' signal. The 
pick intervals selected using this normalized signal, are a minimum of 
15 m (100 nanoseconds) in length and consist of at least 5 contiguous 
sample intervals. In addition, the following criteria, listed in order 
of importance, govern pick interval selection. (1) The intervals shall 
be in a region of the normalized signal where the reference signal meets 
the requirements of Section 2.3 and is everywhere greater than zero. (2) 
The intervals (near and far) with the minimum average amplitude are 
chosen. (3) If more than one interval with the same minimum average 
amplitude is found, the interval closest to the plume is chosen. (4) The 
standard deviation, S<INF>o</INF>, for the calculated opacity shall be 
8% or less. (S<INF>o</INF> is calculated by Equation AM1-7).
    If S<INF>o</INF> is greater than 8%, then the far pick interval 
shall be changed to the next interval of minimal average amplitude. If 
S<INF>o</INF> is still greater than 8%, then this procedure is repeated 
for the far pick interval. This procedure may be repeated once again for 
the near pick interval, but if S<INF>o</INF> remains greater than 8%, 
the plume signal shall be discarded.
    The reference signal pick intervals, R<INF>n</INF> and 
R<INF>f</INF>, must be chosen over the same time interval as the plume 
signal pick intervals, I<INF>n</INF> and I<INF>f</INF>, respectively 
[Figure AM1-III]. Other methods of selecting pick intervals may be used 
if they give equivalent results. Field-oriented examples of pick 
interval selection are available in Reference 5.1.
    The average amplitudes for each of the pick intervals, 
I<INF>n</INF>, I<INF>f</INF>, R<INF>n</INF>, R<INF>f</INF>, shall be 
calculated by averaging the respective individual amplitudes of the 
sample intervals from the plume signal and the associated reference 
signal each corrected for 1/R\2\. The amplitude of I<INF>n</INF> shall 
be calculated according to Equation (AM-3).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.159

Where:

I<INF>ni</INF>=the amplitude of the ith sample interval (near-region),
<INF>[Sigma]</INF>=sum of the individual amplitudes for the sample 
intervals,
m=number of sample intervals in the pick interval, and
I<INF>n</INF>=average amplitude of the near-region pick interval.

    Similarly, the amplitudes for I<INF>f</INF>, R<INF>n</INF>, and 
R<INF>f</INF> are calculated with the three expressions in Equation 
(AM1-4).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.160

    The standard deviation, S<INF>In</INF>, of the set of amplitudes for 
the near-region pick interval, I<INF>n</INF>, shall be calculated using 
Equation (AM1-5).
    Similarly, the standard deviations S<INF>If</INF>, S<INF>Rn</INF>, 
and S<INF>Rf</INF> are calculated with the three expressions in Equation 
(AM1-6).

[[Page 315]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.162

The standard deviation, S<INF>o</INF>, for each associated opacity 
value, O<INF>p</INF>, shall be calculated using Equation (AM1-7).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.163

    The calculated values of I<INF>n</INF>, I<INF>f</INF>, 
R<INF>n</INF>, R<INF>f</INF>, S<INF>In</INF>, S<INF>If</INF>, 
S<INF>Rn</INF>, S<INF>Rf</INF>, O<INF>p</INF>, and S<INF>o</INF> should 
be recorded. Any plume signal with an S<INF>o</INF> greater than 8% 
shall be discarded.
    2.6.1 Azimuth Angle Correction. If the azimuth angle correction to 
opacity specified in this section is performed, then the elevation angle 
correction specified in Section 2.6.2 shall not be performed. When 
opacity is measured in the residual region of an attached steam plume, 
and the lidar line-of-sight is not perpendicular to the plume, it may be 
necessary to correct the opacity measured by the lidar to obtain the 
opacity that would be measured on a path perpendicular to the plume. The 
following method, or any other method which produces equivalent results, 
shall be used to determine the need for a correction, to calculate the 
correction, and to document the point within the plume at which the 
opacity was measured.
    Figure AM1-IV(b) shows the geometry of the opacity correction. L' is 
the path through the plume along which the opacity measurement is made. 
P' is the path perpendicular to the plume at the same point. The angle 
[egr] is the angle between L' and the plume center line. The angle 
([pi]/2-[egr]), is the angle between the L' and P'. The measured 
opacity, O<INF>p</INF>, measured along the path L' shall be corrected to 
obtain the corrected opacity, O<INF>pc</INF>, for the path P', using 
Equation (AM1-8).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.164


[[Page 316]]


The correction in Equation (AM1-8) shall be performed if the inequality 
in Equation (AM1-9) is true.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.165

    Figure AM1-IV(a) shows the geometry used to calculate [egr] and the 
position in the plume at which the lidar measurement is made. This 
analysis assumes that for a given lidar measurement, the range from the 
lidar to the plume, the elevation angle of the lidar from the horizontal 
plane, and the azimuth angle of the lidar from an arbitrary fixed 
reference in the horizontal plane can all be obtained directly.

[[Page 317]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.166

R<INF>s</INF>=range from lidar to source*
[beta]<INF>s</INF>=elevation angle of R<INF>s</INF>*
R<INF>p</INF>=range from lidar to plume at the opacity measurement 
point*
[beta]<INF>p</INF>=elevation angle of R<INF>p</INF>*
R<INF>a</INF>=range from lidar to plume at some arbitrary point, 
P<INF>a</INF>, so the drift angle of the plume can be determined*

[[Page 318]]

[beta]<INF>a</INF>=elevation angle of R<INF>a</INF>*
[alpha]=angle between R<INF>p</INF> and R<INF>a</INF>
R'<INF>s</INF>=projection of R<INF>s</INF> in the horizontal plane
R'<INF>p</INF>=projection of R<INF>p</INF> in the horizontal plane
R'<INF>a</INF>=projection of R<INF>a</INF> in the horizontal plane
[psi]'=angle between R'<INF>s</INF> and R'<INF>p</INF>*
[alpha]'=angle between R'<INF>p</INF> and R'<INF>a</INF>*
R<==distance from the source to the opacity measurement point projected 
in the horizontal plane
R<INF>[thetas]</INF>=distance from opacity measurement point 
P<INF>p</INF> to the point in the plume P<INF>a</INF>.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.167

    The correction angle [egr] shall be determined using Equation AM1-
10.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    *Obtained directly from lidar. These values should be recorded.

Where:

[alpha]=Cos<SUP>-1</SUP> (Cos[beta]<INF>p</INF> Cos[beta]<INF>a</INF> 
Cos[alpha]'+Sin[beta]<INF>p</INF> Sin[beta]<INF>a</INF>),
and
R<INF>[thetas]</INF>=(R<INF>p</INF>2+R<INF>a</INF>2-2 R<INF>p</INF> 
R<INF>a</INF> Cos[alpha])<SUP>1/2</SUP>

    R<=, the distance from the source to the opacity measurement point 
projected in the horizontal plane, shall be determined using Equation 
AM1-11.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.168

Where:

R'<INF>s</INF>=R<INF>s</INF> Cos [beta]<INF>s</INF>, and
R'<INF>p</INF>=R<INF>p</INF> Cos [beta]<INF>p</INF>.

In the special case where the plume centerline at the opacity 
measurement point is horizontal, parallel to the ground, Equation AM1-12 
may be used to determine [egr] instead of Equation AM1-10.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.169

Where:

R''<INF>s</INF>=(R'\2\<INF>s</INF>+R<INF>p</INF>\2\Sin\2\[beta]<INF>p</INF>
)<SUP>1/2</SUP>.

If the angle [egr] is such that [egr]<= 30[deg] or [egr] <ls-thn-eq>= 
150[deg], the azimuth angle correction shall not be performed and the 
associated opacity value shall be discarded.
    2.6.2 Elevation Angle Correction. An individual lidar-measured 
opacity, O<INF>p</INF>, shall be corrected for elevation angle if the 
laser elevation or inclination angle, [beta]<INF>p</INF> [Figure AM1-V], 
is greater than or equal to the value calculated in Equation AM1-13.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.170

The measured opacity, O<INF>p</INF>, along the lidar path L, is adjusted 
to obtain the corrected opacity, O<INF>pc</INF>, for the actual plume 
(horizontal) path, P, by using Equation (AM1-14).

[[Page 319]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.171

Where:

[beta]<INF>p</INF>=lidar elevation or inclination angle,
O<INF>p</INF>=measured opacity along path L, and
O<INF>pc</INF>=corrected opacity for the actual plume thickness P.
    The values for [beta]<INF>p</INF>, O<INF>p</INF> and O<INF>pc</INF> 
should be recorded.

[[Page 320]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.172

    2.6.3 Determination of Actual Plume Opacity. Actual opacity of the 
plume shall be determined by Equation AM1-15.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.173

    2.6.4 Calculation of Average Actual Plume Opacity. The average of 
the actual plume opacity, O<INF>pa</INF>, shall be calculated as the 
average of the consecutive individual actual opacity values, 
O<INF>pa</INF>, by Equation AM1-16.

[[Page 321]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.174

Where:

(O<INF>pa</INF>)<INF>k</INF>=the kth actual opacity value in an 
averaging interval containing n opacity values; k is a summing index.
<INF>[Sigma]</INF>=the sum of the individual actual opacity values.
n=the number of individual actual opacity values contained in the 
averaging interval.
O<INF>pa</INF>=average actual opacity calculated over the averaging 
interval.

                    3. Lidar Performance Verification

    The lidar shall be subjected to two types of performance 
verifications that shall be performed in the field. The annual 
calibration, conducted at least once a year, shall be used to directly 
verify operation and performance of the entire lidar system. The routine 
verification, conducted for each emission source measured, shall be used 
to insure proper performance of the optical receiver and associated 
electronics.
    3.1 Annual Calibration Procedures. Either a plume from a smoke 
generator or screen targets shall be used to conduct this calibration.
    If the screen target method is selected, five screens shall be 
fabricated by placing an opaque mesh material over a narrow frame (wood, 
metal extrusion, etc.). The screen shall have a surface area of at least 
one square meter. The screen material should be chosen for precise 
optical opacities of about 10, 20, 40, 60, and 80%. Opacity of each 
target shall be optically determined and should be recorded. If a smoke 
generator plume is selected, it shall meet the requirements of Section 
3.3 of Reference Method 9. This calibration shall be performed in the 
field during calm (as practical) atmospheric conditions. The lidar shall 
be positioned in accordance with Section 2.1.
    The screen targets must be placed perpendicular to and coincident 
with the lidar line-of-sight at sufficient height above the ground 
(suggest about 30 ft) to avoid ground-level dust contamination. 
Reference signals shall be obtained just prior to conducting the 
calibration test.
    The lidar shall be aimed through the center of the plume within 1 
stack diameter of the exit, or through the geometric center of the 
screen target selected. The lidar shall be set in operation for a 6-
minute data run at a nominal pulse rate of 1 pulse every 10 seconds. 
Each backscatter return signal and each respective opacity value 
obtained from the smoke generator transmissometer, shall be obtained in 
temporal coincidence. The data shall be analyzed and reduced in 
accordance with Section 2.6 of this method. This calibration shall be 
performed for 0% (clean air), and at least five other opacities 
(nominally 10, 20, 40, 60, and 80%).
    The average of the lidar opacity values obtained during a 6-minute 
calibration run shall be calculated and should be recorded. Also the 
average of the opacity values obtained from the smoke generator 
transmissometer for the same 6-minute run shall be calculated and should 
be recorded.
    Alternate calibration procedures that do not meet the above 
requirements but produce equivalent results may be used.
    3.2 Routine Verification Procedures. Either one of two techniques 
shall be used to conduct this verification. It shall be performed at 
least once every 4 hours for each emission source measured. The 
following parameters shall be directly verified.
    1) The opacity value of 0% plus a minimum of 5 (nominally 10, 20, 
40, 60, and 80%) opacity values shall be verified through the PMT 
detector and data processing electronics.
    2) The zero-signal level (receiver signal with no optical signal 
from the source present) shall be inspected to insure that no spurious 
noise is present in the signal. With the entire lidar receiver and 
analog/digital electronics turned on and adjusted for normal operating 
performance, the following procedures shall be used for Techniques 1 and 
2, respectively.
    3.2.1 Procedure for Technique 1. This test shall be performed with 
no ambient or stray light reaching the PMT detector. The narrow band 
filter (694.3 nanometers peak) shall be removed from its position in 
front of the PMT detector. Neutral density filters of nominal opacities 
of 10, 20, 40, 60, and 80% shall be used. The recommended test 
configuration is depicted in Figure AM1-VI.

[[Page 322]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.175

    The zero-signal level shall be measured and should be recorded, as 
indicated in Figure AM1-VI(a). This simulated clear-air or 0% opacity 
value shall be tested in using the selected light source depicted in 
Figure AM1-VI(b).
    The light source either shall be a continuous wave (CW) laser with 
the beam mechanically chopped or a light emitting diode controlled with 
a pulse generator (rectangular pulse). (A laser beam may have to be 
attenuated so as not to saturate the PMT detector). This signal level 
shall be measured

[[Page 323]]

and should be recorded. The opacity value is calculated by taking two 
pick intervals [Section 2.6] about 1 microsecond apart in time and using 
Equation (AM1-2) setting the ratio R<INF>n</INF>/R<INF>f</INF>=1. This 
calculated value should be recorded.
    The simulated clear-air signal level is also employed in the optical 
test using the neutral density filters. Using the test configuration in 
Figure AM1-VI(c), each neutral density filter shall be separately placed 
into the light path from the light source to the PMT detector. The 
signal level shall be measured and should be recorded. The opacity value 
for each filter is calculated by taking the signal level for that 
respective filter (I<INF>f</INF>), dividing it by the 0% opacity signal 
level (I<INF>n</INF>) and performing the remainder of the calculation by 
Equation (AM1-2) with R<INF>n</INF>/R<INF>f</INF>=1. The calculated 
opacity value for each filter should be recorded.
    The neutral density filters used for Technique 1 shall be calibrated 
for actual opacity with accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2% or better. 
This calibration shall be done monthly while the filters are in use and 
the calibrated values should be recorded.
    3.2.2 Procedure for Technique 2. An optical generator (built-in 
calibration mechanism) that contains a light-emitting diode (red light 
for a lidar containing a ruby laser) is used. By injecting an optical 
signal into the lidar receiver immediately ahead of the PMT detector, a 
backscatter signal is simulated. With the entire lidar receiver 
electronics turned on and adjusted for normal operating performance, the 
optical generator is turned on and the simulation signal (corrected for 
1/R\2\) is selected with no plume spike signal and with the opacity 
value equal to 0%. This simulated clear-air atmospheric return signal is 
displayed on the system's video display. The lidar operator then makes 
any fine adjustments that may be necessary to maintain the system's 
normal operating range.
    The opacity values of 0% and the other five values are selected one 
at a time in any order. The simulated return signal data should be 
recorded. The opacity value shall be calculated. This measurement/
calculation shall be performed at least three times for each selected 
opacity value. While the order is not important, each of the opacity 
values from the optical generator shall be verified. The calibrated 
optical generator opacity value for each selection should be recorded.
    The optical generator used for Technique 2 shall be calibrated for 
actual opacity with an accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1% or better. 
This calibration shall be done monthly while the generator is in use and 
calibrated value should be recorded.
    Alternate verification procedures that do not meet the above 
requirements but produce equivalent results may be used.
    3.3 Deviation. The permissible error for the annual calibration and 
routine verification are:
    3.3.1 Annual Calibration Deviation.
    3.3.1.1 Smoke Generator. If the lidar-measured average opacity for 
each data run is not within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5% (full scale) of the 
respective smoke generator's average opacity over the range of 0% 
through 80%, then the lidar shall be considered out of calibration.
    3.3.1.2 Screens. If the lidar-measured average opacity for each data 
run is not within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3% (full scale) of the 
laboratory-determined opacity for each respective simulation screen 
target over the range of 0% through 80%, then the lidar shall be 
considered out of calibration.
    3.3.2 Routine Verification Error. If the lidar-measured average 
opacity for each neutral density filter (Technique 1) or optical 
generator selection (Technique 2) is not within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3% 
(full scale) of the respective laboratory calibration value then the 
lidar shall be considered non-operational.

       4. Performance/Design Specification for Basic Lidar System

    4.1 Lidar Design Specification. The essential components of the 
basic lidar system are a pulsed laser (transmitter), optical receiver, 
detector, signal processor, recorder, and an aiming device that is used 
in aiming the lidar transmitter and receiver. Figure AM1-VII shows a 
functional block diagram of a basic lidar system.

[[Page 324]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.176

    4.2 Performance Evaluation Tests. The owner of a lidar system shall 
subject such a lidar system to the performance verification tests 
described in Section 3, prior to first use of this method. The annual 
calibration shall be performed for three separate, complete

[[Page 325]]

runs and the results of each should be recorded. The requirements of 
Section 3.3.1 must be fulfilled for each of the three runs.
    Once the conditions of the annual calibration are fulfilled the 
lidar shall be subjected to the routine verification for three separate 
complete runs. The requirements of Section 3.3.2 must be fulfilled for 
each of the three runs and the results should be recorded. The 
Administrator may request that the results of the performance evaluation 
be submitted for review.

                              5. References

    5.1 The Use of Lidar for Emissions Source Opacity Determination, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Enforcement 
Investigations Center, Denver, CO. EPA-330/1-79-003-R, Arthur W. 
Dybdahl, current edition [NTIS No. PB81-246662].
    5.2 Field Evaluation of Mobile Lidar for the Measurement of Smoke 
Plume Opacity, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National 
Enforcement Investigations Center, Denver, CO. EPA/NEIC-TS-128, February 
1976.
    5.3 Remote Measurement of Smoke Plume Transmittance Using Lidar, C. 
S. Cook, G. W. Bethke, W. D. Conner (EPA/RTP). Applied Optics 11, pg 
1742. August 1972.
    5.4 Lidar Studies of Stack Plumes in Rural and Urban Environments, 
EPA-650/4-73-002, October 1973.
    5.5 American National Standard for the Safe Use of Lasers ANSI Z 
136.1-176, March 8, 1976.
    5.6 U.S. Army Technical Manual TB MED 279, Control of Hazards to 
Health from Laser Radiation, February 1969.
    5.7 Laser Institute of America Laser Safety Manual, 4th Edition.
    5.8 U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Regulations 
for the Administration and Enforcement of the Radiation Control for 
Health and Safety Act of 1968, January 1976.
    5.9 Laser Safety Handbook, Alex Mallow, Leon Chabot, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co., 1978.

 Method 10--Determination of Carbon Monoxide Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

                     1. Principle and Applicability

    1.1 Principle. An integrated or continuous gas sample is extracted 
from a sampling point and analyzed for carbon monoxide (CO) content 
using a Luft-type nondispersive infrared analyzer (NDIR) or equivalent.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of carbon monoxide emissions from stationary sources only when specified 
by the test procedures for determining compliance with new source 
performance standards. The test procedure will indicate whether a 
continuous or an integrated sample is to be used.

                        2. Range and Sensitivity

    2.1 Range. 0 to 1,000 ppm.
    2.2 Sensitivity. Minimum detectable concentration is 20 ppm for a 0 
to 1,000 ppm span.

                            3. Interferences

    Any substance having a strong absorption of infrared energy will 
interfere to some extent. For example, discrimination ratios for water 
(H<INF>2</INF>O) and carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) are 3.5 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O per 7 ppm CO and 10 percent CO<INF>2</INF> per 10 ppm CO, 
respectively, for devices measuring in the 1,500 to 3,000 ppm range. For 
devices measuring in the 0 to 100 ppm range, interference ratios can be 
as high as 3.5 percent H<INF>2</INF>O per 25 ppm CO and 10 percent 
CO<INF>2</INF> per 50 ppm CO. The use of silica gel and ascarite traps 
will alleviate the major interference problems. The measured gas volume 
must be corrected if these traps are used.

                        4. Precision and Accuracy

    4.1 Precision. The precision of most NDIR analyzers is approximately 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of span.
    4.2 Accuracy. The accuracy of most NDIR analyzers is approximately 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of span after calibration.

                              5. Apparatus

    5.1 Continuous Sample (Figure 10-1).
    5.1.1 Probe. Stainless steel or sheathed Pyrex\1\  glass, equipped 
with a filter to remove particulate matter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Mention of trade names or specific products does not constitute 
endorsement by the Environmental Protection Agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    5.1.2 Air-Cooled Condenser or Equivalent. To remove any excess 
moisture.
    5.2 Integrated Sample (Figure 10-2).
    5.2.1 Probe. Stainless steel or sheathed Pyrex glass, equipped with 
a filter to remove particulate matter.
    5.2.2 Air-Cooled Condenser or Equivalent. To remove any excess 
moisture.
    5.2.3 Valve. Needle valve, or equivalent, to adjust flow rate.
    5.2.4 Pump. Leak-free diaphragm type, or equivalent, to transport 
gas.
    5.2.5 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, to measure a flow range 
from 0 to 1.0 liter per min (0.035 cfm).
    5.2.6 Flexible Bag. Tedlar, or equivalent, with a capacity of 60 to 
90 liters (2 to 3 ft \3\). Leak-test the bag in the laboratory before 
using by evacuating bag with a pump followed by a dry gas meter. When 
evacuation is complete, there should be no flow through the meter.
    5.2.7 Pitot Tube. Type S, or equivalent, attached to the probe so 
that the sampling

[[Page 326]]

rate can be regulated proportional to the stack gas velocity when 
velocity is varying with the time or a sample traverse is conducted.
    5.3 Analysis (Figure 10-3).
    5.3.1 Carbon Monoxide Analyzer. Non dis persive infrared 
spectrometer, or equivalent. This instrument should be demonstrated, 
preferably by the manufacturer, to meet or exceed manufacturer's 
specifications and those described in this method.
    5.3.2 Drying Tube. To contain approximately 200 g of silica gel.
    5.3.3 Calibration Gas. Refer to section 6.1.
    5.3.4 Filter. As recommended by NDIR manufacturer.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.177
    
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.178
    
    5.3.5 CO<INF>2</INF> Removal Tube. To contain approximately 500 g of 
ascarite.
    5.3.6 Ice Water Bath. For ascarite and silica gel tubes.
    5.3.7 Valve. Needle valve, or equivalent, to adjust flow rate
    5.3.8 Rate Meter. Rotameter or equivalent to measure gas flow rate 
of 0 to 1.0 liter per min (0.035 cfm) through NDIR.
    5.3.9 Recorder (optional). To provide permanent record of NDIR 
readings.

                               6. Reagents

    6.1 Calibration Gases. Known concentration of CO in nitrogen 
(N<INF>2</INF>) for instrument span, prepurified grade of N<INF>2</INF> 
for zero, and two additional concentrations corresponding approximately 
to 60 percent and 30 percent span. The span concentration shall not 
exceed 1.5 times the applicable source performance standard. The 
calibration gases shall be certified by the manufacturer to be within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the specified concentration.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.179

    6.2 Silica Gel. Indicating type, 6 to 16 mesh, dried at 175 [deg]C 
(347 [deg]F) for 2 hours.
    6.3 Ascarite. Commercially available.

                              7. Procedure

    7.1 Sampling.
    7.1.1 Continuous Sampling. Set up the equipment as shown in Figure 
10-1 making sure all connections are leak free. Place the probe in the 
stack at a sampling point and purge the sampling line. Connect the 
analyzer and begin drawing sample into the analyzer. Allow 5 minutes for 
the system to stabilize, then record the analyzer reading as required by 
the test procedure. (See section 7.2 and 8). CO<INF>2</INF> content of 
the gas may be determined by using the Method 3 integrated sample 
procedure, or by weighing the ascarite CO<INF>2</INF> removal tube and 
computing CO<INF>2</INF> concentration from the gas volume sampled and 
the weight gain of the tube.
    7.1.2 Integrated Sampling. Evacuate the flexible bag. Set up the 
equipment as shown in Figure 10-2 with the bag disconnected. Place the 
probe in the stack and purge the sampling line. Connect the bag, making 
sure that all connections are leak free. Sample at a rate proportional 
to the stack velocity. CO<INF>2</INF> content of the gas may be 
determined by using the Method 3 integrated sample procedures, or by 
weighing the ascarite CO<INF>2</INF> removal tube and computing 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration from the gas volume sampled and the weight 
gain of the tube.
    7.2 CO Analysis. Assemble the apparatus as shown in Figure 10-3, 
calibrate the instrument, and perform other required operations as 
described in section 8. Purge analyzer with N<INF>2</INF> prior to 
introduction of each sample. Direct the sample stream through the 
instrument for the test period, recording the readings. Check the zero 
and span again after the test to assure that any drift or malfunction is 
detected. Record the sample data on Table 10-1.

                             8. Calibration

    Assemble the apparatus according to Figure 10-3. Generally an 
instrument requires a warm-up period before stability is obtained. 
Follow the manufacturer's instructions for specific procedure. Allow a 
minimum time of 1 hour for warm-up. During this time check

[[Page 327]]

the sample conditioning apparatus, i.e., filter, condenser, drying tube, 
and CO<INF>2</INF> removal tube, to ensure that each component is in 
good operating condition. Zero and calibrate the instrument according to 
the manufacturer's procedures using, respectively, nitrogen and the 
calibration gases.

                         Table 10-1--Field data
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                      Comments
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Location..................................  ............................
Test......................................  ............................
Date......................................  ............................
Operator..................................  ............................
------------------------------------------------------------------------


 
                                         Rotameter setting, liters per
             Clock time                 minute (cubic feet per minute)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             9. Calculation

    Calculate the concentration of carbon monoxide in the stack using 
Equation 10-1.
C<INF>CO stack</INF>=C<INF>CO NDIR</INF>(1-F<INF>co2</INF>)
                                                                Eq. 10-1

Where:

C<INF>CO stack</INF>=Concentration of CO in stack, ppm by volume (dry 
basis).
C<INF>CO NDIR</INF>=Concentration of CO measured by NDIR analyzer, ppm 
by volume (dry basis).
F<INF>CO 2</INF>=Volume fraction of CO<INF>2</INF> in sample, i.e., 
percent CO<INF>2</INF> from Orsat analysis divided by 100.

                       10. Alternative Procedures

    10.1 Interference Trap. The sample conditioning system described in 
Method 10A, sections 2.1.2 and 4.2, may be used as an alternative to the 
silica gel and ascarite traps.

                            11. Bibliography

1. McElroy, Frank, The Intertech NDIR-CO Analyzer, Presented at 11th 
Methods Conference on Air Pollution, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA. April 1, 1970.
2. Jacobs, M. B., et al., Continuous Determination of Carbon Monoxide 
and Hydrocarbons in Air by a Modified Infrared Analyzer, J. Air 
Pollution Control Association, 9(2): 110-114. August 1959.
3. MSA LIRA Infrared Gas and Liquid Analyzer Instruction Book, Mine 
Safety Appliances Co., Technical Products Division, Pittsburgh, PA.
4. Models 215A, 315A, and 415A Infrared Analyzers, Beckman Instruments, 
Inc., Beckman Instructions 1635-B, Fullerton, CA. October 1967.
5. Continuous CO Monitoring System, Model A5611, Intertech Corp., 
Princeton, NJ.
6. UNOR Infrared Gas Analyzers, Bendix Corp., Ronceverte, WV

                                 Addenda

    A. Performance Specifications for NDIR Carbon Monoxide Analyzers
Range (minimum)...........................  0-1000 ppm.
Output (minimum)..........................  0-10mV.
Minimum detectable sensitivity............  20 ppm.
Rise time, 90 percent (maximum)...........  30 seconds.
Fall time, 90 percent (maximum)...........  30 seconds.
Zero drift (maximum)......................  10% in 8 hours.
Span drift (maximum)......................  10% in 8 hours.
Precision (minimum).......................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2% of
                                             full scale.
Noise (maximum)...........................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1% of
                                             full scale.
Linearity (maximum deviation).............  2% of full scale.
Interference rejection ratio..............  CO2--1000 to 1, H2O--500 to
                                             1.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. Definitions of Performance Specifications.
    Range-- The minimum and maximum measurement limits.
    Output-- Electrical signal which is proportional to the measurement; 
intended for connection to readout or data processing devices. Usually 
expressed as millivolts or milliamps full scale at a given impedance.
    Full scale-- The maximum measuring limit for a given range.
    Minimum detectable sensitivity-- The smallest amount of input 
concentration that can be detected as the concentration approaches zero.
    Accuracy-- The degree of agreement between a measured value and the 
true value; usually expressed as <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>percent of full 
scale.
    Time to 90 percent response-- The time interval from a step change 
in the input concentration at the instrument inlet to a reading of 90 
percent of the ultimate recorded concentration.
    Rise Time (90 percent)--The interval between initial response time 
and time to 90 percent response after a step increase in the inlet 
concentration.
    Fall Time (90 percent)--The interval between initial response time 
and time to 90 percent response after a step decrease in the inlet 
concentration.
    Zero Drift-- The change in instrument output over a stated time 
period, usually 24 hours, of unadjusted continuous operation when the 
input concentration is zero; usually expressed as percent full scale.
    Span Drift-- The change in instrument output over a stated time 
period, usually 24 hours, of unadjusted continuous operation when the 
input concentration is a stated upscale value; usually expressed as 
percent full scale.
    Precision-- The degree of agreement between repeated measurements of 
the same concentration, expressed as the average deviation of the single 
results from the mean.
    Noise--Spontaneous deviations from a mean output not caused by input 
concentration changes.

[[Page 328]]

    Linearity--The maximum deviation between an actual instrument 
reading and the reading predicted by a straight line drawn between upper 
and lower calibration points.

  Method 10A--Determination of Carbon Monoxide Emissions in Certifying 
     Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems at Petroleum Refineries

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 4, and Method 5.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon monoxide (CO)..............        630-08-0  3 ppmv
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of CO emissions at petroleum refineries. This method serves as the 
reference method in the relative accuracy test for nondispersive 
infrared (NDIR) CO continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) that 
are required to be installed in petroleum refineries on fluid catalytic 
cracking unit catalyst regenerators (Sec. 60.105(a)(2) of this part).
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    An integrated gas sample is extracted from the stack, passed through 
an alkaline permanganate solution to remove sulfur oxides and nitrogen 
oxides, and collected in a Tedlar bag. The CO concentration in the 
sample is measured spectrophotometrically using the reaction of CO with 
p-sulfaminobenzoic acid.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Sulfur oxides, nitric oxide, and other acid gases interfere with the 
colorimetric reaction. They are removed by passing the sampled gas 
through an alkaline potassium permanganate scrubbing solution. Carbon 
dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) does not interfere, but, because it is removed 
by the scrubbing solution, its concentration must be measured 
independently and an appropriate volume correction made to the sampled 
gas.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method. The analyzer users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedure.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The sampling train shown in Figure 10A-1 is 
required for sample collection. Component parts are described below:
    6.1.1 Probe. Stainless steel, sheathed Pyrex glass, or equivalent, 
equipped with a glass wool plug to remove particulate matter.
    6.1.2 Sample Conditioning System. Three Greenburg-Smith impingers 
connected in series with leak-free connections.
    6.1.3 Pump. Leak-free pump with stainless steel and Teflon parts to 
transport sample at a flow rate of 300 ml/min (0.01 ft\3\/min) to the 
flexible bag.
    6.1.4 Surge Tank. Installed between the pump and the rate meter to 
eliminate the pulsation effect of the pump on the rate meter.
    6.1.5 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, to measure flow rate at 
300 ml/min (0.01 ft\3\/min). Calibrate according to Section 10.2.
    6.1.6 Flexible Bag. Tedlar, or equivalent, with a capacity of 10 
liters (0.35 ft\3\) and equipped with a sealing quick-connect plug. The 
bag must be leak-free according to Section 8.1. For protection, it is 
recommended that the bag be enclosed within a rigid container.

[[Page 329]]

    6.1.7 Valves. Stainless-steel needle valve to adjust flow rate, and 
stainless-steel three-way valve, or equivalent.
    6.1.8 CO<INF>2</INF> Analyzer. Fyrite, or equivalent, to measure 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration to within O.5 percent.
    6.1.9 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter, capable of measuring the sample 
volume under calibration conditions of 300 ml/min (0.01 ft\3\/min) for 
10 minutes.
    6.1.10 Pressure Gauge. A water filled U-tube manometer, or 
equivalent, of about 30 cm (12 in.) to leak-check the flexible bag.
    6.2 Sample Analysis.
    6.2.1 Spectrophotometer. Single- or double-beam to measure 
absorbance at 425 and 600 nm. Slit width should not exceed 20 nm.
    6.2.2 Spectrophotometer Cells. 1-cm pathlength.
    6.2.3 Vacuum Gauge. U-tube mercury manometer, 1 meter (39 in.), with 
1-mm divisions, or other gauge capable of measuring pressure to within 1 
mm Hg.
    6.2.4 Pump. Capable of evacuating the gas reaction bulb to a 
pressure equal to or less than 40 mm Hg absolute, equipped with coarse 
and fine flow control valves.
    6.2.5 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 1 mm Hg.
    6.2.6 Reaction Bulbs. Pyrex glass, 100-ml with Teflon stopcock 
(Figure 10A-2), leak-free at 40 mm Hg, designed so that 10 ml of the 
colorimetric reagent can be added and removed easily and accurately. 
Commercially available gas sample bulbs such as Supelco Catalog No. 2-
2161 may also be used.
    6.2.7 Manifold. Stainless steel, with connections for three reaction 
bulbs and the appropriate connections for the manometer and sampling bag 
as shown in Figure 10A-3.
    6.2.8 Pipets. Class A, 10-ml size.
    6.2.9 Shaker Table. Reciprocating-stroke type such as Eberbach 
Corporation, Model 6015. A rocking arm or rotary-motion type shaker may 
also be used. The shaker must be large enough to accommodate at least 
six gas sample bulbs simultaneously. It may be necessary to construct a 
table top extension for most commercial shakers to provide sufficient 
space for the needed bulbs (Figure 10A-4).
    6.2.10 Valve. Stainless steel shut-off valve.
    6.2.11 Analytical Balance. Capable of weighing to 0.1 mg.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents shall conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are available; 
otherwise, the best available grade shall be used.
    7.1 Sample Collection.
    7.1.1 Water. Deionized distilled, to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 
91, Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). If high 
concentrations of organic matter are not expected to be present, the 
potassium permanganate test for oxidizable organic matter may be 
omitted.
    7.1.2 Alkaline Permanganate Solution, 0.25 M KMnO<INF>4</INF>/1.5 M 
Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Dissolve 40 g KMnO<INF>4</INF> and 60 g NaOH in 
approximately 900 ml water, cool, and dilute to 1 liter.
    7.2 Sample Analysis.
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.1.
    7.2.2 1 M Sodium Hydroxide Solution. Dissolve 40 g NaOH in 
approximately 900 ml of water, cool, and dilute to 1 liter.
    7.2.3 0.1 M NaOH Solution. Dilute 50 ml of the 1 M NaOH solution 
prepared in Section 7.2.2 to 500 ml.
    7.2.4 0.1 M Silver Nitrate (AgNO<INF>3</INF>) Solution. Dissolve 8.5 
g AgNO<INF>3</INF> in water, and dilute to 500 ml.
    7.2.5 0.1 M Para-Sulfaminobenzoic Acid (p-SABA) Solution. Dissolve 
10.0 g p-SABA in 0.1 M NaOH, and dilute to 500 ml with 0.1 M NaOH.
    7.2.6 Colorimetric Solution. To a flask, add 100 ml of 0.1 M p-SABA 
solution and 100 ml of 0.1 M AgNO<INF>3</INF> solution. Mix, and add 50 
ml of 1 M NaOH with shaking. The resultant solution should be clear and 
colorless. This solution is acceptable for use for a period of 2 days.
    7.2.7 Standard Gas Mixtures. Traceable to National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) standards and containing between 50 and 
1000 ppm CO in nitrogen. At least two concentrations are needed to span 
each calibration range used (Section 10.3). The calibration gases must 
be certified by the manufacturer to be within 2 percent of the specified 
concentrations.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sample Bag Leak-Checks. While a bag leak-check is required after 
bag use, it should also be done before the bag is used for sample 
collection. The bag should be leak-checked in the inflated and deflated 
condition according to the following procedure:
    8.1.1 Connect the bag to a water manometer, and pressurize the bag 
to 5 to 10 cm H<INF>2</INF>O (2 to 4 in H<INF>2</INF>O). Allow the bag 
to stand for 60 minutes. Any displacement in the water manometer 
indicates a leak.
    8.1.2 Evacuate the bag with a leakless pump that is connected to the 
downstream side of a flow indicating device such as a 0- to 100-ml/min 
rotameter or an impinger containing water. When the bag is completely 
evacuated, no flow should be evident if the bag is leak-free.
    8.2 Sample Collection.
    8.2.1 Evacuate the Tedlar bag completely using a vacuum pump. 
Assemble the apparatus as shown in Figure 10A-1. Loosely pack glass wool 
in the tip of the probe. Place 400

[[Page 330]]

ml of alkaline permanganate solution in the first two impingers and 250 
ml in the third. Connect the pump to the third impinger, and follow this 
with the surge tank, rate meter, and 3-way valve. Do not connect the 
Tedlar bag to the system at this time.
    8.2.2 Leak-check the sampling system by plugging the probe inlet, 
opening the 3-way valve, and pulling a vacuum of approximately 250 mm Hg 
on the system while observing the rate meter for flow. If flow is 
indicated on the rate meter, do not proceed further until the leak is 
found and corrected.
    8.2.3 Purge the system with sample gas by inserting the probe into 
the stack and drawing the sample gas through the system at 300 ml/min 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent for 5 minutes. Connect the evacuated 
Tedlar bag to the system, record the starting time, and sample at a rate 
of 300 ml/min for 30 minutes, or until the Tedlar bag is nearly full. 
Record the sampling time, the barometric pressure, and the ambient 
temperature. Purge the system as described above immediately before each 
sample.
    8.2.4 The scrubbing solution is adequate for removing sulfur oxides 
and nitrogen oxides from 50 liters (1.8 ft\3\) of stack gas when the 
concentration of each is less than 1,000 ppm and the CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration is less than 15 percent. Replace the scrubber solution 
after every fifth sample.
    8.3 Carbon Dioxide Measurement. Measure the CO<INF>2</INF> content 
in the stack to the nearest 0.5 percent each time a CO sample is 
collected. A simultaneous grab sample analyzed by the Fyrite analyzer is 
acceptable.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.1...........................  Sampling           Ensure accuracy and
                                 equipment leak-    precision of
                                 checks and         sampling
                                 calibration.       measurements.
10.3..........................  Spectrophotometer  Ensure linearity of
                                 calibration.       spectrophotometer
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Gas Bulb Calibration. Weigh the empty bulb to the nearest 0.1 
g. Fill the bulb to the stopcock with water, and again weigh to the 
nearest 0.1 g. Subtract the tare weight, and calculate the volume in 
liters to three significant figures using the density of water at the 
measurement temperature. Record the volume on the bulb. Alternatively, 
mark an identification number on the bulb, and record the volume in a 
notebook.
    10.2 Rate Meter Calibration. Assemble the system as shown in Figure 
10A-1 (the impingers may be removed), and attach a volume meter to the 
probe inlet. Set the rotameter at 300 ml/min, record the volume meter 
reading, start the pump, and pull ambient air through the system for 10 
minutes. Record the final volume meter reading. Repeat the procedure and 
average the results to determine the volume of gas that passed through 
the system.
    10.3 Spectrophotometer Calibration Curve.
    10.3.1 Collect the standards as described in Section 8.2. Prepare at 
least two sets of three bulbs as standards to span the 0 to 400 or 400 
to 1000 ppm range. If any samples span both concentration ranges, 
prepare a calibration curve for each range using separate reagent 
blanks. Prepare a set of three bulbs containing colorimetric reagent but 
no CO to serve as a reagent blank. Analyze each standard and blank 
according to the sample analysis procedure of Section 11.0 Reject the 
standard set where any of the individual bulb absorbances differs from 
the set mean by more than 10 percent.
    10.3.2 Calculate the average absorbance for each set (3 bulbs) of 
standards using Equation 10A-1 and Table 10A-1. Construct a graph of 
average absorbance for each standard against its corresponding 
concentration. Draw a smooth curve through the points. The curve should 
be linear over the two concentration ranges discussed in Section 13.3.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Assemble the system shown in Figure 10A-3, and record the 
information required in Table 10A-1 as it is obtained. Pipet 10.0 ml of 
the colorimetric reagent into each gas reaction bulb, and attach the 
bulbs to the system. Open the stopcocks to the reaction bulbs, but leave 
the valve to the Tedlar bag closed. Turn on the pump, fully open the 
coarse-adjust flow valve, and slowly open the fine-adjust valve until 
the pressure is reduced to at least 40 mm Hg. Now close the coarse 
adjust valve, and observe the manometer to be certain that the system is 
leak-free. Wait a minimum of 2 minutes. If the pressure has increased 
less than 1 mm Hg, proceed as described below. If a leak is present, 
find and correct it before proceeding further.

[[Page 331]]

    11.2 Record the vacuum pressure (P<INF>v</INF>) to the nearest 1 mm 
Hg, and close the reaction bulb stopcocks. Open the Tedlar bag valve, 
and allow the system to come to atmospheric pressure. Close the bag 
valve, open the pump coarse adjust valve, and evacuate the system again. 
Repeat this fill/evacuation procedure at least twice to flush the 
manifold completely. Close the pump coarse adjust valve, open the Tedlar 
bag valve, and let the system fill to atmospheric pressure. Open the 
stopcocks to the reaction bulbs, and let the entire system come to 
atmospheric pressure. Close the bulb stopcocks, remove the bulbs, record 
the room temperature and barometric pressure (P<INF>bar</INF>, to 
nearest mm Hg), and place the bulbs on the shaker table with their main 
axis either parallel to or perpendicular to the plane of the table top. 
Purge the bulb-filling system with ambient air for several minutes 
between samples. Shake the samples for exactly 2 hours.
    11.3 Immediately after shaking, measure the absorbance (A) of each 
bulb sample at 425 nm if the concentration is less than or equal to 400 
ppm CO or at 600 nm if the concentration is above 400 ppm.

    Note: This may be accomplished with multiple bulb sets by 
sequentially collecting sets and adding to the shaker at staggered 
intervals, followed by sequentially removing sets from the shaker for 
absorbance measurement after the two-hour designated intervals have 
elapsed.

    11.4 Use a small portion of the sample to rinse a spectrophotometer 
cell several times before taking an aliquot for analysis. If one cell is 
used to analyze multiple samples, rinse the cell with deionized 
distilled water several times between samples. Prepare and analyze 
standards and a reagent blank as described in Section 10.3. Use water as 
the reference. Reject the analysis if the blank absorbance is greater 
than 0.1. All conditions should be the same for analysis of samples and 
standards. Measure the absorbances as soon as possible after shaking is 
completed.
    11.5 Determine the CO concentration of each bag sample using the 
calibration curve for the appropriate concentration range as discussed 
in Section 10.3.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Carry out calculations retaining at least one extra decimal figure 
beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

A=Sample absorbance, uncorrected for the reagent blank.
A<INF>r</INF>=Absorbance of the reagent blank.
A<INF>s</INF>=Average sample absorbance per liter, units/liter.
B<INF>w</INF>=Moisture content in the bag sample.
C=CO concentration in the stack gas, dry basis, ppm.
C<INF>b</INF>=CO concentration of the bag sample, dry basis, ppm.
C<INF>g</INF>=CO concentration from the calibration curve, ppm.
F=Volume fraction of CO<INF>2</INF> in the stack.
n=Number of reaction bulbs used per bag sample.
P<INF>b</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg.
P<INF>v</INF>=Residual pressure in the sample bulb after evacuation, mm 
Hg.
P<INF>w</INF>=Vapor pressure of H<INF>2</INF>O in the bag (from Table 
10A-2), mm Hg.
V<INF>b</INF>=Volume of the sample bulb, liters.
V<INF>r</INF>=Volume of reagent added to the sample bulb, 0.0100 liter.

    12.2 Average Sample Absorbance per Liter. Calculate A<INF>s</INF> 
for each gas bulb using Equation 10A-1, and record the value in Table 
10A-1. Calculate the average A<INF>s</INF> for each bag sample, and 
compare the three values to the average. If any single value differs by 
more than 10 percent from the average, reject this value, and calculate 
a new average using the two remaining values.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.227

    Note: A and A<INF>r</INF> must be at the same wavelength.

    12.3 CO Concentration in the Bag. Calculate C<INF>b</INF> using 
Equations 10A-2 and 10A-3. If condensate is visible in the Tedlar bag, 
calculate B<INF>w</INF> using Table 10A-2 and the temperature and 
barometric pressure in the analysis room. If condensate is not visible, 
calculate B<INF>w</INF> using the temperature and barometric pressure at 
the sampling site.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.229

    12.4 CO Concentration in the Stack.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.230
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision. The estimated intralaboratory standard deviation of 
the method is 3 percent of the mean for gas samples analyzed in 
duplicate in the concentration range of 39 to 412 ppm. The 
interlaboratory precision has not been established.
    13.2 Accuracy. The method contains no significant biases when 
compared to an NDIR analyzer calibrated with NIST standards.
    13.3 Range. Approximately 3 to 1800 ppm CO. Samples having 
concentrations below 400 ppm are analyzed at 425 nm, and samples

[[Page 332]]

having concentrations above 400 ppm are analyzed at 600 nm.
    13.4 Sensitivity. The detection limit is 3 ppmv based on a change in 
concentration equal to three times the standard deviation of the reagent 
blank solution.
    13.5 Stability. The individual components of the colorimetric 
reagent are stable for at least 1 month. The colorimetric reagent must 
be used within 2 days after preparation to avoid excessive blank 
correction. The samples in the Tedlar bag should be stable for at least 
1 week if the bags are leak-free.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Butler, F.E., J.E. Knoll, and M.R. Midgett. Development and 
Evaluation of Methods for Determining Carbon Monoxide Emissions. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, N.C. June 1985. 
33 pp.
    2. Ferguson, B.B., R.E. Lester, and W.J. Mitchell. Field Evaluation 
of Carbon Monoxide and Hydrogen Sulfide Continuous Emission Monitors at 
an Oil Refinery. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle 
Park, N.C. Publication No. EPA-600/4-82-054. August 1982. 100 pp.
    3. Lambert, J.L., and R.E. Weins. Induced Colorimetric Method for 
Carbon Monoxide. Analytical Chemistry. 46(7):929-930. June 1974.
    4. Levaggi, D.A., and M. Feldstein. The Colorimetric Determination 
of Low Concentrations of Carbon Monoxide. Industrial Hygiene Journal. 
25:64-66. January-February 1964.
    5. Repp, M. Evaluation of Continuous Monitors For Carbon Monoxide in 
Stationary Sources. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research 
Triangle Park, N.C. Publication No. EPA-600/2-77-063. March 1977. 155 
pp.
    6. Smith, F., D.E. Wagoner, and R.P. Donovan. Guidelines for 
Development of a Quality Assurance Program: Volume VIII--Determination 
of CO Emissions from Stationary Sources by NDIR Spectrometry. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, N.C. 
Publication No. EPA-650/4-74-005-h. February 1975. 96 pp.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 333]]



                                          Table 10A-1--Data Recording Sheet for Samples Analyzed in Triplicate
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                   Partial
                                Room                          Bulb     Reagent    pressure              Shaking      Abs
      Sample  No./type          temp      Stack     Bulb      vol.     vol. in   of  gas in   Pb,  mm    time,     versus     A-Ar       As      Avg As
                               [deg]C     %CO2       No.     liters     bulb,     bulb,  mm     Hg        min       water
                                                                        liter        Hg
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
blank
-----------------------------
 
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Std. 1
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-----------------------------
 
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Std. 2
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-----------------------------
 
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sample 1
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-----------------------------
Sample 2
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-----------------------------
 
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
                             ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sample 3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 334]]


                                        Table 10A-2--Moisture Correction
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       Vapor                           Vapor
                       Temperature [deg]C                           pressure of     Temperature     pressure of
                                                                    H2O, mm Hg        [deg]C         H2, mm Hg
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4...............................................................             6.1              18            15.5
6...............................................................             7.0              20            17.5
8...............................................................             8.0              22            19.8
10..............................................................             9.2              24            22.4
12..............................................................            10.5              26            25.2
14..............................................................            12.0              28            28.3
16..............................................................            13.6              30            31.8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                                  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.231
                                                                                                  

[[Page 335]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.232


[[Page 336]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.233


[[Page 337]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.234

 Method 10B--Determination of Carbon Monoxide Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

    Note: This method is not inclusive with respect to specifications 
(e.g., equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and 
analytical) essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated 
by reference from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain 
reliable results, persons using this method should have a thorough 
knowledge of at least the following additional test methods: Method 1, 
Method 4, Method 10A, and Method 25.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Analyte                   CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon monoxide (CO).............        630-08-0   Not determined.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method applies to the measurement of CO 
emissions at petroleum refineries and from other sources when specified 
in an applicable subpart of the regulations.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 An integrated gas sample is extracted from the sampling point, 
passed through a conditioning system to remove interferences, and 
collected in a Tedlar bag. The CO is separated from the sample by gas 
chromatography (GC) and catalytically reduced to methane 
(CH<INF>4</INF>) which is determined by flame ionization detection 
(FID). The analytical portion of this method is identical to applicable 
sections in Method 25 detailing CO measurement.

[[Page 338]]

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) and organics potentially can 
interfere with the analysis. Most of the CO<INF>2</INF> is removed from 
the sample by the alkaline permanganate conditioning system; any 
residual CO<INF>2</INF> and organics are separated from the CO by GC.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method. The analyzer users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions concerning the analytical 
procedure.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. Same as in Method 10A, Section 6.1.
    6.2 Sample Analysis. A GC/FID analyzer, capable of quantifying CO in 
the sample and consisting of at least the following major components, is 
required for sample analysis. [Alternatively, complete Method 25 
analytical systems (Method 25, Section 6.3) are acceptable alternatives 
when calibrated for CO and operated in accordance with the Method 25 
analytical procedures (Method 25, Section 11.0).]
    6.2.1 Separation Column. A column capable of separating CO from 
CO<INF>2</INF> and organic compounds that may be present. A 3.2-mm (\1/
8\-in.) OD stainless steel column packed with 1.7 m (5.5 ft.) of 60/80 
mesh Carbosieve S-II (available from Supelco) has been used successfully 
for this purpose.
    6.2.2 Reduction Catalyst. Same as in Method 25, Section 6.3.1.2.
    6.2.3 Sample Injection System. Same as in Method 25, Section 
6.3.1.4, equipped to accept a sample line from the Tedlar bag.
    6.2.4 Flame Ionization Detector. Meeting the linearity 
specifications of Section 10.3 and having a minimal instrument range of 
10 to 1,000 ppm CO.
    6.2.5 Data Recording System. Analog strip chart recorder or digital 
integration system, compatible with the FID, for permanently recording 
the analytical results.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sample Collection. Same as in Method 10A, Section 7.1.
    7.2 Sample Analysis.
    7.2.1 Carrier, Fuel, and Combustion Gases. Same as in Method 25, 
Sections 7.2.1, 7.2.2, and 7.2.3, respectively.
    7.2.2 Calibration Gases. Three standard gases with nominal CO 
concentrations of 20, 200, and 1,000 ppm CO in nitrogen. The calibration 
gases shall be certified by the manufacturer to be <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the specified concentrations.
    7.2.3 Reduction Catalyst Efficiency Check Calibration Gas. Standard 
CH<INF>4</INF> gas with a nominal concentration of 1,000 ppm in air.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Same as in Method 10A, Section 8.0.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.0...........................  Sample bag/        Ensures that negative
                                 sampling system    bias introduced
                                 leak-checks.       through leakage is
                                                    minimized.
10.1..........................  Carrier gas blank  Ensures that positive
                                 check.             bias introduced by
                                                    contamination of
                                                    carrier gas is less
                                                    than 5 ppmv.
10.2..........................  Reduction          Ensures that negative
                                 catalyst           bias introduced by
                                 efficiency check.  inefficient
                                                    reduction catalyst
                                                    is less than 5
                                                    percent.
10.3..........................  Analyzer           Ensures linearity of
                                 calibration.       analyzer response to
                                                    standards.
11.2..........................  Triplicate sample  Ensures precision of
                                 analyses.          analytical results.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Carrier Gas Blank Check. Analyze each new tank of carrier gas 
with the GC analyzer according to Section 11.2 to check for 
contamination. The corresponding concentration must be less than 5 ppm 
for the tank to be acceptable for use.
    10.2 Reduction Catalyst Efficiency Check. Prior to initial use, the 
reduction catalyst shall be tested for reduction efficiency. With the 
heated reduction catalyst bypassed, make triplicate injections of the 
1,000 ppm CH<INF>4</INF> gas (Section 7.2.3) to calibrate the analyzer. 
Repeat the procedure using 1,000 ppm CO gas (Section 7.2.2) with the 
catalyst in operation. The reduction catalyst operation is acceptable if 
the CO response is within 5 percent of the certified gas value.
    10.3 Analyzer Calibration. Perform this test before the system is 
first placed into operation. With the reduction catalyst in operation, 
conduct a linearity check of the analyzer using the standards specified 
in Section 7.2.2. Make triplicate injections of each calibration gas, 
and then calculate the average response factor (area/ppm) for each gas, 
as

[[Page 339]]

well as the overall mean of the response factor values. The instrument 
linearity is acceptable if the average response factor of each 
calibration gas is within 2.5 percent of the overall mean value and if 
the relative standard deviation (calculated in Section 12.8 of Method 
25) for each set of triplicate injections is less than 2 percent. Record 
the overall mean of the response factor values as the calibration 
response factor (R).

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Preparation for Analysis. Before putting the GC analyzer into 
routine operation, conduct the calibration procedures listed in Section 
10.0. Establish an appropriate carrier flow rate and detector 
temperature for the specific instrument used.
    11.2 Sample Analysis. Purge the sample loop with sample, and then 
inject the sample. Analyze each sample in triplicate, and calculate the 
average sample area (A). Determine the bag CO concentration according to 
Section 12.2.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Carry out calculations retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off results only after 
the final calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.
A=Average sample area.
B<INF>w</INF>=Moisture content in the bag sample, fraction.
C=CO concentration in the stack gas, dry basis, ppm.
C<INF>b</INF>=CO concentration in the bag sample, dry basis, ppm.
F=Volume fraction of CO<INF>2</INF> in the stack, fraction.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg.
P<INF>w</INF>=Vapor pressure of the H<INF>2</INF>O in the bag (from 
Table 10A-2, Method 10A), mm Hg.
R=Mean calibration response factor, area/ppm.

    12.2 CO Concentration in the Bag. Calculate C<INF>b</INF> using 
Equations 10B-1 and 10B-2. If condensate is visible in the Tedlar bag, 
calculate B<INF>w</INF> using Table 10A-2 of Method 10A and the 
temperature and barometric pressure in the analysis room. If condensate 
is not visible, calculate B<INF>w</INF> using the temperature and 
barometric pressure at the sampling site.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.236

    12.3 CO Concentration in the Stack
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.237
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as in Method 25, Section 16.0, with the addition of the 
following:

    1. Butler, F.E, J.E. Knoll, and M.R. Midgett. Development and 
Evaluation of Methods for Determining Carbon Monoxide Emissions. Quality 
Assurance Division, Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. June 1985. 
33 pp.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-4, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

          Appendix A-5 to Part 60--Test Methods 11 through 15A

Method 11--Determination of hydrogen sulfide content of fuel gas streams 
in petroleum refineries
Method 12--Determination of inorganic lead emissions from stationary 
sources
Method 13A--Determination of total fluoride emissions from stationary 
sources--SPADNS zirconium lake method
Method 13B--Determination of total fluoride emissions from stationary 
sources--Specific ion electrode method
Method 14--Determination of fluoride emissions from potroom roof 
monitors for primary aluminum plants
Method 14A-- Determination of Total Fluoride Emissions from Selected 
Sources at Primary Aluminum Production Facilities
Method 15--Determination of hydrogen sulfide, carbonyl sulfide, and 
carbon disulfide emissions from stationary sources
Method 15A--Determination of total reduced sulfur emissions from sulfur 
recovery plants in petroleum refineries
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2)

[[Page 340]]

identify any special instructions or conditions to be followed when 
applying a method to the respective facility. Such instructions (for 
example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or temperatures) are to be 
used either in addition to, or as a substitute for procedures in a test 
method. Similarly, for sources subject to emission monitoring 
requirements, specific instructions pertaining to any use of a test 
method as a reference method are provided in the subpart or in Appendix 
B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are 
properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

Method 11--Determination of Hydrogen Sulfide Content of Fuel Gas Streams 
                         in Petroleum Refineries

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Analyte                   CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)...........       7783-06-4   8 mg/m\3\--740 mg/
                                                     m\3\, (6 ppm--520
                                                     ppm).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of the H<INF>2</INF>S content of fuel gas streams at petroleum 
refineries.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A sample is extracted from a source and passed through a series 
of midget impingers containing a cadmium sulfate (CdSO<INF>4</INF>) 
solution; H<INF>2</INF>S is absorbed, forming cadmium sulfide (CdS). The 
latter compound is then measured iodometrically.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Any compound that reduces iodine (I<INF>2</INF>) or oxidizes the 
iodide ion will interfere in this procedure, provided it is collected in 
the CdSO<INF>4</INF> impingers. Sulfur dioxide in concentrations of up 
to 2,600 mg/m\3\ is removed with an impinger containing a hydrogen 
peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>) solution. Thiols precipitate with

[[Page 341]]

H<INF>2</INF>S. In the absence of H<INF>2</INF>S, only traces of thiols 
are collected. When methane-and ethane-thiols at a total level of 300 
mg/m\3\ are present in addition to H<INF>2</INF>S, the results vary from 
2 percent low at an H<INF>2</INF>S concentration of 400 mg/m\3\ to 14 
percent high at an H<INF>2</INF>S concentration of 100 mg/m\3\. Carbonyl 
sulfide at a concentration of 20 percent does not interfere. Certain 
carbonyl-containing compounds react with iodine and produce recurring 
end points. However, acetaldehyde and acetone at concentrations of 1 and 
3 percent, respectively, do not interfere.
    4.2 Entrained H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> produces a negative 
interference equivalent to 100 percent of that of an equimolar quantity 
of H<INF>2</INF>S. Avoid the ejection of H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> into 
the CdSO<INF>4</INF> impingers.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide. Irritating to eyes, skin, nose, and lungs. 
30% H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> is a strong oxidizing agent. Avoid 
contact with skin, eyes, and combustible material. Wear gloves when 
handling.
    5.2.2 Hydrochloric Acid. Highly toxic. Vapors are highly irritating 
to eyes, skin, nose, and lungs, causing severe damage. May cause 
bronchitis, pneumonia, or edema of lungs. Exposure to concentrations of 
0.13 to 0.2 percent can be lethal in minutes. Will react with metals, 
producing hydrogen.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The following items are needed for sample 
collection:
    6.1.1 Sampling Line. Teflon tubing, 6- to 7- mm (\1/4\-in.) ID, to 
connect the sampling train to the sampling valve.
    6.1.2 Impingers. Five midget impingers, each with 30-ml capacity. 
The internal diameter of the impinger tip must be 1 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 mm. The impinger tip must be positioned 4 to 6 mm 
from the bottom of the impinger.
    6.1.3 Tubing. Glass or Teflon connecting tubing for the impingers.
    6.1.4 Ice Water Bath. To maintain absorbing solution at a low 
temperature.
    6.1.5 Drying Tube. Tube packed with 6- to 16- mesh indicating-type 
silica gel, or equivalent, to dry the gas sample and protect the meter 
and pump. If the silica gel has been used previously, dry at 175 [deg]C 
(350 [deg]F) for 2 hours. New silica gel may be used as received. 
Alternatively, other types of desiccants (equivalent or better) may be 
used, subject to approval of the Administrator.

    Note: Do not use more than 30 g of silica gel. Silica gel adsorbs 
gases such as propane from the fuel gas stream, and use of excessive 
amounts of silica gel could result in errors in the determination of 
sample volume.

    6.1.6 Sampling Valve. Needle valve, or equivalent, to adjust gas 
flow rate. Stainless steel or other corrosion-resistant material.
    6.1.7 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter (DGM), sufficiently accurate to 
measure the sample volume within 2 percent, calibrated at the selected 
flow rate (about 1.0 liter/min) and conditions actually encountered 
during sampling. The meter shall be equipped with a temperature sensor 
(dial thermometer or equivalent) capable of measuring temperature to 
within 3 [deg]C (5.4 [deg]F). The gas meter should have a petcock, or 
equivalent, on the outlet connector which can be closed during the leak-
check. Gas volume for one revolution of the meter must not be more than 
10 liters.
    6.1.8 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, to measure flow rates in 
the range from 0.5 to 2 liters/min (1 to 4 ft\3\/hr).
    6.1.9 Graduated Cylinder. 25-ml size.
    6.1.10 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in. Hg). In many 
cases, the barometric reading may be obtained from a nearby National 
Weather Service station, in which case, the station value (which is the 
absolute barometric pressure) shall be requested and an adjustment for 
elevation differences between the weather station and the sampling point 
shall be applied at a rate of minus 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in Hg) per 30 m (100 
ft) elevation increase or vice-versa for elevation decrease.
    6.1.11 U-tube Manometer. 0-; to 30-cm water column, for leak-check 
procedure.
    6.1.12 Rubber Squeeze Bulb. To pressurize train for leak-check.
    6.1.13 Tee, Pinchclamp, and Connecting Tubing. For leak-check.
    6.1.14 Pump. Diaphragm pump, or equivalent. Insert a small surge 
tank between the pump and rate meter to minimize the pulsation effect of 
the diaphragm pump on the rate meter. The pump is used for the air purge 
at the end of the sample run; the pump is not ordinarily used during 
sampling, because fuel gas streams are usually sufficiently pressurized 
to force sample gas through the train at the required flow rate.

[[Page 342]]

The pump need not be leak-free unless it is used for sampling.
    6.1.15 Needle Valve or Critical Orifice. To set air purge flow to 1 
liter/min.
    6.1.16 Tube Packed with Active Carbon. To filter air during purge.
    6.1.17 Volumetric Flask. One 1000-ml.
    6.1.18 Volumetric Pipette. One 15-ml.
    6.1.19 Pressure-Reduction Regulator. Depending on the sampling 
stream pressure, a pressure-reduction regulator may be needed to reduce 
the pressure of the gas stream entering the Teflon sample line to a safe 
level.
    6.1.20 Cold Trap. If condensed water or amine is present in the 
sample stream, a corrosion-resistant cold trap shall be used immediately 
after the sample tap. The trap shall not be operated below 0 [deg]C (32 
[deg]F) to avoid condensation of C<INF>3</INF> or C<INF>4</INF> 
hydrocarbons.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are needed for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Sample Container. Iodine flask, glass-stoppered, 500-ml size.
    6.2.2 Volumetric Pipette. One 50-ml.
    6.2.3 Graduated Cylinders. One each 25- and 250-ml.
    6.2.4 Erlenmeyer Flasks. 125-ml.
    6.2.5 Wash Bottle.
    6.2.6 Volumetric Flasks. Three 1000-ml.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. The following items are needed for sample 
analysis:
    6.3.1 Flask. Glass-stoppered iodine flask, 500-ml.
    6.3.2 Burette. 50-ml.
    6.3.3 Erlenmeyer Flask. 125-ml.
    6.3.4 Volumetric Pipettes. One 25-ml; two each 50- and 100-ml.
    6.3.5 Volumetric Flasks. One 1000-ml; two 500-ml.
    6.3.6 Graduated Cylinders. One each 10- and 100-ml.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents 
conform to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available. Otherwise, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 CdSO<INF>4</INF> Absorbing Solution. Dissolve 41 g of 
3CdSO<INF>4</INF>8H<INF>2</INF>O and 15 ml of 0.1 M sulfuric acid in a 
1-liter volumetric flask that contains approximately \3/4\ liter of 
water. Dilute to volume with deionized, distilled water. Mix thoroughly. 
The pH should be 3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1. Add 10 drops of Dow-
Corning Antifoam B. Shake well before use. This solution is stable for 
at least one month. If Antifoam B is not used, a more labor-intensive 
sample recovery procedure is required (see Section 11.2).
    7.1.2 Hydrogen Peroxide, 3 Percent. Dilute 30 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> to 3 percent as needed. Prepare fresh daily.
    7.1.3 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 91, 
Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). The 
KMnO<INF>4</INF> test for oxidizable organic matter may be omitted when 
high concentrations of organic matter are not expected to be present.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. The following reagents are needed for sample 
recovery:
    7.2.1 Water. Same as Section 7.1.3.
    7.2.2 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl) Solution, 3 M. Add 240 ml of 
concentrated HCl (specific gravity 1.19) to 500 ml of water in a 1-liter 
volumetric flask. Dilute to 1 liter with water. Mix thoroughly.
    7.2.3 Iodine (I<INF>2</INF>) Solution, 0.1 N. Dissolve 24 g of 
potassium iodide (KI) in 30 ml of water. Add 12.7 g of resublimed iodine 
(I<INF>2</INF>) to the KI solution. Shake the mixture until the 
I<INF>2</INF> is completely dissolved. If possible, let the solution 
stand overnight in the dark. Slowly dilute the solution to 1 liter with 
water, with swirling. Filter the solution if it is cloudy. Store 
solution in a brown-glass reagent bottle.
    7.2.4 Standard I<INF>2</INF> Solution, 0.01 N. Pipette 100.0 ml of 
the 0.1 N iodine solution into a 1-liter volumetric flask, and dilute to 
volume with water. Standardize daily as in Section 10.2.1. This solution 
must be protected from light. Reagent bottles and flasks must be kept 
tightly stoppered.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. The following reagents and standards are needed 
for sample analysis:
    7.3.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.3.
    7.3.2 Standard Sodium Thiosulfate Solution, 0.1 N. Dissolve 24.8 g 
of sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate 
(Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF>[middot]5H<INF>2</INF>O) or 
15.8 g of anhydrous sodium thiosulfate 
(Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF>) in 1 liter of water, and add 
0.01 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate (Na<INF>2</INF>CO<INF>3</INF>) and 
0.4 ml of chloroform (CHCl<INF>3</INF>) to stabilize. Mix thoroughly by 
shaking or by aerating with nitrogen for approximately 15 minutes, and 
store in a glass-stoppered, reagent bottle. Standardize as in Section 
10.2.2.
    7.3.3 Standard Sodium Thiosulfate Solution, 0.01 N. Pipette 50.0 ml 
of the standard 0.1 N Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution 
into a volumetric flask, and dilute to 500 ml with water.

    Note: A 0.01 N phenylarsine oxide (C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO) 
solution may be prepared instead of 0.01 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> (see Section 7.3.4).

    7.3.4 Standard Phenylarsine Oxide Solution, 0.01 N. Dissolve 1.80 g 
of (C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO) in 150 ml of 0.3 N sodium hydroxide. 
After settling, decant 140 ml of this solution into 800 ml of water. 
Bring the solution to pH 6-7 with 6 N HCl, and dilute to 1 liter with 
water. Standardize as in Section 10.2.3.
    7.3.5 Starch Indicator Solution. Suspend 10 g of soluble starch in 
100 ml of water, and add 15 g of potassium hydroxide (KOH) pellets. Stir 
until dissolved, dilute with 900 ml of water, and let stand for 1 hour. 
Neutralize the alkali with concentrated HCl, using an

[[Page 343]]

indicator paper similar to Alkacid test ribbon, then add 2 ml of glacial 
acetic acid as a preservative.

    Note: Test starch indicator solution for decomposition by titrating 
with 0.01 N I<INF>2</INF> solution, 4 ml of starch solution in 200 ml of 
water that contains 1 g of KI. If more than 4 drops of the 0.01 N 
I<INF>2</INF> solution are required to obtain the blue color, a fresh 
solution must be prepared.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sampling Train Preparation. Assemble the sampling train as shown 
in Figure 11-1, connecting the five midget impingers in series. Place 15 
ml of 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> solution in the first 
impinger. Leave the second impinger empty. Place 15 ml of the 
CdSO<INF>4</INF> solution in the third, fourth, and fifth impingers. 
Place the impinger assembly in an ice water bath container, and place 
water and crushed ice around the impingers. Add more ice during the run, 
if needed.
    8.2 Leak-Check Procedure.
    8.2.1 Connect the rubber bulb and manometer to the first impinger, 
as shown in Figure 11-1. Close the petcock on the DGM outlet. Pressurize 
the train to 25 cm water with the bulb, and close off the tubing 
connected to the rubber bulb. The train must hold 25 cm water pressure 
with not more than a 1 cm drop in pressure in a 1-minute interval. 
Stopcock grease is acceptable for sealing ground glass joints.
    8.2.2 If the pump is used for sampling, it is recommended, but not 
required, that the pump be leak-checked separately, either prior to or 
after the sampling run. To leak-check the pump, proceed as follows: 
Disconnect the drying tube from the impinger assembly. Place a vacuum 
gauge at the inlet to either the drying tube or the pump, pull a vacuum 
of 250 mm Hg (10 in. Hg), plug or pinch off the outlet of the flow 
meter, and then turn off the pump. The vacuum should remain stable for 
at least 30 seconds. If performed prior to the sampling run, the pump 
leak-check should precede the leak-check of the sampling train described 
immediately above; if performed after the sampling run, the pump leak-
check should follow the sampling train leak-check.
    8.3 Purge the connecting line between the sampling valve and the 
first impinger by disconnecting the line from the first impinger, 
opening the sampling valve, and allowing process gas to flow through the 
line for one to two minutes. Then, close the sampling valve, and 
reconnect the line to the impinger train. Open the petcock on the dry 
gas meter outlet. Record the initial DGM reading.
    8.4 Open the sampling valve, and then adjust the valve to obtain a 
rate of approximately 1 liter/min (0.035 cfm). Maintain a constant 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) flow rate during the test. Record the 
DGM temperature.
    8.5 Sample for at least 10 minutes. At the end of the sampling time, 
close the sampling valve, and record the final volume and temperature 
readings. Conduct a leak-check as described in Section 8.2 above.
    8.6 Disconnect the impinger train from the sampling line. Connect 
the charcoal tube and the pump as shown in Figure 11-1. Purge the train 
[at a rate of 1 liter/min (0.035 ft\3\/min)] with clean ambient air for 
15 minutes to ensure that all H<INF>2</INF>S is removed from the 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>. For sample recovery, cap the open ends, and 
remove the impinger train to a clean area that is away from sources of 
heat. The area should be well lighted, but not exposed to direct 
sunlight.
    8.7 Sample Recovery.
    8.7.1 Discard the contents of the H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> 
impinger. Carefully rinse with water the contents of the third, fourth, 
and fifth impingers into a 500-ml iodine flask.

    Note: The impingers normally have only a thin film of CdS remaining 
after a water rinse. If Antifoam B was not used or if significant 
quantities of yellow CdS remain in the impingers, the alternative 
recovery procedure in Section 11.2 must be used.

    8.7.2 Proceed to Section 11 for the analysis.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2, 10.1.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of
                                 check and          sample volume.
                                 calibration.
11.2..........................  Replicate          Ensure precision of
                                 titrations of      titration
                                 blanks.            determinations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Calibration. Calibrate the sample collection equipment as 
follows.
    10.1.1 Dry Gas Meter.
    10.1.1.1 Initial Calibration. The DGM shall be calibrated before its 
initial use in the field. Proceed as follows: First, assemble the 
following components in series: Drying tube, needle valve, pump, 
rotameter, and DGM. Then, leak-check the metering system as follows: 
Place a vacuum gauge (at least 760 mm Hg) at the inlet to the drying 
tube, and pull a vacuum of 250 mm Hg (10 in. Hg); plug or pinch off the 
outlet of the flow meter, and then turn off the pump. The vacuum shall 
remain stable for at least 30 seconds. Carefully

[[Page 344]]

release the vacuum gauge before releasing the flow meter end. Next, 
calibrate the DGM (at the sampling flow rate specified by the method) as 
follows: Connect an appropriately sized wet-test meter (e.g., 1 liter 
per revolution) to the inlet of the drying tube. Make three independent 
calibration runs, using at least five revolutions of the DGM per run. 
Calculate the calibration factor, Y (wet-test meter calibration volume 
divided by the DGM volume, both volumes adjusted to the same reference 
temperature and pressure), for each run, and average the results. If any 
Y value deviates by more than 2 percent from the average, the DGM is 
unacceptable for use. Otherwise, use the average as the calibration 
factor for subsequent test runs.
    10.1.1.2 Post-Test Calibration Check. After each field test series, 
conduct a calibration check as in Section 10.1.1.1, above, except for 
the following two variations: (a) three or more revolutions of the DGM 
may be used and (b) only two independent runs need be made. If the 
calibration factor does not deviate by more than 5 percent from the 
initial calibration factor (determined in Section 10.1.1.1), then the 
DGM volumes obtained during the test series are acceptable. If the 
calibration factor deviates by more than 5 percent, recalibrate the DGM 
as in Section 10.1.1.1, and for the calculations, use the calibration 
factor (initial or recalibration) that yields the lower gas volume for 
each test run.
    10.1.2 Temperature Sensors. Calibrate against mercury-in-glass 
thermometers.
    10.1.3 Rate Meter. The rate meter need not be calibrated, but should 
be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's instructions.
    10.1.4 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer.
    10.2 Standardization.
    10.2.1 Iodine Solution Standardization. Standardize the 0.01 N 
I<INF>2</INF> solution daily as follows: Pipette 25 ml of the 
I<INF>2</INF> solution into a 125-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 2 ml of 3 M 
HCl. Titrate rapidly with standard 0.01 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution or with 0.01 N 
C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO until the solution is light yellow, using 
gentle mixing. Add four drops of starch indicator solution, and continue 
titrating slowly until the blue color just disappears. Record the volume 
of Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution used, 
V<INF>SI</INF>, or the volume of C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO solution 
used, V<INF>AI</INF>, in ml. Repeat until replicate values agree within 
0.05 ml. Average the replicate titration values which agree within 0.05 
ml, and calculate the exact normality of the I<INF>2</INF> solution 
using Equation 11-3. Repeat the standardization daily.
    10.2.2 Sodium Thiosulfate Solution Standardization. Standardize the 
0.1 N Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution as follows: 
Oven-dry potassium dichromate (K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF>) 
at 180 to 200 [deg]C (360 to 390 [deg]F). To the nearest milligram, 
weigh 2 g of the dichromate (W). Transfer the dichromate to a 500-ml 
volumetric flask, dissolve in water, and dilute to exactly 500 ml. In a 
500-ml iodine flask, dissolve approximately 3 g of KI in 45 ml of water, 
then add 10 ml of 3 M HCl solution. Pipette 50 ml of the dichromate 
solution into this mixture. Gently swirl the contents of the flask once, 
and allow it to stand in the dark for 5 minutes. Dilute the solution 
with 100 to 200 ml of water, washing down the sides of the flask with 
part of the water. Titrate with 0.1 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> until the solution is light 
yellow. Add 4 ml of starch indicator and continue titrating slowly to a 
green end point. Record the volume of 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution used, V<INF>S</INF>, 
in ml. Repeat until replicate values agree within 0.05 ml. Calculate the 
normality using Equation 11-1. Repeat the standardization each week or 
after each test series, whichever time is shorter.
    10.2.3 Phenylarsine Oxide Solution Standardization. Standardize the 
0.01 N C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO (if applicable) as follows: Oven-
dry K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF> at 180 to 200 [deg]C (360 
to 390 [deg]F). To the nearest milligram, weigh 2 g of the dichromate 
(W). Transfer the dichromate to a 500-ml volumetric flask, dissolve in 
water, and dilute to exactly 500 ml. In a 500-ml iodine flask, dissolve 
approximately 0.3 g of KI in 45 ml of water, then add 10 ml of 3 M HCl. 
Pipette 5 ml of the dichromate solution into the iodine flask. Gently 
swirl the contents of the flask once, and allow it to stand in the dark 
for 5 minutes. Dilute the solution with 100 to 200 ml of water, washing 
down the sides of the flask with part of the water. Titrate with 0.01 N 
C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO until the solution is light yellow. Add 4 
ml of starch indicator, and continue titrating slowly to a green end 
point. Record the volume of C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO used, 
V<INF>A</INF>, in ml. Repeat until replicate analyses agree within 0.05 
ml. Calculate the normality using Equation 11-2. Repeat the 
standardization each week or after each test series, whichever time is 
shorter.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Conduct the titration analyses in a clean area away from direct 
sunlight.
    11.1 Pipette exactly 50 ml of 0.01 N I<INF>2</INF> solution into a 
125-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 10 ml of 3 M HCl to the solution. 
Quantitatively rinse the acidified I<INF>2</INF> into the iodine flask. 
Stopper the flask immediately, and shake briefly.
    11.2 Use these alternative procedures if Antifoam B was not used or 
if significant quantities of yellow CdS remain in the impingers. Extract 
the remaining CdS from the third, fourth, and fifth impingers using the 
acidified I<INF>2</INF> solution. Immediately after pouring the 
acidified I<INF>2</INF> into an impinger, stopper it and shake for a few 
moments, then transfer the liquid to the iodine flask. Do not transfer 
any rinse portion from one impinger to another; transfer it directly to 
the iodine flask. Once the acidified I<INF>2</INF> solution has been

[[Page 345]]

poured into any glassware containing CdS, the container must be tightly 
stoppered at all times except when adding more solution, and this must 
be done as quickly and carefully as possible. After adding any acidified 
I<INF>2</INF> solution to the iodine flask, allow a few minutes for 
absorption of the H<INF>2</INF>S before adding any further rinses. 
Repeat the I<INF>2</INF> extraction until all CdS is removed from the 
impingers. Extract that part of the connecting glassware that contains 
visible CdS. Quantitatively rinse all the I<INF>2</INF> from the 
impingers, connectors, and the beaker into the iodine flask using water. 
Stopper the flask and shake briefly.
    11.3 Allow the iodine flask to stand about 30 minutes in the dark 
for absorption of the H<INF>2</INF>S into the I<INF>2</INF>, then 
complete the titration analysis as outlined in Sections 11.5 and 11.6.

    Note: Iodine evaporates from acidified I<INF>2</INF> solutions. 
Samples to which acidified I<INF>2</INF> has been added may not be 
stored, but must be analyzed in the time schedule stated above.

    11.4 Prepare a blank by adding 45 ml of CdSO<INF>4</INF> absorbing 
solution to an iodine flask. Pipette exactly 50 ml of 0.01 N 
I<INF>2</INF> solution into a 125-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 10 ml of 3 M 
HCl. Stopper the flask, shake briefly, let stand 30 minutes in the dark, 
and titrate with the samples.

    Note: The blank must be handled by exactly the same procedure as 
that used for the samples.

    11.5 Using 0.01 N Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution 
(or 0.01 N C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO, if applicable), rapidly 
titrate each sample in an iodine flask using gentle mixing, until 
solution is light yellow. Add 4 ml of starch indicator solution, and 
continue titrating slowly until the blue color just disappears. Record 
the volume of Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution used, 
V<INF>TT</INF>, or the volume of C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO solution 
used, V<INF>AT</INF>, in ml.
    11.6 Titrate the blanks in the same manner as the samples. Run 
blanks each day until replicate values agree within 0.05 ml. Average the 
replicate titration values which agree within 0.05 ml.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures only after 
the final calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>H2S</INF>=Concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S at standard conditions, 
mg/dscm.
N<INF>A</INF>=Normality of standard C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO 
solution, g-eq/liter.
N<INF>I</INF>=Normality of standard I<INF>2</INF> solution, g-eq/liter.
N<INF>S</INF>=Normality of standard ([sime]0.1 N) 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution, g-eq/liter.
N<INF>T</INF>=Normality of standard ([sime]0.01 N) 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution, assumed to be 0.1 NS, 
g-eq/liter.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at the sampling site, mm Hg.
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg.
T<INF>m</INF>=Average DGM temperature, [deg]K.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K.
V<INF>A</INF>=Volume of C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO solution used for 
standardization, ml.
V<INF>AI</INF>=Volume of standard C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO solution 
used for titration analysis, ml.
V<INF>I</INF>=Volume of standard I<INF>2</INF> solution used for 
standardization, ml.
V<INF>IT</INF>=Volume of standard I<INF>2</INF> solution used for 
titration analysis, normally 50 ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Volume of gas sample at meter conditions, liters.
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample at standard conditions, liters.
V<INF>SI</INF>=Volume of ``0.1 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution used for 
standardization, ml.
V<INF>T</INF>=Volume of standard ([sime]0.01 N) 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution used in standardizing 
iodine solution (see Section 10.2.1), ml.
V<INF>TT</INF>=Volume of standard (0.01 N) 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution used for titration 
analysis, ml.
W=Weight of K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF> used to standardize 
Na<INF>2</INF>s<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> or 
C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO solutions, as applicable (see Sections 
10.2.2 and 10.2.3), g.
Y=DGM calibration factor.
    12.2 Normality of the Standard ([sime]0.1 N) Sodium Thiosulfate 
Solution.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.238

Where:

2.039=Conversion factor
    =(6 g-eq I<INF>2</INF>/mole 
K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF>) (1,000 ml/liter)/(294.2 g 
K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF>/mole) (10 aliquot factor)

    12.3 Normality of Standard Phenylarsine Oxide Solution (if 
applicable).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.239

Where:

0.2039=Conversion factor.
    =(6 g-eq I<INF>2</INF>/mole 
K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF>) (1,000 ml/liter)/(294.2 g 
K<INF>2</INF>Cr<INF>2</INF>O<INF>7</INF>/mole) (100 aliquot factor)

    12.4 Normality of Standard Iodine Solution.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.240
    
    Note: If C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO is used instead of 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF>, replace N<INF>T</INF> and 
V<INF>T</INF> in Equation 11-3 with N<INF>A</INF> and V<INF>AS</INF>, 
respectively (see Sections 10.2.1 and 10.2.3).

    12.5 Dry Gas Volume. Correct the sample volume measured by the DGM 
to standard conditions (20 [deg]C and 760 mm Hg).

[[Page 346]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.241

    12.6 Concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S. Calculate the concentration of 
H<INF>2</INF>S in the gas stream at standard conditions using Equation 
11-5:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.242

Where:

17.04 x 10\3\=Conversion factor
    =(34.07 g/mole H<INF>2</INF>S) (1,000 liters/m\3\) (1,000mg/g)/
(1,000 ml/liter) (2H<INF>2</INF>S eq/mole)

    Note: If C<INF>6</INF>H<INF>5</INF>AsO is used instead of 
NaS<INF>2</INF>2O<INF>3</INF>, replace N<INF>A</INF> and V<INF>AT</INF> 
in Equation 11-5 with N<INF>A</INF> and V<INF>AT</INF>, respectively 
(see Sections 11.5 and 10.2.3).

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision. Collaborative testing has shown the intra-laboratory 
precision to be 2.2 percent and the inter-laboratory precision to be 5 
percent.
    13.2 Bias. The method bias was shown to be -4.8 percent when only 
H<INF>2</INF>S was present. In the presence of the interferences cited 
in Section 4.0, the bias was positive at low H<INF>2</INF>S 
concentration and negative at higher concentrations. At 230 mg 
H<INF>2</INF>S/m\3\, the level of the compliance standard, the bias was 
+2.7 percent. Thiols had no effect on the precision.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Determination of Hydrogen Sulfide, Ammoniacal Cadmium Chloride 
Method. API Method 772-54. In: Manual on Disposal of Refinery Wastes, 
Vol. V: Sampling and Analysis of Waste Gases and Particulate Matter. 
American Petroleum Institute, Washington, D.C. 1954.
    2. Tentative Method of Determination of Hydrogen Sulfide and 
Mercaptan Sulfur in Natural Gas. Natural Gas Processors Association, 
Tulsa, OK. NGPA Publication No. 2265-65. 1965.
    3. Knoll, J.D., and M.R. Midgett. Determination of Hydrogen Sulfide 
in Refinery Fuel Gases. Environmental Monitoring Series, Office of 
Research and Development, USEPA. Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. EPA 
600/4-77-007.
    4. Scheil, G.W., and M.C. Sharp. Standardization of Method 11 at a 
Petroleum Refinery. Midwest Research Institute Draft Report for USEPA. 
Office of Research and Development. Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. 
EPA Contract No. 68-02-1098. August 1976. EPA 600/4-77-088a (Volume 1) 
and EPA 600/4-77-088b (Volume 2).

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 347]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.243

  Method 12--Determination of Inorganic Lead Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, and 
Method 5.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 348]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Analyte                   CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inorganic Lead Compounds as lead        7439-92-1   see Section 13.3.
 (Pb).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of inorganic lead emissions from stationary sources, only as specified 
in an applicable subpart of the regulations.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Particulate and gaseous Pb emissions are withdrawn 
isokinetically from the source and are collected on a filter and in 
dilute nitric acid. The collected samples are digested in acid solution 
and are analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry using an air/
acetylene flame.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Copper. High concentrations of copper may interfere with the 
analysis of Pb at 217.0 nm. This interference can be avoided by 
analyzing the samples at 283.3 nm.
    4.2 Matrix Effects. Analysis for Pb by flame atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry is sensitive to the chemical composition and to the 
physical properties (e.g., viscosity, pH) of the sample. The analytical 
procedure requires the use of the Method of Standard Additions to check 
for these matrix effects, and requires sample analysis using the Method 
of Standard Additions if significant matrix effects are found to be 
present.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs.
    5.2.2 Nitric Acid (HNO<INF>3</INF>). Highly corrosive to eyes, skin, 
nose, and lungs. Vapors cause bronchitis, pneumonia, or edema of lungs. 
Reaction to inhalation may be delayed as long as 30 hours and still be 
fatal. Provide ventilation to limit exposure. Strong oxidizer. Hazardous 
reaction may occur with organic materials such as solvents.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. A schematic of the sampling train used in 
performing this method is shown in Figure 12-1 in Section 18.0; it is 
similar to the Method 5 train. The following items are needed for sample 
collection:
    6.1.1 Probe Nozzle, Probe Liner, Pitot Tube, Differential Pressure 
Gauge, Filter Holder, Filter Heating System, Temperature Sensor, 
Metering System, Barometer, and Gas Density Determination Equipment. 
Same as Method 5, Sections 6.1.1.1 through 6.1.1.7, 6.1.1.9, 6.1.2, and 
6.1.3, respectively.
    6.1.2 Impingers. Four impingers connected in series with leak-free 
ground glass fittings or any similar leak-free noncontaminating fittings 
are needed. For the first, third, and fourth impingers, use the 
Greenburg-Smith design, modified by replacing the tip with a 1.3 cm (\1/
2\ in.) ID glass tube extending to about 1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) from the 
bottom of the flask. For the second impinger, use the Greenburg-Smith 
design with the standard tip.
    6.1.3 Temperature Sensor. Place a temperature sensor, capable of 
measuring temperature to within 1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F) at the outlet of the 
fourth impinger for monitoring purposes.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are needed for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes, Petri Dishes, Graduated 
Cylinder and/or Balance, Plastic Storage Containers, and Funnel and 
Rubber Policeman. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.2.1 and 6.2.4 through 
6.2.7, respectively.
    6.2.2 Wash Bottles. Glass (2).
    6.2.3 Sample Storage Containers. Chemically resistant, borosilicate 
glass bottles, for 0.1 N nitric acid (HNO<INF>3</INF>) impinger and 
probe solutions and washes, 1000-ml. Use screw-cap liners that are 
either rubber-backed Teflon or leak-free and resistant to chemical 
attack by 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>. (Narrow mouth glass bottles have been 
found to be less prone to leakage.)
    6.2.4 Funnel. Glass, to aid in sample recovery.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. The following items are needed for sample 
analysis:
    6.3.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer. With lead hollow cathode 
lamp and burner for air/acetylene flame.
    6.3.2 Hot Plate.

[[Page 349]]

    6.3.3 Erlenmeyer Flasks. 125-ml, 24/40 standard taper.
    6.3.4 Membrane Filters. Millipore SCWPO 4700, or equivalent.
    6.3.5 Filtration Apparatus. Millipore vacuum filtration unit, or 
equivalent, for use with the above membrane filter.
    6.3.6 Volumetric Flasks. 100-ml, 250-ml, and 1000-ml.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents 
conform to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available; otherwise, use the best available grade.

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are needed for sample 
collection:
    7.1.1 Filter. Gelman Spectro Grade, Reeve Angel 934 AH, MSA 1106 BH, 
all with lot assay for Pb, or other high-purity glass fiber filters, 
without organic binder, exhibiting at least 99.95 percent efficiency 
(<0.05 percent penetration) on 0.3 micron dioctyl phthalate smoke 
particles. Conduct the filter efficiency test using ASTM D 2986-71, 78, 
or 95a (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17) or use test data 
from the supplier's quality control program.
    7.1.2 Silica Gel, Crushed Ice, and Stopcock Grease. Same as Method 
5, Sections 7.1.2, 7.1.4, and 7.1.5, respectively.
    7.1.3 Water. Deionized distilled, to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 
91, Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). If high 
concentrations of organic matter are not expected to be present, the 
potassium permanganate test for oxidizable organic matter may be 
omitted.
    7.1.4 Nitric Acid, 0.1 N. Dilute 6.5 ml of concentrated 
HNO<INF>3</INF> to 1 liter with water. (It may be desirable to run 
blanks before field use to eliminate a high blank on test samples.)
    7.2 Sample Recovery. 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> (Same as in Section 7.1.4 
above).
    7.3 Sample Analysis. The following reagents and standards are needed 
for sample analysis:
    7.3.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.3.
    7.3.2 Nitric Acid, Concentrated.
    7.3.3 Nitric Acid, 50 Percent (v/v). Dilute 500 ml of concentrated 
HNO<INF>3</INF> to 1 liter with water.
    7.3.4 Stock Lead Standard Solution, 1000 [micro]g Pb/ml. Dissolve 
0.1598 g of lead nitrate [Pb(NO<INF>3</INF>)<INF>2</INF>] in about 60 ml 
water, add 2 ml concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF>, and dilute to 100 ml with 
water.
    7.3.5 Working Lead Standards. Pipet 0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 
ml of the stock lead standard solution (Section 7.3.4) into 250-ml 
volumetric flasks. Add 5 ml of concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> to each 
flask, and dilute to volume with water. These working standards contain 
0.0, 4.0, 8.0, 12.0, 16.0, and 20.0 [micro]g Pb/ml, respectively. 
Prepare, as needed, additional standards at other concentrations in a 
similar manner.
    7.3.6 Air. Suitable quality for atomic absorption spectrophotometry.
    7.3.7 Acetylene. Suitable quality for atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry.
    7.3.8 Hydrogen Peroxide, 3 Percent (v/v). Dilute 10 ml of 30 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> to 100 ml with water.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Preparation. Follow the same general procedure given in 
Method 5, Section 8.1, except that the filter need not be weighed.
    8.2 Preliminary Determinations. Follow the same general procedure 
given in Method 5, Section 8.2.
    8.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Follow the same general procedure 
given in Method 5, Section 8.3, except place 100 ml of 0.1 N 
HNO<INF>3</INF> (instead of water) in each of the first two impingers. 
As in Method 5, leave the third impinger empty and transfer 
approximately 200 to 300 g of preweighed silica gel from its container 
to the fourth impinger. Set up the train as shown in Figure 12-1.
    8.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Same as Method 5, Section 8.4.
    8.5 Sampling Train Operation. Same as Method 5, Section 8.5.
    8.6 Calculation of Percent Isokinetic. Same as Method 5, Section 
8.6.
    8.7 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Sections 8.7.1 through 
8.7.6.1, with the addition of the following:
    8.7.1 Container No. 2 (Probe).
    8.7.1.1 Taking care that dust on the outside of the probe or other 
exterior surfaces does not get into the sample, quantitatively recover 
sample matter and any condensate from the probe nozzle, probe fitting, 
probe liner, and front half of the filter holder by washing these 
components with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> and placing the wash into a glass 
sample storage container. Measure and record (to the nearest 2 ml) the 
total amount of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> used for these rinses. Perform the 
0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> rinses as follows:
    8.7.1.2 Carefully remove the probe nozzle, and rinse the inside 
surfaces with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> from a wash bottle while brushing 
with a stainless steel, Nylon-bristle brush. Brush until the 0.1 N 
HNO<INF>3</INF> rinse shows no visible particles, then make a final 
rinse of the inside surface with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>.
    8.7.1.3 Brush and rinse with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> the inside parts 
of the Swagelok fitting in a similar way until no visible particles 
remain.
    8.7.1.4 Rinse the probe liner with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>. While 
rotating the probe so that all inside surfaces will be rinsed with 0.1 N

[[Page 350]]

HNO<INF>3</INF>, tilt the probe, and squirt 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> into 
its upper end. Let the 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> drain from the lower end 
into the sample container. A glass funnel may be used to aid in 
transferring liquid washes to the container. Follow the rinse with a 
probe brush. Hold the probe in an inclined position, squirt 0.1 N 
HNO<INF>3</INF> into the upper end of the probe as the probe brush is 
being pushed with a twisting action through the probe; hold the sample 
container underneath the lower end of the probe, and catch any 0.1 N 
HNO<INF>3</INF> and sample matter that is brushed from the probe. Run 
the brush through the probe three times or more until no visible sample 
matter is carried out with the 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> and none remains on 
the probe liner on visual inspection. With stainless steel or other 
metal probes, run the brush through in the above prescribed manner at 
least six times, since metal probes have small crevices in which sample 
matter can be entrapped. Rinse the brush with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>, and 
quantitatively collect these washings in the sample container. After the 
brushing, make a final rinse of the probe as described above.
    8.7.1.5 It is recommended that two people clean the probe to 
minimize loss of sample. Between sampling runs, keep brushes clean and 
protected from contamination.
    8.7.1.6 After ensuring that all joints are wiped clean of silicone 
grease, brush and rinse with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> the inside of the 
from half of the filter holder. Brush and rinse each surface three times 
or more, if needed, to remove visible sample matter. Make a final rinse 
of the brush and filter holder. After all 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> washings 
and sample matter are collected in the sample container, tighten the lid 
on the sample container so that the fluid will not leak out when it is 
shipped to the laboratory. Mark the height of the fluid level to 
determine whether leakage occurs during transport. Label the container 
to identify its contents clearly.
    8.7.2 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). Note the color of the indicating 
silica gel to determine if it has been completely spent, and make a 
notation of its condition. Transfer the silica gel from the fourth 
impinger to the original container, and seal. A funnel may be used to 
pour the silica gel from the impinger and a rubber policeman may be used 
to remove the silica gel from the impinger. It is not necessary to 
remove the small amount of particles that may adhere to the walls and 
are difficult to remove. Since the gain in weight is to be used for 
moisture calculations, do not use any water or other liquids to transfer 
the silica gel. If a balance is available in the field, follow the 
procedure for Container No. 3 in Section 11.4.2.
    8.7.3 Container No. 4 (Impingers). Due to the large quantity of 
liquid involved, the impinger solutions may be placed in several 
containers. Clean each of the first three impingers and connecting 
glassware in the following manner:
    8.7.3.1. Wipe the impinger ball joints free of silicone grease, and 
cap the joints.
    8.7.3.2. Rotate and agitate each impinger, so that the impinger 
contents might serve as a rinse solution.
    8.7.3.3. Transfer the contents of the impingers to a 500-ml 
graduated cylinder. Remove the outlet ball joint cap, and drain the 
contents through this opening. Do not separate the impinger parts (inner 
and outer tubes) while transferring their contents to the cylinder. 
Measure the liquid volume to within 2 ml. Alternatively, determine the 
weight of the liquid to within 0.5 g. Record in the log the volume or 
weight of the liquid present, along with a notation of any color or film 
observed in the impinger catch. The liquid volume or weight is needed, 
along with the silica gel data, to calculate the stack gas moisture 
content (see Method 5, Figure 5-6).
    8.7.3.4. Transfer the contents to Container No. 4.

    Note: In Sections 8.7.3.5 and 8.7.3.6, measure and record the total 
amount of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> used for rinsing.

    8.7.3.5. Pour approximately 30 ml of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> into each 
of the first three impingers and agitate the impingers. Drain the 0.1 N 
HNO<INF>3</INF> through the outlet arm of each impinger into Container 
No. 4. Repeat this operation a second time; inspect the impingers for 
any abnormal conditions.
    8.7.3.6. Wipe the ball joints of the glassware connecting the 
impingers free of silicone grease and rinse each piece of glassware 
twice with 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>; transfer this rinse into Container No. 
4. Do not rinse or brush the glass-fritted filter support. Mark the 
height of the fluid level to determine whether leakage occurs during 
transport. Label the container to identify its contents clearly.
    8.8 Blanks.
    8.8.1 Nitric Acid. Save 200 ml of the 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> used for 
sampling and cleanup as a blank. Take the solution directly from the 
bottle being used and place into a glass sample container labeled ``0.1 
N HNO<INF>3</INF> blank.''
    8.8.2 Filter. Save two filters from each lot of filters used in 
sampling. Place these filters in a container labeled ``filter blank.''

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

[[Page 351]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4, 10.1.....................  Sampling           Ensure accuracy and
                                 equipment leak-    precision of
                                 checks and         sampling
                                 calibration.       measurements.
10.2..........................  Spectrophotometer  Ensure linearity of
                                 calibration.       spectrophotometer
                                                    response to
                                                    standards.
11.5..........................  Check for matrix   Eliminate matrix
                                 effects.           effects.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Sampling Equipment. Same as Method 5, Section 10.0.
    10.2 Spectrophotometer.
    10.2.1 Measure the absorbance of the standard solutions using the 
instrument settings recommended by the spectrophotometer manufacturer. 
Repeat until good agreement (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent) is 
obtained between two consecutive readings. Plot the absorbance (y-axis) 
versus concentration in [micro]g Pb/ml (x-axis). Draw or compute a 
straight line through the linear portion of the curve. Do not force the 
calibration curve through zero, but if the curve does not pass through 
the origin or at least lie closer to the origin than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.003 absorbance units, check for incorrectly prepared 
standards and for curvature in the calibration curve.
    10.2.2 To determine stability of the calibration curve, run a blank 
and a standard after every five samples, and recalibrate as necessary.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Loss Check. Prior to analysis, check the liquid level in 
Containers Number 2 and Number 4. Note on the analytical data sheet 
whether leakage occurred during transport. If a noticeable amount of 
leakage occurred, either void the sample or take steps, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator, to adjust the final results.
    11.2 Sample Preparation.
    11.2.1 Container No. 1 (Filter). Cut the filter into strips and 
transfer the strips and all loose particulate matter into a 125-ml 
Erlenmeyer flask. Rinse the petri dish with 10 ml of 50 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF> to ensure a quantitative transfer, and add to the flask.

    Note: If the total volume required in Section 11.2.3 is expected to 
exceed 80 ml, use a 250-ml flask in place of the 125-ml flask.

    11.2.2 Containers No. 2 and No. 4 (Probe and Impingers). Combine the 
contents of Containers No. 2 and No. 4, and evaporate to dryness on a 
hot plate.
    11.2.3 Sample Extraction for Lead.
    11.2.3.1 Based on the approximate stack gas particulate 
concentration and the total volume of stack gas sampled, estimate the 
total weight of particulate sample collected. Next, transfer the residue 
from Containers No. 2 and No. 4 to the 125-ml Erlenmeyer flask that 
contains the sampling filter using a rubber policeman and 10 ml of 50 
percent HNO<INF>3</INF> for every 100 mg of sample collected in the 
train or a minimum of 30 ml of 50 percent HNO<INF>3</INF>, whichever is 
larger.
    11.2.3.2 Place the Erlenmeyer flask on a hot plate, and heat with 
periodic stirring for 30 minutes at a temperature just below boiling. If 
the sample volume falls below 15 ml, add more 50 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>. Add 10 ml of 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>, and 
continue heating for 10 minutes. Add 50 ml of hot (80 [deg]C, 176 
[deg]F) water, and heat for 20 minutes. Remove the flask from the hot 
plate, and allow to cool. Filter the sample through a Millipore membrane 
filter, or equivalent, and transfer the filtrate to a 250-ml volumetric 
flask. Dilute to volume with water.
    11.2.4 Filter Blank. Cut each filter into strips, and place each 
filter in a separate 125-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 15 ml of 50 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>, and treat as described in Section 11.2.3 using 10 ml of 
3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> and 50 ml of hot water. Filter and 
dilute to a total volume of 100 ml using water.
    11.2.5 Nitric Acid Blank, 0.1 N. Take the entire 200 ml of 0.1 N 
HNO<INF>3</INF> to dryness on a steam bath, add 15 ml of 50 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>, and treat as described in Section 11.2.3 using 10 ml of 
3 percent H<INF>2</INF>0<INF>2</INF> and 50 ml of hot water. Dilute to a 
total volume of 100 ml using water.
    11.3 Spectrophotometer Preparation. Turn on the power; set the 
wavelength, slit width, and lamp current; and adjust the background 
corrector as instructed by the manufacturer's manual for the particular 
atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Adjust the burner and flame 
characteristics as necessary.
    11.4 Analysis.
    11.4.1 Lead Determination. Calibrate the spectrophotometer as 
outlined in Section 10.2, and determine the absorbance for each source 
sample, the filter blank, and 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> blank. Analyze each 
sample three times in this manner. Make appropriate dilutions, as 
needed, to bring all sample Pb concentrations into the linear absorbance 
range of the spectrophotometer. Because instruments vary between 
manufacturers, no detailed operating instructions will be given here. 
Instead, the instructions provided with the particular instrument should 
be followed. If the Pb concentration of a sample is

[[Page 352]]

at the low end of the calibration curve and high accuracy is required, 
the sample can be taken to dryness on a hot plate and the residue 
dissolved in the appropriate volume of water to bring it into the 
optimum range of the calibration curve.
    11.4.2 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). This step may be conducted in 
the field. Weigh the spent silica gel (or silica gel plus impinger) to 
the nearest 0.5 g; record this weight.
    11.5 Check for Matrix Effects. Use the Method of Standard Additions 
as follows to check at least one sample from each source for matrix 
effects on the Pb results:
    11.5.1 Add or spike an equal volume of standard solution to an 
aliquot of the sample solution.
    11.5.2 Measure the absorbance of the resulting solution and the 
absorbance of an aliquot of unspiked sample.
    11.5.3 Calculate the Pb concentration C<INF>m</INF> in [micro]g/ml 
of the sample solution using Equation 12-1 in Section 12.5.
    Volume corrections will not be required if the solutions as analyzed 
have been made to the same final volume. Therefore, C<INF>m</INF> and 
C<INF>a</INF> represent Pb concentration before dilutions.
    Method of Standard Additions procedures described on pages 9-4 and 
9-5 of the section entitled ``General Information'' of the Perkin Elmer 
Corporation Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry Manual, Number 303-0152 
(Reference 1 in Section 17.0) may also be used. In any event, if the 
results of the Method of Standard Additions procedure used on the single 
source sample do not agree to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of 
the value obtained by the routine atomic absorption analysis, then 
reanalyze all samples from the source using the Method of Standard 
Additions procedure.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.

A<INF>m</INF>=Absorbance of the sample solution.
A<INF>n</INF>=Cross-sectional area of nozzle, m\2\ (ft\2\).
A<INF>t</INF>=Absorbance of the spiked sample solution.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water in the gas stream, proportion by volume.
C<INF>a</INF>=Lead concentration in standard solution, [micro]g/ml.
C<INF>m</INF>=Lead concentration in sample solution analyzed during 
check for matrix effects, [micro]g/ml.
C<INF>s</INF>=Lead concentration in stack gas, dry basis, converted to 
standard conditions, mg/dscm (gr/dscf).
I=Percent of isokinetic sampling.
L<INF>1</INF>=Individual leakage rate observed during the leak-check 
conducted prior to the first component change, m\3\/min (ft\3\/min)
L<INF>a</INF>=Maximum acceptable leakage rate for either a pretest leak-
check or for a leak-check following a component change; equal to 0.00057 
m\3\/min (0.020 cfm) or 4 percent of the average sampling rate, 
whichever is less.
L<INF>i</INF>=Individual leakage rate observed during the leak-check 
conducted prior to the ``ith'' component change (i=1, 2, 3 * * * n), 
m\3\/min (cfm).
L<INF>p</INF>=Leakage rate observed during the post-test leak-check, 
m\3\/min (cfm).
m<INF>t</INF>=Total weight of lead collected in the sample, [micro]g.
M<INF>w</INF>=Molecular weight of water, 18.0 g/g-mole (18.0 lb/lb-
mole).
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at the sampling site, mm Hg (in. 
Hg).
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute stack gas pressure, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
R=Ideal gas constant, 0.06236 [(mm Hg) (m\3\)]/[([deg]K) (g-mole)] 
{21.85 [(in. Hg) (ft\3\)]/[([deg]R) (lb-mole)]{time} .
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute average dry gas meter temperature (see Figure 5-3 
of Method 5), [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
v<INF>s</INF>=Stack gas velocity, m/sec (ft/sec).
V<INF>m</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by the dry gas meter, dry 
basis, m\3\ (ft\3\).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by the dry gas 
meter, corrected to standard conditions, m\3\ (ft\3\).
V<INF>w(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor collected in the sampling 
train, corrected to standard conditions, m\3\ (ft\3\).
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
[Delta]H=Average pressure differential across the orifice meter (see 
Figure 5-3 of Method 5), mm H<INF>2</INF>O (in. H<INF>2</INF>O).
[thetas]=Total sampling time, min.
[thetas]<INF>l</INF>=Sampling time interval, from the beginning of a run 
until the first component change, min.
[thetas]<INF>i</INF>=Sampling time interval, between two successive 
component changes, beginning with the interval between the first and 
second changes, min.
[thetas]<INF>p</INF>=Sampling time interval, from the final (n\th\) 
component change until the end of the sampling run, min.
[rho]<INF>w</INF>=Density of water, 0.9982 g/ml (0.002201 lb/ml).

    12.2 Average Dry Gas Meter Temperatures (T<INF>m</INF>) and Average 
Orifice Pressure Drop ([Delta]H). See data sheet (Figure 5-3 of Method 
5).
    12.3 Dry Gas Volume, Volume of Water Vapor, and Moisture Content. 
Using data obtained in this test, calculate V<INF>m(std)</INF>, 
V<INF>w(std)</INF>, and B<INF>ws</INF> according to the procedures 
outlined in Method 5, Sections 12.3 through 12.5.
    12.4 Total Lead in Source Sample. For each source sample, correct 
the average absorbance for the contribution of the filter blank and the 
0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> blank. Use the calibration curve and this 
corrected absorbance to determine the Pb concentration in the sample 
aspirated into the spectrophotometer. Calculate the total Pb content 
m<INF>t</INF> (in

[[Page 353]]

[micro]g) in the original source sample; correct for all the dilutions 
that were made to bring the Pb concentration of the sample into the 
linear range of the spectrophotometer.
    12.5 Sample Lead Concentration. Calculate the Pb concentration of 
the sample using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.244

    12.6 Lead Concentration. Calculate the stack gas Pb concentration 
C<INF>s</INF> using Equation 12-2:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.245

Where:

K<INF>3</INF>=0.001 mg/[micro]g for metric units.
    =1.54 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> gr/[micro]g for English units

    12.7 Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate. Calculate the 
average stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate using data obtained 
in this method and the equations in Sections 12.2 and 12.3 of Method 2.
    12.8 Isokinetic Variation. Same as Method 5, Section 12.11.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision. The within-laboratory precision, as measured by the 
coefficient of variation, ranges from 0.2 to 9.5 percent relative to a 
run-mean concentration. These values were based on tests conducted at a 
gray iron foundry, a lead storage battery manufacturing plant, a 
secondary lead smelter, and a lead recovery furnace of an alkyl lead 
manufacturing plant. The concentrations encountered during these tests 
ranged from 0.61 to 123.3 mg Pb/m\3\.
    13.2 Analytical Range. For a minimum analytical accuracy of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent, the lower limit of the range is 100 
[micro]g. The upper limit can be extended considerably by dilution.
    13.3 Analytical Sensitivity. Typical sensitivities for a 1-percent 
change in absorption (0.0044 absorbance units) are 0.2 and 0.5 [micro]g 
Pb/ml for the 217.0 and 283.3 nm lines, respectively.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Simultaneous Determination of Particulate and Lead Emissions. 
Method 5 may be used to simultaneously determine Pb provided: (1) 
acetone is used to remove particulate from the probe and inside of the 
filter holder as specified by Method 5, (2) 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> is 
used in the impingers, (3) a glass fiber filter with a low Pb background 
is used, and (4) the entire train contents, including the impingers, are 
treated and analyzed for Pb as described in Sections 8.0 and 11.0 of 
this method.
    16.2 Filter Location. A filter may be used between the third and 
fourth impingers provided the filter is included in the analysis for Pb.
    16.3 In-Stack Filter. An in-stack filter may be used provided: (1) A 
glass-lined probe and at least two impingers, each containing 100 ml of 
0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> after the in-stack filter, are used and (2) the 
probe and impinger contents are recovered and analyzed for Pb. Recover 
sample from the nozzle with acetone if a particulate analysis is to be 
made.

                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 5, Section 17.0, References 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7, with 
the addition of the following:

    1. Perkin Elmer Corporation. Analytical Methods for Atomic 
Absorption Spectrophotometry. Norwalk, Connecticut. September 1976.
    2. American Society for Testing and Materials. Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards, Part 31: Water, Atmospheric Analysis. Philadelphia, PA 1974. 
p. 40-42.
    3. Kelin, R., and C. Hach. Standard Additions--Uses and Limitations 
in Spectrophotometric Analysis. Amer. Lab. 9:21-27. 1977.
    4. Mitchell, W.J., and M.R. Midgett. Determining Inorganic and Alkyl 
Lead Emissions from Stationary Sources. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. Emission Monitoring and Support Laboratory. Research Triangle 
Park, NC. (Presented at National APCA Meeting, Houston. June 26, 1978).

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 354]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.246

 Method 13A--Determination of Total Fluoride Emissions From Stationary 
                 Sources (Spadns Zirconium Lake Method)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, and 
Method 5.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 355]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.            Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total fluorides as Fluorine....       7782-41-4   Not determined.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of fluoride (F<SUP>-</SUP>) emissions from sources as specified in the 
regulations. It does not measure fluorocarbons, such as Freons.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                               2.0 Summary

    Gaseous and particulate F<SUP>-</SUP> are withdrawn isokinetically 
from the source and collected in water and on a filter. The total 
F<SUP>-</SUP> is then determined by the SPADNS Zirconium Lake 
Colorimetric method.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Chloride. Large quantities of chloride will interfere with the 
analysis, but this interference can be prevented by adding silver 
sulfate into the distillation flask (see Section 11.3). If chloride ion 
is present, it may be easier to use the specific ion electrode method of 
analysis (Method 13B).
    4.2 Grease. Grease on sample-exposed surfaces may cause low 
F<SUP>-</SUP> results due to adsorption.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.2.1 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl). Highly toxic. Vapors are highly 
irritating to eyes, skin, nose, and lungs, causing severe damage. May 
cause bronchitis, pneumonia, or edema of lungs. Exposure to 
concentrations of 0.13 to 0.2 percent can be lethal in minutes. Will 
react with metals, producing hydrogen.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eye tissues 
and to skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. 
Reacts exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.3 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m\3\ for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in higher 
concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts 
violently with metals and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. A schematic of the sampling train used in 
performing this method is shown in Figure 13A-1; it is similar to the 
Method 5 sampling train except that the filter position is 
interchangeable. The sampling train consists of the following 
components:
    6.1.1 Probe Nozzle, Pitot Tube, Differential Pressure Gauge, Filter 
Heating System, Temperature Sensor, Metering System, Barometer, and Gas 
Density Determination Equipment. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.1.1.1, 
6.1.1.3 through 6.1.1.7, 6.1.1.9, 6.1.2, and 6.1.3, respectively. The 
filter heating system and temperature sensor are needed only when 
moisture condensation is a problem.
    6.1.2 Probe Liner. Borosilicate glass or 316 stainless steel. When 
the filter is located immediately after the probe, a probe heating 
system may be used to prevent filter plugging resulting from moisture 
condensation, but the temperature in the probe shall not be allowed to 
exceed 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 
[deg]F).
    6.1.3 Filter Holder. With positive seal against leakage from the 
outside or around the filter. If the filter is located between the probe 
and first impinger, use borosilicate glass or stainless steel with a 20-
mesh stainless steel screen filter support and a silicone rubber gasket; 
do not use a glass frit or a sintered metal filter support. If the 
filter is located between the third and fourth impingers, borosilicate 
glass with a glass frit filter support and a silicone rubber gasket may 
be used. Other materials of construction may be used, subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.
    6.1.4 Impingers. Four impingers connected as shown in Figure 13A-1 
with ground-glass (or equivalent), vacuum-tight fittings. For the first, 
third, and fourth impingers, use the Greenburg-Smith design, modified by 
replacing the tip with a 1.3-cm (\1/2\ in.) ID glass tube extending to 
1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) from the bottom of the flask. For the second 
impinger, use a

[[Page 356]]

Greenburg-Smith impinger with the standard tip. Modifications (e.g., 
flexible connections between the impingers or materials other than 
glass) may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator. Place 
a temperature sensor, capable of measuring temperature to within 1 
[deg]C (2 [deg]F), at the outlet of the fourth impinger for monitoring 
purposes.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. The following items are needed for sample 
recovery:
    6.2.1 Probe-liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes, Wash Bottles, Graduated 
Cylinder and/or Balance, Plastic Storage Containers, Funnel and Rubber 
Policeman, and Funnel. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.2.1, 6.2.2 and 6.2.5 
to 6.2.8, respectively.
    6.2.2 Sample Storage Container. Wide-mouth, high-density 
polyethylene bottles for impinger water samples, 1 liter.
    6.3 Sample Preparation and Analysis. The following items are needed 
for sample preparation and analysis:
    6.3.1 Distillation Apparatus. Glass distillation apparatus assembled 
as shown in Figure 13A-2.
    6.3.2 Bunsen Burner.
    6.3.3 Electric Muffle Furnace. Capable of heating to 600 [deg]C 
(1100 [deg]F).
    6.3.4 Crucibles. Nickel, 75- to 100-ml.
    6.3.5 Beakers. 500-ml and 1500-ml.
    6.3.6 Volumetric Flasks. 50-ml.
    6.3.7 Erlenmeyer Flasks or Plastic Bottles. 500-ml.
    6.3.8 Constant Temperature Bath. Capable of maintaining a constant 
temperature of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 [deg]C at room temperature 
conditions.
    6.3.9 Balance. 300-g capacity, to measure to <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g.
    6.3.10 Spectrophotometer. Instrument that measures absorbance at 570 
nm and provides at least a 1-cm light path.
    6.3.11 Spectrophotometer Cells. 1-cm path length.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents are to conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are available. 
Otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are needed for sample 
collection:
    7.1.1 Filters.
    7.1.1.1 If the filter is located between the third and fourth 
impingers, use a Whatman No. 1 filter, or equivalent, sized to fit the 
filter holder.
    7.1.1.2 If the filter is located between the probe and first 
impinger, use any suitable medium (e.g., paper, organic membrane) that 
can withstand prolonged exposure to temperatures up to 135 [deg]C (275 
[deg]F), and has at least 95 percent collection efficiency (<5 percent 
penetration) for 0.3 [micro]m dioctyl phthalate smoke particles. Conduct 
the filter efficiency test before the test series, using ASTM D 2986-71, 
78, or 95a (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17), or use test 
data from the supplier's quality control program. The filter must also 
have a low F<SUP>-</SUP> blank value (<0.015 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/cm\2\ of 
filter area). Before the test series, determine the average 
F<SUP>-</SUP> blank value of at least three filters (from the lot to be 
used for sampling) using the applicable procedures described in Sections 
8.3 and 8.4 of this method. In general, glass fiber filters have high 
and/or variable F<SUP>-</SUP> blank values, and will not be acceptable 
for use.
    7.1.2 Water. Deionized distilled, to conform to ASTM D 1193-77 or 
91, Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). If high 
concentrations of organic matter are not expected to be present, the 
potassium permanganate test for oxidizable organic matter may be 
deleted.
    7.1.3 Silica Gel, Crushed Ice, and Stopcock Grease. Same as Method 
5, Sections 7.1.2, 7.1.4, and 7.1.5, respectively.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Water, as described in Section 7.1.2, is needed 
for sample recovery.
    7.3 Sample Preparation and Analysis. The following reagents and 
standards are needed for sample preparation and analysis:
    7.3.1 Calcium Oxide (CaO). Certified grade containing 0.005 percent 
F<SUP>-</SUP> or less.
    7.3.2 Phenolphthalein Indicator. Dissolve 0.1 g of phenolphthalein 
in a mixture of 50 ml of 90 percent ethanol and 50 ml of water.
    7.3.3 Silver Sulfate (Ag<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>).
    7.3.4 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH), Pellets.
    7.3.5 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>), Concentrated.
    7.3.6 Sulfuric Acid, 25 Percent (v/v). Mix 1 part of concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> with 3 parts of water.
    7.3.7 Filters. Whatman No. 541, or equivalent.
    7.3.8 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl), Concentrated.
    7.3.9 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.2.
    7.3.10 Fluoride Standard Solution, 0.01 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/ml. Dry 
approximately 0.5 g of sodium fluoride (NaF) in an oven at 110 [deg]C 
(230 [deg]F) for at least 2 hours. Dissolve 0.2210 g of NaF in 1 liter 
of water. Dilute 100 ml of this solution to 1 liter with water.
    7.3.11 SPADNS Solution [4,5 Dihydroxyl-3-(p-Sulfophenylazo)-2,7-
Naphthalene-Disulfonic Acid Trisodium Salt]. Dissolve 0.960 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.010 g of SPADNS reagent in 500 ml water. If stored in 
a well-sealed bottle protected from the sunlight, this solution is 
stable for at least 1 month.
    7.3.12 Spectrophotometer Zero Reference Solution. Add 10 ml of 
SPADNS solution to 100 ml water, and acidify with a solution prepared by 
diluting 7 ml of concentrated HCl to 10 ml with deionized, distilled 
water. Prepare daily.
    7.3.13 SPADNS Mixed Reagent. Dissolve 0.135 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.005 g of zirconyl chloride octahydrate 
(ZrOCl<INF>2</INF> 8H<INF>2</INF>O) in 25 ml of water. Add 350 ml

[[Page 357]]

of concentrated HCl, and dilute to 500 ml with deionized, distilled 
water. Mix equal volumes of this solution and SPADNS solution to form a 
single reagent. This reagent is stable for at least 2 months.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Preparation. Follow the general procedure given in 
Method 5, Section 8.1, except that the filter need not be weighed.
    8.2 Preliminary Determinations. Follow the general procedure given 
in Method 5, Section 8.2, except that the nozzle size must be selected 
such that isokinetic sampling rates below 28 liters/min (1.0 cfm) can be 
maintained.
    8.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Follow the general procedure 
given in Method 5, Section 8.3, except for the following variation: 
Assemble the train as shown in Figure 13A-1 with the filter between the 
third and fourth impingers. Alternatively, if a 20-mesh stainless steel 
screen is used for the filter support, the filter may be placed between 
the probe and first impinger. A filter heating system to prevent 
moisture condensation may be used, but shall not allow the temperature 
to exceed 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F). Record the filter location on the data sheet 
(see Section 8.5).
    8.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Follow the leak-check procedures given in 
Method 5, Section 8.4.
    8.5 Sampling Train Operation. Follow the general procedure given in 
Method 5, Section 8.5, keeping the filter and probe temperatures (if 
applicable) at 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>14 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 [deg]F) and isokinetic sampling rates below 28 
liters/min (1.0 cfm). For each run, record the data required on a data 
sheet such as the one shown in Method 5, Figure 5-3.
    8.6 Sample Recovery. Proper cleanup procedure begins as soon as the 
probe is removed from the stack at the end of the sampling period. Allow 
the probe to cool.
    8.6.1 When the probe can be safely handled, wipe off all external 
particulate matter near the tip of the probe nozzle, and place a cap 
over it to keep from losing part of the sample. Do not cap off the probe 
tip tightly while the sampling train is cooling down as this would 
create a vacuum in the filter holder, thus drawing water from the 
impingers into the filter holder.
    8.6.2 Before moving the sample train to the cleanup site, remove the 
probe from the sample train, wipe off any silicone grease, and cap the 
open outlet of the probe. Be careful not to lose any condensate that 
might be present. Remove the filter assembly, wipe off any silicone 
grease from the filter holder inlet, and cap this inlet. Remove the 
umbilical cord from the last impinger, and cap the impinger. After 
wiping off any silicone grease, cap off the filter holder outlet and any 
open impinger inlets and outlets. Ground-glass stoppers, plastic caps, 
or serum caps may be used to close these openings.
    8.6.3 Transfer the probe and filter-impinger assembly to the cleanup 
area. This area should be clean and protected from the wind so that the 
chances of contaminating or losing the sample will be minimized.
    8.6.4 Inspect the train prior to and during disassembly, and note 
any abnormal conditions. Treat the samples as follows:
    8.6.4.1 Container No. 1 (Probe, Filter, and Impinger Catches).
    8.6.4.1.1 Using a graduated cylinder, measure to the nearest ml, and 
record the volume of the water in the first three impingers; include any 
condensate in the probe in this determination. Transfer the impinger 
water from the graduated cylinder into a polyethylene container. Add the 
filter to this container. (The filter may be handled separately using 
procedures subject to the Administrator's approval.) Taking care that 
dust on the outside of the probe or other exterior surfaces does not get 
into the sample, clean all sample-exposed surfaces (including the probe 
nozzle, probe fitting, probe liner, first three impingers, impinger 
connectors, and filter holder) with water. Use less than 500 ml for the 
entire wash. Add the washings to the sample container. Perform the water 
rinses as follows:
    8.6.4.1.2 Carefully remove the probe nozzle and rinse the inside 
surface with water from a wash bottle. Brush with a Nylon bristle brush, 
and rinse until the rinse shows no visible particles, after which make a 
final rinse of the inside surface. Brush and rinse the inside parts of 
the Swagelok fitting with water in a similar way.
    8.6.4.1.3 Rinse the probe liner with water. While squirting the 
water into the upper end of the probe, tilt and rotate the probe so that 
all inside surfaces will be wetted with water. Let the water drain from 
the lower end into the sample container. A funnel (glass or 
polyethylene) may be used to aid in transferring the liquid washes to 
the container. Follow the rinse with a probe brush. Hold the probe in an 
inclined position, and squirt water into the upper end as the probe 
brush is being pushed with a twisting action through the probe. Hold the 
sample container underneath the lower end of the probe, and catch any 
water and particulate matter that is brushed from the probe. Run the 
brush through the probe three times or more. With stainless steel or 
other metal probes, run the brush through in the above prescribed manner 
at least six times since metal probes have small crevices in which 
particulate matter can be entrapped. Rinse the brush with water, and 
quantitatively collect these washings in the sample container. After the 
brushing, make a final rinse of the probe as described above.
    8.6.4.1.4 It is recommended that two people clean the probe to 
minimize sample

[[Page 358]]

losses. Between sampling runs, keep brushes clean and protected from 
contamination.
    8.6.4.1.5 Rinse the inside surface of each of the first three 
impingers (and connecting glassware) three separate times. Use a small 
portion of water for each rinse, and brush each sample-exposed surface 
with a Nylon bristle brush, to ensure recovery of fine particulate 
matter. Make a final rinse of each surface and of the brush.
    8.6.4.1.6 After ensuring that all joints have been wiped clean of 
the silicone grease, brush and rinse with water the inside of the filter 
holder (front-half only, if filter is positioned between the third and 
fourth impingers). Brush and rinse each surface three times or more if 
needed. Make a final rinse of the brush and filter holder.
    8.6.4.1.7 After all water washings and particulate matter have been 
collected in the sample container, tighten the lid so that water will 
not leak out when it is shipped to the laboratory. Mark the height of 
the fluid level to transport. Label the container clearly to identify 
its contents.
    8.6.4.2 Container No. 2 (Sample Blank). Prepare a blank by placing 
an unused filter in a polyethylene container and adding a volume of 
water equal to the total volume in Container No. 1. Process the blank in 
the same manner as for Container No. 1.
    8.6.4.3 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). Note the color of the 
indicating silica gel to determine whether it has been completely spent, 
and make a notation of its condition. Transfer the silica gel from the 
fourth impinger to its original container, and seal. A funnel may be 
used to pour the silica gel and a rubber policeman to remove the silica 
gel from the impinger. It is not necessary to remove the small amount of 
dust particles that may adhere to the impinger wall and are difficult to 
remove. Since the gain in weight is to be used for moisture 
calculations, do not use any water or other liquids to transfer the 
silica gel. If a balance is available in the field, follow the 
analytical procedure for Container No. 3 in Section 11.4.2.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4, 10.1.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate and
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.2..........................  Spectrophotometer  Evaluate analytical
                                 calibration.       technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
11.3.3........................  Interference/      Minimize negative
                                 recovery           effects of used
                                 efficiency check   acid.
                                 during
                                 distillation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Sampling Equipment. Calibrate the probe nozzle, pitot tube, 
metering system, probe heater, temperature sensors, and barometer 
according to the procedures outlined in Method 5, Sections 10.1 through 
10.6. Conduct the leak-check of the metering system according to the 
procedures outlined in Method 5, Section 8.4.1.
    10.2 Spectrophotometer.
    10.2.1 Prepare the blank standard by adding 10 ml of SPADNS mixed 
reagent to 50 ml of water.
    10.2.2 Accurately prepare a series of standards from the 0.01 mg 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/ml standard fluoride solution (Section 7.3.10) by diluting 
0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 ml to 100 ml with deionized, distilled 
water. Pipet 50 ml from each solution, and transfer each to a separate 
100-ml beaker. Then add 10 ml of SPADNS mixed reagent (Section 7.3.13) 
to each. These standards will contain 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, and 70 
[micro]g F<SUP>-</SUP>(0 to 1.4 [micro]g/ml), respectively.
    10.2.3 After mixing, place the blank and calibration standards in a 
constant temperature bath for 30 minutes before reading the absorbance 
with the spectrophotometer. Adjust all samples to this same temperature 
before analyzing.
    10.2.4 With the spectrophotometer at 570 nm, use the blank standard 
to set the absorbance to zero. Determine the absorbance of the 
standards.
    10.2.5 Prepare a calibration curve by plotting [micro]g 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/50 ml versus absorbance on linear graph paper. Prepare the 
standard curve initially and thereafter whenever the SPADNS mixed 
reagent is newly made. Also, run a calibration standard with each set of 
samples and, if it differs from the calibration curve by more than 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent, prepare a new standard curve.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Loss Check. Note the liquid levels in Containers No. 1 
and No. 2, determine whether leakage occurred during transport, and note 
this finding on the analytical data sheet. If noticeable leakage has 
occurred, either void the sample or use methods, subject to the approval 
of the Administrator, to correct the final results.

[[Page 359]]

    11.2 Sample Preparation. Treat the contents of each sample container 
as described below:
    11.2.1 Container No. 1 (Probe, Filter, and Impinger Catches). Filter 
this container's contents, including the sampling filter, through 
Whatman No. 541 filter paper, or equivalent, into a 1500-ml beaker.
    11.2.1.1 If the filtrate volume exceeds 900 ml, make the filtrate 
basic (red to phenolphthalein) with NaOH, and evaporate to less than 900 
ml.
    11.2.1.2 Place the filtered material (including sampling filter) in 
a nickel crucible, add a few ml of water, and macerate the filters with 
a glass rod.
    11.2.1.2.1 Add 100 mg CaO to the crucible, and mix the contents 
thoroughly to form a slurry. Add two drops of phenolphthalein indicator. 
Place the crucible in a hood under infrared lamps or on a hot plate at 
low heat. Evaporate the water completely. During the evaporation of the 
water, keep the slurry basic (red to phenolphthalein) to avoid loss of 
F<SUP>-</SUP>. If the indicator turns colorless (acidic) during the 
evaporation, add CaO until the color turns red again.
    11.2.1.2.2 After evaporation of the water, place the crucible on a 
hot plate under a hood, and slowly increase the temperature until the 
Whatman No. 541 and sampling filters char. It may take several hours to 
char the filters completely.
    11.2.1.2.3 Place the crucible in a cold muffle furnace. Gradually 
(to prevent smoking) increase the temperature to 600 [deg]C (1100 
[deg]F), and maintain this temperature until the contents are reduced to 
an ash. Remove the crucible from the furnace, and allow to cool.
    11.2.1.2.4 Add approximately 4 g of crushed NaOH to the crucible, 
and mix. Return the crucible to the muffle furnace, and fuse the sample 
for 10 minutes at 600 [deg]C.
    11.2.1.2.5 Remove the sample from the furnace, and cool to ambient 
temperature. Using several rinsings of warm water, transfer the contents 
of the crucible to the beaker containing the filtrate. To ensure 
complete sample removal, rinse finally with two 20-ml portions of 25 
percent H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>, and carefully add to the beaker. 
Mix well, and transfer to a 1-liter volumetric flask. Dilute to volume 
with water, and mix thoroughly. Allow any undissolved solids to settle.
    11.2.2 Container No. 2 (Sample Blank). Treat in the same manner as 
described in Section 11.2.1 above.
    11.2.3 Adjustment of Acid/Water Ratio in Distillation Flask. Place 
400 ml of water in the distillation flask, and add 200 ml of 
concentrated H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>. Add some soft glass beads and 
several small pieces of broken glass tubing, and assemble the apparatus 
as shown in Figure 13A-2. Heat the flask until it reaches a temperature 
of 175 [deg]C (347 [deg]F) to adjust the acid/water ratio for subsequent 
distillations. Discard the distillate.

    Caution: Use a protective shield when carrying out this procedure. 
Observe standard precautions when mixing H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> 
with water. Slowly add the acid to the flask with constant swirling.

    11.3 Distillation.
    11.3.1 Cool the contents of the distillation flask to below 80 
[deg]C (180 [deg]F). Pipet an aliquot of sample containing less than 
10.0 mg F<SUP>-</SUP> directly into the distillation flask, and add 
water to make a total volume of 220 ml added to the distillation flask. 
(To estimate the appropriate aliquot size, select an aliquot of the 
solution, and treat as described in Section 11.4.1. This will be an 
approximation of the F<SUP>-</SUP> content because of possible 
interfering ions.)

    Note: If the sample contains chloride, add 5 mg of 
Ag<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> to the flask for every mg of chloride.

    11.3.2 Place a 250-ml volumetric flask at the condenser exit. Heat 
the flask as rapidly as possible with a Bunsen burner, and collect all 
the distillate up to 175 [deg]C (347 [deg]F). During heatup, play the 
burner flame up and down the side of the flask to prevent bumping. 
Conduct the distillation as rapidly as possible (15 minutes or less). 
Slow distillations have been found to produce low F<SUP>-</SUP> 
recoveries. Be careful not to exceed 175 [deg]C (347 [deg]F) to avoid 
causing H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> to distill over. If F<SUP>-</SUP> 
distillation in the mg range is to be followed by a distillation in the 
fractional mg range, add 220 ml of water and distill it over as in the 
acid adjustment step to remove residual F<SUP>-</SUP> from the 
distillation system.
    11.3.3 The acid in the distillation flask may be used until there is 
carry-over of interferences or poor F<SUP>-</SUP> recovery. Check for 
interference and for recovery efficiency every tenth distillation using 
a water blank and a standard solution. Change the acid whenever the 
F<SUP>-</SUP> recovery is less than 90 percent or the blank value 
exceeds 0.1 [micro]g/ml.
    11.4 Sample Analysis.
    11.4.1 Containers No. 1 and No. 2.
    11.4.1.1 After distilling suitable aliquots from Containers No. 1 
and No. 2 according to Section 11.3, dilute the distillate in the 
volumetric flasks to exactly 250 ml with water, and mix thoroughly. 
Pipet a suitable aliquot of each sample distillate (containing 10 to 40 
[micro]g F<SUP>-</SUP>/ml) into a beaker, and dilute to 50 ml with 
water. Use the same aliquot size for the blank. Add 10 ml of SPADNS 
mixed reagent (Section 7.3.13), and mix thoroughly.
    11.4.1.2 After mixing, place the sample in a constant-temperature 
bath containing the standard solutions for 30 minutes before reading the 
absorbance on the spectrophotometer.

    Note: After the sample and colorimetric reagent are mixed, the color 
formed is stable for approximately 2 hours. Also, a 3 [deg]C (5.4 
[deg]F) temperature difference between the sample and standard solutions 
produces an error

[[Page 360]]

of approximately 0.005 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/liter. To avoid this error, the 
absorbencies of the sample and standard solutions must be measured at 
the same temperature.

    11.4.1.3 Set the spectrophotometer to zero absorbance at 570 nm with 
the zero reference solution (Section 7.3.12), and check the 
spectrophotometer calibration with the standard solution (Section 
7.3.10). Determine the absorbance of the samples, and determine the 
concentration from the calibration curve. If the concentration does not 
fall within the range of the calibration curve, repeat the procedure 
using a different size aliquot.
    11.4.2 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). Weigh the spent silica gel (or 
silica gel plus impinger) to the nearest 0.5 g using a balance. This 
step may be conducted in the field.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation. Other forms of the equations may be used, provided that 
they yield equivalent results.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

A<INF>d</INF>=Aliquot of distillate taken for color development, ml.
A<INF>t</INF>=Aliquot of total sample added to still, ml.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream, portion by volume.
C<INF>s</INF>=Concentration of F<SUP>-</SUP> in stack gas, mg/dscm (gr/
dscf).
F<INF>c</INF>=F<SUP>-</SUP> concentration from the calibration curve, 
[micro]g.
F<INF>t</INF>=Total F<SUP>-</SUP> in sample, mg.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute average dry gas meter (DGM) temperature (see 
Figure 5-3 of Method 5), [deg]K ([deg]R).
T<INF>s</INF>=Absolute average stack gas temperature (see Figure 5-3 of 
Method 5), [deg]K ([deg]R).
V<INF>d</INF>=Volume of distillate as diluted, ml.
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by DGM at standard 
conditions, dscm (dscf).
V<INF>t</INF>=Total volume of F<SUP>-</SUP> sample, after final 
dilution, ml.
V<INF>w(std)</INF>=Volume of water vapor in the gas sample at standard 
conditions, scm (scf)

    12.2 Average DGM Temperature and Average Orifice Pressure Drop (see 
Figure 5-3 of Method 5).
    12.3 Dry Gas Volume. Calculate V<INF>m(std)</INF>, and adjust for 
leakage, if necessary, using Equation 5-1 of Method 5.
    12.4 Volume of Water Vapor and Moisture Content. Calculate 
V<INF>w(std)</INF> and B<INF>ws</INF> from the data obtained in this 
method. Use Equations 5-2 and 5-3 of Method 5.
    12.5 Total Fluoride in Sample. Calculate the amount of F<SUP>-</SUP> 
in the sample using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.247

Where:

K=10<SUP>-3</SUP> mg/[micro]g (metric units)
    =1.54 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> gr/[micro]g (English units)

    12.6 Fluoride Concentration in Stack Gas. Determine the 
F<SUP>-</SUP> concentration in the stack gas using the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.248

    12.7 Isokinetic Variation. Same as Method 5, Section 12.11.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    The following estimates are based on a collaborative test done at a 
primary aluminum smelter. In the test, six laboratories each sampled the 
stack simultaneously using two sampling trains for a total of 12 samples 
per sampling run. Fluoride concentrations encountered during the test 
ranged from 0.1 to 1.4 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/m\3\.
    13.1 Precision. The intra- and inter-laboratory standard deviations, 
which include sampling and analysis errors, were 0.044 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/
m\3\ with 60 degrees of freedom and 0.064 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/m\3\ with 
five degrees of freedom, respectively.
    13.2 Bias. The collaborative test did not find any bias in the 
analytical method.
    13.3 Range. The range of this method is 0 to 1.4 [micro]g 
F<INF>-</INF>/ml.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Compliance with ASTM D 3270-73T, 80, 91, or 95 (incorporated by 
reference--see Sec. 60.17) ``Analysis of Fluoride Content of the 
Atmosphere and Plant Tissues (Semiautomated Method) is an acceptable 
alternative for the requirements specified in Sections 11.2, 11.3, and 
11.4.1 when applied to suitable aliquots of Containers 1 and 2 samples.

                             17.0 References

    1. Bellack, Ervin. Simplified Fluoride Distillation Method. J. of 
the American Water Works Association. 50:5306. 1958.
    2. Mitchell, W.J., J.C. Suggs, and F.J. Bergman. Collaborative Study 
of EPA Method 13A and Method 13B. Publication No. EPA-300/4-77-050. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. December 
1977.
    3. Mitchell, W.J., and M.R. Midgett. Adequacy of Sampling Trains and 
Analytical

[[Page 361]]

Procedures Used for Fluoride. Atm. Environ. 10:865-872. 1976.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.249


[[Page 362]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.250

 Method 13B--Determination of Total Fluoride Emissions From Stationary 
                 Sources (Specific Ion Electrode Method)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, and Method 13A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total fluorides as Fluorine....       7782-41-4  Not determined.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of fluoride (F<SUP>-</SUP>) emissions from sources as specified in the 
regulations. It does not measure fluorocarbons, such as Freons.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                               2.0 Summary

    Gaseous and particulate F<SUP>-</SUP> are withdrawn isokinetically 
from the source and collected in water and on a filter. The total 
F<SUP>-</SUP> is then determined by the specific ion electrode method.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    Grease on sample-exposed surfaces may cause low F<SUP>-</SUP> 
results because of adsorption.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method does not purport to address 
all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the

[[Page 363]]

user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.2.1 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eye tissues 
and to skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. 
Reacts exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.2 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m\3\ for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in higher 
concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts 
violently with metals and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection and Sample Recovery. Same as Method 13A, 
Sections 6.1 and 6.2, respectively.
    6.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis. The following items are 
required for sample preparation and analysis:
    6.2.1 Distillation Apparatus, Bunsen Burner, Electric Muffle 
Furnace, Crucibles, Beakers, Volumetric Flasks, Erlenmeyer Flasks or 
Plastic Bottles, Constant Temperature Bath, and Balance. Same as Method 
13A, Sections 6.3.1 to 6.3.9, respectively.
    6.2.2 Fluoride Ion Activity Sensing Electrode.
    6.2.3 Reference Electrode. Single junction, sleeve type.
    6.2.4 Electrometer. A pH meter with millivolt-scale capable of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1-mv resolution, or a specific ion meter made 
specifically for specific ion electrode use.
    6.2.5 Magnetic Stirrer and Tetrafluoroethylene (TFE) Fluorocarbon-
Coated Stirring Bars.
    6.2.6 Beakers. Polyethylene, 100-ml.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents are to conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are available. 
Otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.1 Sample Collection and Sample Recovery. Same as Method 13A, 
Sections 7.1 and 7.2, respectively.
    7.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis. The following reagents and 
standards are required for sample analysis:
    7.2.1 Calcium Oxide (CaO). Certified grade containing 0.005 percent 
F<SUP>-</SUP> or less.
    7.2.2 Phenolphthalein Indicator. Dissolve 0.1 g phenolphthalein in a 
mixture of 50 ml of 90 percent ethanol and 50 ml water.
    7.2.3 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH), Pellets.
    7.2.4 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>), Concentrated.
    7.2.5 Filters. Whatman No. 541, or equivalent.
    7.2.6 Water. Same as Section 7.1.2 of Method 13A.
    7.2.7 Sodium Hydroxide, 5 M. Dissolve 20 g of NaOH in 100 ml of 
water.
    7.2.8 Sulfuric Acid, 25 Percent (v/v). Mix 1 part of concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> with 3 parts of water.
    7.2.9 Total Ionic Strength Adjustment Buffer (TISAB). Place 
approximately 500 ml of water in a 1-liter beaker. Add 57 ml of glacial 
acetic acid, 58 g of sodium chloride, and 4 g of cyclohexylene dinitrilo 
tetraacetic acid. Stir to dissolve. Place the beaker in a water bath and 
cool to 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F). Slowly add 5 M NaOH to the solution, 
measuring the pH continuously with a calibrated pH/reference electrode 
pair, until the pH is 5.3. Pour into a 1-liter volumetric flask, and 
dilute to volume with deionized, distilled water. Commercially prepared 
TISAB may be substituted for the above.
    7.2.10 Fluoride Standard Solution, 0.1 M. Oven dry approximately 10 
g of sodium fluoride (NaF) for a minimum of 2 hours at 110 [deg]C (230 
[deg]F), and store in a desiccator. Then add 4.2 g of NaF to a 1-liter 
volumetric flask, and add enough water to dissolve. Dilute to volume 
with water.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Same as Method 13A, Section 8.0.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.0, 10.1.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate and
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.2..........................  Fluoride           Evaluate analytical
                                 electrode.         technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
11.1..........................  Interference/      Minimize negative
                                 recovery           effects of used
                                 efficiency-check   acid.
                                 during
                                 distillation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 364]]

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Sampling Equipment. Same as Method 13A, Section 10.1.
    10.2 Fluoride Electrode. Prepare fluoride standardizing solutions by 
serial dilution of the 0.1 M fluoride standard solution. Pipet 10 ml of 
0.1 M fluoride standard solution into a 100-ml volumetric flask, and 
make up to the mark with water for a 10<SUP>-2</SUP> M standard 
solution. Use 10 ml of 10<SUP>-2</SUP> M solution to make a 
10<SUP>-3</SUP> M solution in the same manner. Repeat the dilution 
procedure, and make 10<SUP>-4</SUP> and 10<SUP>-5</SUP> M solutions.
    10.2.1 Pipet 50 ml of each standard into a separate beaker. Add 50 
ml of TISAB to each beaker. Place the electrode in the most dilute 
standard solution. When a steady millivolt reading is obtained, plot the 
value on the linear axis of semilog graph paper versus concentration on 
the log axis. Plot the nominal value for concentration of the standard 
on the log axis, (e.g., when 50 ml of 10<SUP>-2</SUP> M standard is 
diluted with 50 ml of TISAB, the concentration is still designated 
``10<SUP>-2</SUP> M'').
    10.2.2 Between measurements, soak the fluoride sensing electrode in 
water for 30 seconds, and then remove and blot dry. Analyze the 
standards going from dilute to concentrated standards. A straight-line 
calibration curve will be obtained, with nominal concentrations of 
10<SUP>-4</SUP>, 10<SUP>-3</SUP>, 10<SUP>-2</SUP>, 10<SUP>-1</SUP> 
fluoride molarity on the log axis plotted versus electrode potential (in 
mv) on the linear scale. Some electrodes may be slightly nonlinear 
between 10<SUP>-5</SUP> and 10<SUP>-4</SUP> M. If this occurs, use 
additional standards between these two concentrations.
    10.2.3 Calibrate the fluoride electrode daily, and check it hourly. 
Prepare fresh fluoride standardizing solutions daily (10<SUP>-2</SUP> M 
or less). Store fluoride standardizing solutions in polyethylene or 
polypropylene containers.

    Note: Certain specific ion meters have been designed specifically 
for fluoride electrode use and give a direct readout of fluoride ion 
concentration. These meters may be used in lieu of calibration curves 
for fluoride measurements over a narrow concentration ranges. Calibrate 
the meter according to the manufacturer's instructions.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Loss Check, Sample Preparation, and Distillation. Same 
as Method 13A, Sections 11.1 through 11.3, except that the Note 
following Section 11.3.1 is not applicable.
    11.2 Analysis.
    11.2.1 Containers No. 1 and No. 2. Distill suitable aliquots from 
Containers No. 1 and No. 2. Dilute the distillate in the volumetric 
flasks to exactly 250 ml with water, and mix thoroughly. Pipet a 25-ml 
aliquot from each of the distillate into separate beakers. Add an equal 
volume of TISAB, and mix. The sample should be at the same temperature 
as the calibration standards when measurements are made. If ambient 
laboratory temperature fluctuates more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
[deg]C from the temperature at which the calibration standards were 
measured, condition samples and standards in a constant-temperature bath 
before measurement. Stir the sample with a magnetic stirrer during 
measurement to minimize electrode response time. If the stirrer 
generates enough heat to change solution temperature, place a piece of 
temperature insulating material, such as cork, between the stirrer and 
the beaker. Hold dilute samples (below 10<SUP>-4</SUP> M fluoride ion 
content) in polyethylene beakers during measurement.
    11.2.2 Insert the fluoride and reference electrodes into the 
solution. When a steady millivolt reading is obtained, record it. This 
may take several minutes. Determine concentration from the calibration 
curve. Between electrode measurements, rinse the electrode with water.
    11.2.3 Container No. 3 (Silica Gel). Same as in Method 13A, Section 
11.4.2.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculation.
    12.1 Nomenclature. Same as Method 13A, Section 12.1, with the 
addition of the following:

M=F<SUP>-</SUP> concentration from calibration curve, molarity.

    12.2 Average DGM Temperature and Average Orifice Pressure Drop, Dry 
Gas Volume, Volume of Water Vapor and Moisture Content, Fluoride 
Concentration in Stack Gas, and Isokinetic Variation. Same as Method 
13A, Sections 12.2 to 12.4, 12.6, and 12.7, respectively.
    12.3 Total Fluoride in Sample. Calculate the amount of F<SUP>-</SUP> 
in the sample using Equation 13B-1:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.251

Where:

K=19 [(mg[middot]l)/(mole[middot]ml)] (metric units)
    =0.292 [(gr[middot]l)/(mole[middot]ml)] (English units)

                         13.0 Method Performance

    The following estimates are based on a collaborative test done at a 
primary aluminum smelter. In the test, six laboratories each sampled the 
stack simultaneously using two sampling trains for a total of 12 samples 
per

[[Page 365]]

sampling run. Fluoride concentrations encountered during the test ranged 
from 0.1 to 1.4 mg F<SUP>-</SUP>/m\3\.
    13.1 Precision. The intra-laboratory and inter-laboratory standard 
deviations, which include sampling and analysis errors, are 0.037 mg 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/m\3\ with 60 degrees of freedom and 0.056 mg 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/m\3\ with five degrees of freedom, respectively.
    13.2 Bias. The collaborative test did not find any bias in the 
analytical method.
    13.3 Range. The range of this method is 0.02 to 2,000 [micro]g 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/ml; however, measurements of less than 0.1 [micro]g 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/ml require extra care.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Compliance with ASTM D 3270-73T, 91, 95 ``Analysis for Fluoride 
Content of the Atmosphere and Plant Tissues (Semiautomated Method)'' is 
an acceptable alternative for the distillation and analysis requirements 
specified in Sections 11.1 and 11.2 when applied to suitable aliquots of 
Containers 1 and 2 samples.

                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 13A, Section 16.0, References 1 and 2, with the 
following addition:

    1. MacLeod, Kathryn E., and Howard L. Crist. Comparison of the 
SPADNS-Zirconium Lake and Specific Ion Electrode Methods of Fluoride 
Determination in Stack Emission Samples. Analytical Chemistry. 45:1272-
1273. 1973.

    18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

    Method 14--Determination of Fluoride Emissions From Potroom Roof 
                  Monitors for Primary Aluminum Plants

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5, Method 13A, and Method 13B.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total fluorides as Fluorine.......       7782-41-4  Not determined.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of fluoride emissions from roof monitors at primary aluminum reduction 
plant potroom groups.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Gaseous and particulate fluoride roof monitor emissions are 
drawn into a permanent sampling manifold through several large nozzles. 
The sample is transported from the sampling manifold to ground level 
through a duct. The fluoride content of the gas in the duct is 
determined using either Method 13A or Method 13B. Effluent velocity and 
volumetric flow rate are determined using anemometers located in the 
roof monitor.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Potroom means a building unit which houses a group of electrolytic 
cells in which aluminum is produced.
    Potroom group means an uncontrolled potroom, a potroom which is 
controlled individually, or a group of potrooms or potroom segments 
ducted to a common control system.
    Roof monitor means that portion of the roof of a potroom where gases 
not captured at the cell exit from the potroom.

                            4.0 Interferences

    Same as Section 4.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B, with the 
addition of the following:
    4.1 Magnetic Field Effects. Anemometer readings can be affected by 
potroom magnetic field effects. Section 6.1 provides for minimization of 
this interference through proper shielding or encasement of anemometer 
components.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. Same as Section 5.2 of either Method 13A or 
Method 13B.

[[Page 366]]

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B, as 
applicable, with the addition of the following:
    6.1 Velocity Measurement Apparatus.
    6.1.1 Anemometer Specifications. Propeller anemometers, or 
equivalent. Each anemometer shall meet the following specifications:
    6.1.1.1 Its propeller shall be made of polystyrene, or similar 
material of uniform density. To ensure uniformity of performance among 
propellers, it is desirable that all propellers be made from the same 
mold.
    6.1.1.2 The propeller shall be properly balanced, to optimize 
performance.
    6.1.1.3 When the anemometer is mounted horizontally, its threshold 
velocity shall not exceed 15 m/min (50 ft/min).
    6.1.1.4 The measurement range of the anemometer shall extend to at 
least 600 m/min (2,000 ft/min).
    6.1.1.5 The anemometer shall be able to withstand prolonged exposure 
to dusty and corrosive environments; one way of achieving this is to 
purge the bearings of the anemometer continuously with filtered air 
during operation.
    6.1.1.6 All anemometer components shall be properly shielded or 
encased, such that the performance of the anemometer is uninfluenced by 
potroom magnetic field effects.
    6.1.1.7 A known relationship shall exist between the electrical 
output signal from the anemometer generator and the propeller shaft rpm 
(see Section 10.2.1). Anemometers having other types of output signals 
(e.g., optical) may be used, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator. If other types of anemometers are used, there must be a 
known relationship between output signal and shaft rpm (see Section 
10.2.2).
    6.1.1.8 Each anemometer shall be equipped with a suitable readout 
system (see Section 6.1.3).
    6.1.2 Anemometer Installation Requirements.
    6.1.2.1 Single, Isolated Potroom. If the affected facility consists 
of a single, isolated potroom (or potroom segment), install at least one 
anemometer for every 85 m (280 ft) of roof monitor length. If the length 
of the roof monitor divided by 85 m (280 ft) is not a whole number, 
round the fraction to the nearest whole number to determine the number 
of anemometers needed. For monitors that are less than 130 m (430 ft) in 
length, use at least two anemometers. Divide the monitor cross-section 
into as many equal areas as anemometers, and locate an anemometer at the 
centroid of each equal area. See exception in Section 6.1.2.3.
    6.1.2.2 Two or More Potrooms. If the affected facility consists of 
two or more potrooms (or potroom segments) ducted to a common control 
device, install anemometers in each potroom (or segment) that contains a 
sampling manifold. Install at least one anemometer for every 85 m (280 
ft) of roof monitor length of the potroom (or segment). If the potroom 
(or segment) length divided by 85 m (280 ft) is not a whole number, 
round the fraction to the nearest whole number to determine the number 
of anemometers needed. If the potroom (or segment) length is less than 
130 m (430 ft), use at least two anemometers. Divide the potroom (or 
segment) monitor cross-section into as many equal areas as anemometers, 
and locate an anemometer at the centroid of each equal area. See 
exception in Section 6.1.2.3.
    6.1.2.3 Placement of Anemometer at the Center of Manifold. At least 
one anemometer shall be installed in the immediate vicinity (i.e., 
within 10 m (33 ft)) of the center of the manifold (see Section 6.2.1). 
For its placement in relation to the width of the monitor, there are two 
alternatives. The first is to make a velocity traverse of the width of 
the roof monitor where an anemometer is to be placed and install the 
anemometer at a point of average velocity along this traverse. The 
traverse may be made with any suitable low velocity measuring device, 
and shall be made during normal process operating conditions. The second 
alternative is to install the anemometer half-way across the width of 
the roof monitor. In this latter case, the velocity traverse need not be 
conducted.
    6.1.3 Recorders. Recorders that are equipped with suitable auxiliary 
equipment (e.g., transducers) for converting the output signal from each 
anemometer to a continuous recording of air flow velocity or to an 
integrated measure of volumetric flowrate shall be used. A suitable 
recorder is one that allows the output signal from the propeller 
anemometer to be read to within 1 percent when the velocity is between 
100 and 120 m/min (330 and 390 ft/min). For the purpose of recording 
velocity, ``continuous'' shall mean one readout per 15-minute or shorter 
time interval. A constant amount of time shall elapse between readings. 
Volumetric flow rate may be determined by an electrical count of 
anemometer revolutions. The recorders or counters shall permit 
identification of the velocities or flowrates measured by each 
individual anemometer.
    6.1.4 Pitot Tube. Standard-type pitot tube, as described in Section 
6.7 of Method 2, and having a coefficient of 0.99 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01.
    6.1.5 Pitot Tube (Optional). Isolated, Type S pitot, as described in 
Section 6.1 of Method 2, and having a known coefficient, determined as 
outlined in Section 4.1 of Method 2.
    6.1.6 Differential Pressure Gauge. Inclined manometer, or 
equivalent, as described in Section 6.1.2 of Method 2.
    6.2 Roof Monitor Air Sampling System.

[[Page 367]]

    6.2.1 Manifold System and Ductwork. A minimum of one manifold system 
shall be installed for each potroom group. The manifold system and 
ductwork shall meet the following specifications:
    6.2.1.1 The manifold system and connecting duct shall be permanently 
installed to draw an air sample from the roof monitor to ground level. A 
typical installation of a duct for drawing a sample from a roof monitor 
to ground level is shown in Figure 14-1 in Section 17.0. A plan of a 
manifold system that is located in a roof monitor is shown in Figure 14-
2. These drawings represent a typical installation for a generalized 
roof monitor. The dimensions on these figures may be altered slightly to 
make the manifold system fit into a particular roof monitor, but the 
general configuration shall be followed.
    6.2.1.2 There shall be eight nozzles, each having a diameter of 0.40 
to 0.50 m.
    6.2.1.3 The length of the manifold system from the first nozzle to 
the eighth shall be 35 m (115 ft) or eight percent of the length of the 
potroom (or potroom segment) roof monitor, whichever is greater. 
Deviation from this requirement is subject to the approval of the 
Administrator.
    6.2.1.4 The duct leading from the roof monitor manifold system shall 
be round with a diameter of 0.30 to 0.40 m (1.0 to 1.3 ft). All 
connections in the ductwork shall be leak-free.
    6.2.1.5 As shown in Figure 14-2, each of the sample legs of the 
manifold shall have a device, such as a blast gate or valve, to enable 
adjustment of the flow into each sample nozzle.
    6.2.1.6 The manifold system shall be located in the immediate 
vicinity of one of the propeller anemometers (see Section 8.1.1.4) and 
as close as possible to the midsection of the potroom (or potroom 
segment). Avoid locating the manifold system near the end of a potroom 
or in a section where the aluminum reduction pot arrangement is not 
typical of the rest of the potroom (or potroom segment). The sample 
nozzles shall be centered in the throat of the roof monitor (see Figure 
14-1).
    6.2.1.7 All sample-exposed surfaces within the nozzles, manifold, 
and sample duct shall be constructed with 316 stainless steel. 
Alternatively, aluminum may be used if a new ductwork is conditioned 
with fluoride-laden roof monitor air for a period of six weeks before 
initial testing. Other materials of construction may be used if it is 
demonstrated through comparative testing, to the satisfaction of the 
Administrator, that there is no loss of fluorides in the system.
    6.2.1.8 Two sample ports shall be located in a vertical section of 
the duct between the roof monitor and the exhaust fan (see Section 
6.2.2). The sample ports shall be at least 10 duct diameters downstream 
and three diameters upstream from any flow disturbance such as a bend or 
contraction. The two sample ports shall be situated 90[deg] apart. One 
of the sample ports shall be situated so that the duct can be traversed 
in the plane of the nearest upstream duct bend.
    6.2.2 Exhaust Fan. An industrial fan or blower shall be attached to 
the sample duct at ground level (see Figure 14-1). This exhaust fan 
shall have a capacity such that a large enough volume of air can be 
pulled through the ductwork to maintain an isokinetic sampling rate in 
all the sample nozzles for all flow rates normally encountered in the 
roof monitor. The exhaust fan volumetric flow rate shall be adjustable 
so that the roof monitor gases can be drawn isokinetically into the 
sample nozzles. This control of flow may be achieved by a damper on the 
inlet to the exhauster or by any other workable method.
    6.3 Temperature Measurement Apparatus. To monitor and record the 
temperature of the roof monitor effluent gas, and consisting of the 
following:
    6.3.1 Temperature Sensor. A temperature sensor shall be installed in 
the roof monitor near the sample duct. The temperature sensor shall 
conform to the specifications outlined in Method 2, Section 6.3.
    6.3.2 Signal Transducer. Transducer, to change the temperature 
sensor voltage output to a temperature readout.
    6.3.3 Thermocouple Wire. To reach from roof monitor to signal 
transducer and recorder.
    6.3.4 Recorder. Suitable recorder to monitor the output from the 
thermocouple signal transducer.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B, as 
applicable.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Roof Monitor Velocity Determination.
    8.1.1 Velocity Estimate(s) for Setting Isokinetic Flow. To assist in 
setting isokinetic flow in the manifold sample nozzles, the anticipated 
average velocity in the section of the roof monitor containing the 
sampling manifold shall be estimated before each test run. Any 
convenient means to make this estimate may be used (e.g., the velocity 
indicated by the anemometer in the section of the roof monitor 
containing the sampling manifold may be continuously monitored during 
the 24-hour period before the test run). If there is question as to 
whether a single estimate of average velocity is adequate for an entire 
test run (e.g., if velocities are anticipated to be significantly 
different during different potroom operations), the test run may be 
divided into two

[[Page 368]]

or more ``sub-runs,'' and a different estimated average velocity may be 
used for each sub-run (see Section 8.4.2).
    8.1.2 Velocity Determination During a Test Run. During the actual 
test run, record the velocity or volumetric flowrate readings of each 
propeller anemometer in the roof monitor. Readings shall be taken from 
each anemometer at equal time intervals of 15 minutes or less (or 
continuously).
    8.2 Temperature Recording. Record the temperature of the roof 
monitor effluent gases at least once every 2 hours during the test run.
    8.3 Pretest Ductwork Conditioning. During the 24-hour period 
immediately preceding the test run, turn on the exhaust fan, and draw 
roof monitor air through the manifold system and ductwork. Adjust the 
fan to draw a volumetric flow through the duct such that the velocity of 
gas entering the manifold nozzles approximates the average velocity of 
the air exiting the roof monitor in the vicinity of the sampling 
manifold.
    8.4 Manifold Isokinetic Sample Rate Adjustment(s).
    8.4.1 Initial Adjustment. Before the test run (or first sub-run, if 
applicable; see Sections 8.1.1 and 8.4.2), adjust the fan such that air 
enters the manifold sample nozzles at a velocity equal to the 
appropriate estimated average velocity determined under Section 8.1.1. 
Use Equation 14-1 (Section 12.2.2) to determine the correct stream 
velocity needed in the duct at the sampling location, in order for 
sample gas to be drawn isokinetically into the manifold nozzles. Next, 
verify that the correct stream velocity has been achieved, by performing 
a pitot tube traverse of the sample duct (using either a standard or 
Type S pitot tube); use the procedure outlined in Method 2.
    8.4.2 Adjustments During Run. If the test run is divided into two or 
more ``sub-runs'' (see Section 8.1.1), additional isokinetic rate 
adjustment(s) may become necessary during the run. Any such adjustment 
shall be made just before the start of a sub-run, using the procedure 
outlined in Section 8.4.1 above.

    Note: Isokinetic rate adjustments are not permissible during a sub-
run.

    8.5 Pretest Preparation, Preliminary Determinations, Preparation of 
Sampling Train, Leak-Check Procedures, Sampling Train Operation, and 
Sample Recovery. Same as Method 13A, Sections 8.1 through 8.6, with the 
exception of the following:
    8.5.1 A single train shall be used for the entire sampling run. 
Alternatively, if two or more sub-runs are performed, a separate train 
may be used for each sub-run; note, however, that if this option is 
chosen, the area of the sampling nozzle shall be the same (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent) for each train. If the test run is divided 
into sub-runs, a complete traverse of the duct shall be performed during 
each sub-run.
    8.5.2 Time Per Run. Each test run shall last 8 hours or more; if 
more than one run is to be performed, all runs shall be of approximately 
the same (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) length. If questions exist 
as to the representativeness of an 8-hour test, a longer period should 
be selected. Conduct each run during a period when all normal operations 
are performed underneath the sampling manifold. For most recently-
constructed plants, 24 hours are required for all potroom operations and 
events to occur in the area beneath the sampling manifold. During the 
test period, all pots in the potroom group shall be operated such that 
emissions are representative of normal operating conditions in the 
potroom group.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality Control
            Section                  Measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.0, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of gas
                                 check and          flow rate in duct
                                 calibration.       and of sample
                                                    volume.
10.3, 10.4....................  Initial and        Ensure accurate and
                                 periodic           precise measurement
                                 performance        of roof monitor
                                 checks of roof     effluent gas
                                 monitor effluent   temperature and flow
                                 gas                rate.
                                 characterization
                                 apparatus.
11.0..........................  Interference/      Minimize negative
                                 recovery           effects of used
                                 efficiency check   acid.
                                 during
                                 distillation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Section 10.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B, as 
applicable, with the addition of the following:
    10.1 Manifold Intake Nozzles. The manifold intake nozzles shall be 
calibrated when the manifold system is installed or, alternatively, the 
manifold may be preassembled and the nozzles calibrated on the ground 
prior to installation. The following procedures shall be observed:
    10.1.1 Adjust the exhaust fan to draw a volumetric flow rate (refer 
to Equation 14-1) such that the entrance velocity into each manifold 
nozzle approximates the average effluent velocity in the roof monitor.
    10.1.2 Measure the velocity of the air entering each nozzle by 
inserting a standard pitot tube into a 2.5 cm or less diameter hole

[[Page 369]]

(see Figure 14-2) located in the manifold between each blast gate (or 
valve) and nozzle. Note that a standard pitot tube is used, rather than 
a type S, to eliminate possible velocity measurement errors due to 
cross-section blockage in the small (0.13 m diameter) manifold leg 
ducts. The pitot tube tip shall be positioned at the center of each 
manifold leg duct. Take care to ensure that there is no leakage around 
the pitot tube, which could affect the indicated velocity in the 
manifold leg.
    10.1.3 If the velocity of air being drawn into each nozzle is not 
the same, open or close each blast gate (or valve) until the velocity in 
each nozzle is the same. Fasten each blast gate (or valve) so that it 
will remain in position, and close the pitot port holes.
    10.2 Initial Calibration of Propeller Anemometers.
    10.2.1 Anemometers that meet the specifications outlined in Section 
6.1.1 need not be calibrated, provided that a reference performance 
curve relating anemometer signal output to air velocity (covering the 
velocity range of interest) is available from the manufacturer. If a 
reference performance curve is not available from the manufacturer, such 
a curve shall be generated.
    For the purpose of this method, a ``reference'' performance curve is 
defined as one that has been derived from primary standard calibration 
data, with the anemometer mounted vertically. ``Primary standard'' data 
are obtainable by: (a) direct calibration of one or more of the 
anemometers by the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST); (b) NIST-traceable calibration; or (c) Calibration by direct 
measurement of fundamental parameters such as length and time (e.g., by 
moving the anemometers through still air at measured rates of speed, and 
recording the output signals).
    10.2.2 Anemometers having output signals other than electrical 
(e.g., optical) may be used, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator. If other types of anemometers are used, a reference 
performance curve shall be generated, using procedures subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.
    10.2.3 The reference performance curve shall be derived from at 
least the following three points: 60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15, 900 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100, and 1800 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 rpm.
    10.3 Initial Performance Checks. Conduct these checks within 60 days 
before the first performance test.
    10.3.1 Anemometers. A performance-check shall be conducted as 
outlined in Sections 10.3.1.1 through 10.3.1.3. Alternatively, any other 
suitable method that takes into account the signal output, propeller 
condition, and threshold velocity of the anemometer may be used, subject 
to the approval of the Administrator.
    10.3.1.1 Check the signal output of the anemometer by using an 
accurate rpm generator (see Figure 14-3) or synchronous motors to spin 
the propeller shaft at each of the three rpm settings described in 
Section 10.2.3, and measuring the output signal at each setting. If, at 
each setting, the output signal is within 5 percent of the 
manufacturer's value, the anemometer can be used. If the anemometer 
performance is unsatisfactory, the anemometer shall either be replaced 
or repaired.
    10.3.1.2 Check the propeller condition, by visually inspecting the 
propeller, making note of any significant damage or warpage; damaged or 
deformed propellers shall be replaced.
    10.3.1.3 Check the anemometer threshold velocity as follows: With 
the anemometer mounted as shown in Figure 14-4(A), fasten a known weight 
(a straight-pin will suffice) to the anemometer propeller at a fixed 
distance from the center of the propeller shaft. This will generate a 
known torque; for example, a 0.1-g weight, placed 10 cm from the center 
of the shaft, will generate a torque of 1.0 g-cm. If the known torque 
causes the propeller to rotate downward, approximately 90[deg] [see 
Figure 14-4(B)], then the known torque is greater than or equal to the 
starting torque; if the propeller fails to rotate approximately 90[deg], 
the known torque is less than the starting torque. By trying different 
combinations of weight and distance, the starting torque of a particular 
anemometer can be satisfactorily estimated. Once an estimate of the 
starting torque has been obtained, the threshold velocity of the 
anemometer (for horizontal mounting) can be estimated from a graph such 
as Figure 14-5 (obtained from the manufacturer). If the horizontal 
threshold velocity is acceptable [<15 m/min (50 ft/min), when this 
technique is used], the anemometer can be used. If the threshold 
velocity of an anemometer is found to be unacceptably high, the 
anemometer shall either be replaced or repaired.
    10.3.2 Recorders and Counters. Check the calibration of each 
recorder and counter (see Section 6.1.2) at a minimum of three points, 
approximately spanning the expected range of velocities. Use the 
calibration procedures recommended by the manufacturer, or other 
suitable procedures (subject to the approval of the Administrator). If a 
recorder or counter is found to be out of calibration by an average 
amount greater than 5 percent for the three calibration points, replace 
or repair the system; otherwise, the system can be used.
    10.3.3 Temperature Measurement Apparatus. Check the calibration of 
the Temperature Measurement Apparatus, using the procedures outlined in 
Section 10.3 of Method 2, at temperatures of 0, 100, and 150 [deg]C (32, 
212, and 302 [deg]F). If the calibration is off by more than 5 [deg]C (9 
[deg]F) at any of the temperatures,

[[Page 370]]

repair or replace the apparatus; otherwise, the apparatus can be used.
    10.4 Periodic Performance Checks. Repeat the procedures outlined in 
Section 10.3 no more than 12 months after the initial performance 
checks. If the above systems pass the performance checks (i.e., if no 
repair or replacement of any component is necessary), continue with the 
performance checks on a 12-month interval basis. However, if any of the 
above systems fail the performance checks, repair or replace the 
system(s) that failed, and conduct the periodic performance checks on a 
3-month interval basis, until sufficient information (to the 
satisfaction of the Administrator) is obtained to establish a modified 
performance check schedule and calculation procedure.

    Note: If any of the above systems fails the 12-month periodic 
performance checks, the data for the past year need not be recalculated.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    Same as Section 11.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Section 12.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B, as 
applicable, with the following additions and exceptions:
    12.1 Nomenclature.

A=Roof monitor open area, m\2\ (ft\2\).
B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor in the gas stream, portion by volume.
C<INF>s</INF>=Average fluoride concentration in roof monitor air, mg F/
dscm (gr/dscf).
D<INF>d</INF>=Diameter of duct at sampling location, m (ft).
D<INF>n</INF>=Diameter of a roof monitor manifold nozzle, m (ft).
F=Emission Rate multiplication factor, dimensionless.
F<INF>t</INF>=Total fluoride mass collected during a particular sub-run 
(from Equation 13A-1 of Method 13A or Equation 13B-1 of Method 13B), mg 
F<SUP>-</SUP> (gr F<SUP>-</SUP>).
M<INF>d</INF>=Mole fraction of dry gas, dimensionless.
P<INF>rm</INF>=Pressure in the roof monitor; equal to barometric 
pressure for this application.
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Average volumetric flow from roof monitor at standard 
conditions on a dry basis, m\3\/min.
T<INF>rm</INF>=Average roof monitor temperature (from Section 8.2), 
[deg]C ( [deg]F).
V<INF>d</INF>=Desired velocity in duct at sampling location, m/sec.
V<INF>m</INF>=Anticipated average velocity (from Section 8.1.1) in 
sampling duct, m/sec.
V<INF>mt</INF>=Arithmetic mean roof monitor effluent gas velocity, m/
sec.
V<INF>s</INF>=Actual average velocity in the sampling duct (from 
Equation 2-9 of Method 2 and data obtained from Method 13A or 13B), m/
sec.

    12.2 Isokinetic Sampling Check.
    12.2.1 Calculate the arithmetic mean of the roof monitor effluent 
gas velocity readings (v<INF>m</INF>) as measured by the anemometer in 
the section of the roof monitor containing the sampling manifold. If two 
or more sub-runs have been performed, the average velocity for each sub-
run may be calculated separately.
    12.2.2 Calculate the expected average velocity (v<INF>d</INF>) in 
the duct, corresponding to each value of v<INF>m</INF> obtained under 
Section 12.2.1, using Equation 14-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.252

Where:

8=number of required manifold nozzles.
60=sec/min.

    12.2.3 Calculate the actual average velocity (v<INF>s</INF>) in the 
sampling duct for each run or sub-run according to Equation 2-9 of 
Method 2, using data obtained during sampling (Section 8.0 of Method 
13A).
    12.2.4 Express each vs value from Section 12.2.3 as a percentage of 
the corresponding v<INF>d</INF> value from Section 12.2.2.
    12.2.4.1 If vs is less than or equal to 120 percent of 
v<INF>d</INF>, the results are acceptable (note that in cases where the 
above calculations have been performed for each sub-run, the results are 
acceptable if the average percentage for all sub-runs is less than or 
equal to 120 percent).
    12.2.4.2 If v<INF>s</INF> is more than 120 percent of v<INF>d</INF>, 
multiply the reported emission rate by the following factor:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.253

    12.3 Average Velocity of Roof Monitor Effluent Gas. Calculate the 
arithmetic mean roof monitor effluent gas velocity (v<INF>mt</INF>) 
using all the velocity or volumetric flow readings from Section 8.1.2.
    12.4 Average Temperature of Roof Monitor Effluent Gas. Calculate the 
arithmetic mean roof monitor effluent gas temperature (T<INF>m</INF>) 
using all the temperature readings recorded in Section 8.2.
    12.5 Concentration of Fluorides in Roof Monitor Effluent Gas.
    12.5.1 If a single sampling train was used throughout the run, 
calculate the average fluoride concentration for the roof monitor using 
Equation 13A-2 of Method 13A.
    12.5.2 If two or more sampling trains were used (i.e., one per sub-
run), calculate the average fluoride concentration for the run using 
Equation 14-3:

[[Page 371]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.254

Where:

n=Total number of sub-runs.
    12.6 Mole Fraction of Dry Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.255
    
    12.7 Average Volumetric Flow Rate of Roof Monitor Effluent Gas. 
Calculate the arithmetic mean volumetric flow rate of the roof monitor 
effluent gases using Equation 14-5.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.256

Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3858 K/mm Hg for metric units,
    =17.64 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Section 16.0 of either Method 13A or Method 13B, as 
applicable, with the addition of the following:

    1. Shigehara, R.T. A Guideline for Evaluating Compliance Test 
Results (Isokinetic Sampling Rate Criterion). U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Emission Measurement Branch, Research Triangle Park, 
NC. August 1977.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 372]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.257


[[Page 373]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.258


[[Page 374]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.259


[[Page 375]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.260


[[Page 376]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.261

  Method 14A--Determination of Total Fluoride Emissions from Selected 
            Sources at Primary Aluminum Production Facilities

    Note: This method does not include all the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 5, Methods 13A and 13B, and 
Method 14 of this appendix.

1.0 Scope and Application
    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 377]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Analyte                    CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total fluorides.................  None assigned.....  Not determined.
Includes hydrogen fluoride......  007664-39-3.......  Not determined.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of total fluorides (TF) emissions from sources specified in the 
applicable regulation. This method was developed by consensus with the 
Aluminum Association and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
2.0 Summary of Method
    2.1 Total fluorides, in the form of solid and gaseous fluorides, are 
withdrawn from the ascending air stream inside of an aluminum reduction 
potroom and, prior to exiting the potroom roof monitor, into a specific 
cassette arrangement. The cassettes are connected by tubing to 
flowmeters and a manifold system that allows for the equal distribution 
of volume pulled through each cassette, and finally to a dry gas meter. 
The cassettes have a specific internal arrangement of one unaltered 
cellulose filter and support pad in the first section of the cassette 
for solid fluoride retention and two cellulose filters with support pads 
that are impregnated with sodium formate for the chemical absorption of 
gaseous fluorides in the following two sections of the cassette. A 
minimum of eight cassettes shall be used for a potline and shall be 
strategically located at equal intervals across the potroom roof so as 
to encompass a minimum of 8 percent of the total length of the potroom. 
A greater number of cassettes may be used should the regulated facility 
choose to do so. The mass flow rate of pollutants is determined with 
anemometers and temperature sensing devices located immediately below 
the opening of the roof monitor and spaced evenly within the cassette 
group.
3.0 Definitions
    3.1 Cassette. A segmented, styrene acrylonitrile cassette 
configuration with three separate segments and a base, for the purpose 
of this method, to capture and retain fluoride from potroom gases.
    3.2 Cassette arrangement. The cassettes, tubing, manifold system, 
flowmeters, dry gas meter, and any other related equipment associated 
with the actual extraction of the sample gas stream.
    3.3 Cassette group. That section of the potroom roof monitor where a 
distinct group of cassettes is located.
    3.4 Potline. A single, discrete group of electrolytic reduction 
cells electrically connected in series, in which alumina is reduced to 
form aluminum.
    3.5 Potroom. A building unit that houses a group of electrolytic 
reduction cells in which aluminum is produced.
    3.6 Potroom group. An uncontrolled potroom, a potroom that is 
controlled individually, or a group of potrooms or potroom segments 
ducted to a common primary control system.
    3.7 Primary control system. The equipment used to capture the gases 
and particulate matter generated during the reduction process and the 
emission control device(s) used to remove pollutants prior to discharge 
of the cleaned gas to the atmosphere.
    3.8 Roof monitor. That portion of the roof of a potroom building 
where gases, not captured at the cell, exit from the potroom.
    3.9 Total fluorides (TF). Elemental fluorine and all fluoride 
compounds as measured by Methods 13A or 13B of this appendix or by an 
approved alternative method.
4.0 Interferences and Known Limitations
    4.1 There are two principal categories of limitations that must be 
addressed when using this method. The first category is sampling bias 
and the second is analytical bias. Biases in sampling can occur when 
there is an insufficient number of cassettes located along the roof 
monitor of a potroom or if the distribution of those cassettes is 
spatially unequal. Known sampling biases also can occur when there are 
leaks within the cassette arrangement and if anemometers and temperature 
devices are not providing accurate data. Applicable instruments must be 
properly calibrated to avoid sampling bias. Analytical biases can occur 
when instrumentation is not calibrated or fails calibration and the 
instrument is used out of proper calibration. Additionally, biases can 
occur in the laboratory if fusion crucibles retain residual fluorides 
over lengthy periods of use. This condition could result in falsely 
elevated fluoride values. Maintaining a clean work environment in the 
laboratory is crucial to producing accurate values.
    4.2 Biases during sampling can be avoided by properly spacing the 
appropriate number of cassettes along the roof monitor, conducting leak 
checks of the cassette arrangement, calibrating the dry gas meter every 
30 days, verifying the accuracy of individual flowmeters (so that there 
is no more than 5 percent difference in the volume pulled between any 
two flowmeters), and calibrating or replacing anemometers and 
temperature sensing devices as necessary to maintain true data 
generation.
    4.3 Analytical biases can be avoided by calibrating instruments 
according to the manufacturer's specifications prior to conducting any 
analyses, by performing internal and external audits of up to 10 percent 
of all samples analyzed, and by rotating individual crucibles as the 
``blank'' crucible to detect any potential residual fluoride carry-over 
to samples. Should any contamination be discovered in the blank 
crucible, the crucible shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove any 
detected residual fluorides and a ``blank'' analysis conducted again to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the cleaning. The crucible

[[Page 378]]

shall remain in service as long as no detectable residual fluorides are 
present.
5.0 Safety
    5.1 This method may involve the handling of hazardous materials in 
the analytical phase. This method does not purport to address all of the 
potential safety hazards associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.3 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and skin. 
Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.4 Perchloric Acid (HClO<INF>4</INF>). Corrosive to eyes, skin, 
nose, and throat. Provide ventilation to limit exposure. Very strong 
oxidizer. Keep separate from water and oxidizable materials to prevent 
vigorous evolution of heat, spontaneous combustion, or explosion. Heat 
solutions containing HClO4 only in hoods specifically designed for 
HClO<INF>4</INF>.
6.0 Equipment and Supplies
    6.1 Sampling.
    6.1.1 Cassette arrangement. The cassette itself is a three-piece, 
styrene acrylonitrile cassette unit (a Gelman Sciences product), 37 
millimeter (mm), with plastic connectors. In the first section (the 
intake section), an untreated Gelman Sciences 37 mm, 0.8 micrometer 
([micro]m) DM-800 metricel membrane filter and cellulose support pad, or 
equivalent, is situated. In the second and third segments of the 
cassette there is placed one each of Gelman Sciences 37 mm, 5 [micro]m 
GLA-5000 low-ash PVC filter with a cellulose support pad or equivalent 
product. Each of these two filters and support pads shall have been 
immersed in a solution of 10 percent sodium formate (volume/volume in an 
ethyl alcohol solution). The impregnated pads shall be placed in the 
cassette segments while still wet and heated at 50 [deg]C (122 [deg]F) 
until the pad is completely dry. It is important to check for a proper 
fit of the filter and support pad to the cassette segment to ensure that 
there are no areas where gases could bypass the filter. Once all of the 
cassette segments have been prepared, the cassette shall be assembled 
and a plastic plug shall be inserted into the exhaust hole of the 
cassette. Prior to placing the cassette into service, the space between 
each segment shall be taped with an appropriately durable tape to 
prevent the infiltration of gases through the points of connection, and 
an aluminum nozzle shall be inserted into the intake hole of the 
cassette. The aluminum nozzle shall have a short section of tubing 
placed over the opening of the nozzle, with the tubing plugged to 
prevent dust from entering the nozzle and to prepare the nozzle for the 
cassette arrangement leak check. An alternate nozzle type can be used if 
historical results or scientific demonstration of applicability can be 
shown.
    6.1.2 Anemometers and temperature sensing devices. To calculate the 
mass flow rate of TF from the roof monitor under standard conditions, 
anemometers that meet the specifications in section 2.1.1 in Method 14 
of this appendix or an equivalent device yielding equivalent information 
shall be used. A recording mechanism capable of accurately recording the 
exit gas temperature at least every 2 hours shall be used.
    6.1.3 Barometer. To correct the volumetric flow from the potline 
roof monitor to standard conditions, a mercury (Hg), aneroid, or other 
barometer capable of measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.5 mm 
[0.1 inch (in)] Hg shall be used.

    Note: The barometric reading may be obtained from a nearby National 
Weather Service Station. In this case, the station value (which is 
absolute barometric pressure) shall be requested and an adjustment for 
elevation differences between the weather station and the sampling point 
shall be made at a rate of minus 2.5 mm (0.1 in) Hg per 30 meters (m) 
[100 feet (ft)] elevation increase or plus 2.5 mm (0.1 in) Hg per 30 m 
(100 ft) elevation decrease.

    6.2 Sample recovery.
    6.2.1 Hot plate.
    6.2.2 Muffle furnace.
    6.2.3 Nickel crucible.
    6.2.4 Stirring rod. Teflon.
    6.2.5 Volumetric flask. 50-milliliter (ml).
    6.2.6 Plastic vial. 50-ml.
    6.3 Analysis.
    6.3.1 Primary analytical method. An automated analyzer having the 
following components or equivalent: a multichannel proportioning pump, 
multiposition sampler, voltage stabilizer, colorimeter, instrument 
recording device, microdistillation apparatus, flexible 
Teflon<SUP>[reg]</SUP> heating bath, vacuum pump, pulse suppressers and 
an air flow system.
    6.3.2 Secondary analytical method. Specific Ion Electrode (SIE).
7.0 Reagents and Standards
    7.1 Water. Deionized distilled to conform to ASTM Specification D 
1193-77, Type 3 (incorporated by reference in Sec. 60.17(a)(22) of this 
part). The KMnO<INF>4</INF> test for oxidizable organic matter may be 
omitted when high concentrations of organic matter are not expected to 
be present.
    7.2 Calcium oxide.
    7.3 Sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Pellets.

[[Page 379]]

    7.4 Perchloric acid (HClO<INF>4</INF>). Mix 1:1 with water. Sulfuric 
acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>) may be used in place of 
HClO<INF>4</INF>.
    7.5 Audit samples. The audit samples discussed in section 9.1 shall 
be prepared from reagent grade, water soluble stock reagents, or 
purchased as an aqueous solution from a commercial supplier. If the 
audit stock solution is purchased from a commercial supplier, the 
standard solution must be accompanied by a certificate of analysis or an 
equivalent proof of fluoride concentration.
8.0 Sample Collection and Analysis
    8.1 Preparing cassette arrangement for sampling. The cassettes are 
initially connected to flexible tubing. The tubing is connected to 
flowmeters and a manifold system. The manifold system is connected to a 
dry gas meter (Research Appliance Company model 201009 or equivalent). 
The length of tubing is managed by pneumatically or electrically 
operated hoists located in the roof monitor, and the travel of the 
tubing is controlled by encasing the tubing in aluminum conduit. The 
tubing is lowered for cassette insertion by operating a control box at 
floor level. Once the cassette has been securely inserted into the 
tubing and the leak check performed, the tubing and cassette are raised 
to the roof monitor level using the floor level control box. 
Arrangements similar to the one described are acceptable if the 
scientific sample collection principles are followed.
    8.2 Test run sampling period. A test run shall comprise a minimum of 
a 24-hour sampling event encompassing at least eight cassettes per 
potline (or four cassettes per potroom group). Monthly compliance shall 
be based on three test runs during the month. Test runs of greater than 
24 hours are allowed; however, three such runs shall be conducted during 
the month.
    8.3 Leak-check procedures.
    8.3.1 Pretest leak check. A pretest leak-check is recommended; 
however, it is not required. To perform a pretest leak-check after the 
cassettes have been inserted into the tubing, isolate the cassette to be 
leak-checked by turning the valves on the manifold to stop all flows to 
the other sampling points connected to the manifold and meter. The 
cassette, with the plugged tubing section securing the intake of the 
nozzle, is subjected to the highest vacuum expected during the run. If 
no leaks are detected, the tubing plug can be briefly removed as the dry 
gas meter is rapidly turned off.
    8.3.2 Post-test leak check. A leak check is required at the 
conclusion of each test run for each cassette. The leak check shall be 
performed in accordance with the procedure outlined in section 8.3.1 of 
this method except that it shall be performed at a vacuum greater than 
the maximum vacuum reached during the test run. If the leakage rate is 
found to be no greater than 4 percent of the average sampling rate, the 
results are acceptable. If the leakage rate is greater than 4 percent of 
the average sampling rate, either record the leakage rate and correct 
the sampling volume as discussed in section 12.4 of this method or void 
the test run if the minimum number of cassettes were used. If the number 
of cassettes used was greater than the minimum required, discard the 
leaking cassette and use the remaining cassettes for the emission 
determination.
    8.3.3 Anemometers and temperature sensing device placement. Install 
the recording mechanism to record the exit gas temperature. Anemometers 
shall be installed as required in section 6.1.2 of Method 14 of this 
appendix, except replace the word ``manifold'' with ``cassette group'' 
in section 6.1.2.3. These two different instruments shall be located 
near each other along the roof monitor. See conceptual configurations in 
Figures 14A-1, 14A-2, and 14A-3 of this method. Fewer temperature 
devices than anemometers may be used if at least one temperature device 
is located within the span of the cassette group. Other anemometer 
location siting scenarios may be acceptable as long as the exit velocity 
of the roof monitor gases is representative of the entire section of the 
potline being sampled.
    8.4 Sampling. The actual sample run shall begin with the removal of 
the tubing and plug from the cassette nozzle. Each cassette is then 
raised to the roof monitor area, the dry gas meter is turned on, and the 
flowmeters are set to the calibration point, which allows an equal 
volume of sampled gas to enter each cassette. The dry gas meter shall be 
set to a range suitable for the specific potroom type being sampled that 
will yield valid data known from previous experience or a range 
determined by the use of the calculation in section 12 of this method. 
Parameters related to the test run that shall be recorded, either during 
the test run or after the test run if recording devices are used, 
include: anemometer data, roof monitor exit gas temperature, dry gas 
meter temperature, dry gas meter volume, and barometric pressure. At the 
conclusion of the test run, the cassettes shall be lowered, the dry gas 
meter turned off, and the volume registered on the dry gas meter 
recorded. The post-test leak check procedures described in section 8.3.2 
of this method shall be performed. All data relevant to the test shall 
be recorded on a field data sheet and maintained on file.
    8.5 Sample recovery.
    8.5.1 The cassettes shall be brought to the laboratory with the 
intake nozzle contents protected with the section of plugged tubing 
previously described. The exterior of cassettes shall carefully be wiped 
free of any dust or debris, making sure that any falling dust or debris 
does not present a potential laboratory contamination problem.

[[Page 380]]

    8.5.2 Carefully remove all tape from the cassettes and remove the 
initial filter, support pad, and all loose solids from the first 
(intake) section of the cassette. Fold the filter and support pad 
several times and, along with all loose solids removed from the interior 
of the first section of the cassette, place them into a nickel crucible. 
Using water, wash the interior of the nozzle into the same nickel 
crucible. Add 0.1 gram (g) [<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 milligram (mg)] of 
calcium oxide and a sufficient amount of water to make a loose slurry. 
Mix the contents of the crucible thoroughly with a Teflon'' stirring 
rod. After rinsing any adhering residue from the stirring rod back into 
the crucible, place the crucible on a hot plate or in a muffle furnace 
until all liquid is evaporated and allow the mixture to gradually char 
for 1 hour.
    8.5.3 Transfer the crucible to a cold muffle furnace and ash at 600 
[deg]C (1,112 [deg]F). Remove the crucible after the ashing phase and, 
after the crucible cools, add 3.0 g (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 g) of 
NaOH pellets. Place this mixture in a muffle furnace at 600 [deg]C 
(1,112 [deg]F) for 3 minutes. Remove the crucible and roll the melt so 
as to reach all of the ash with the molten NaOH. Let the melt cool to 
room temperature. Add 10 to 15 ml of water to the crucible and place it 
on a hot plate at a low temperature setting until the melt is soft or 
suspended. Transfer the contents of the crucible to a 50-ml volumetric 
flask. Rinse the crucible with 20 ml of 1:1 perchloric acid or 20 ml of 
1:1 sulfuric acid in two (2) 10 ml portions. Pour the acid rinse slowly 
into the volumetric flask and swirl the flask after each addition. Cool 
to room temperature. The product of this procedure is particulate 
fluorides.
    8.5.4 Gaseous fluorides can be isolated for analysis by folding the 
gaseous fluoride filters and support pads to approximately \1/4\ of 
their original size and placing them in a 50-ml plastic vial. To the 
vial add exactly 10 ml of water and leach the sample for a minimum of 1 
hour. The leachate from this process yields the gaseous fluorides for 
analysis.
9.0 Quality Control
    9.1 Laboratory auditing. Laboratory audits of specific and known 
concentrations of fluoride shall be submitted to the laboratory with 
each group of samples submitted for analysis. An auditor shall prepare 
and present the audit samples as a ``blind'' evaluation of laboratory 
performance with each group of samples submitted to the laboratory. The 
audits shall be prepared to represent concentrations of fluoride that 
could be expected to be in the low, medium and high range of actual 
results. Average recoveries of all three audits must equal 90 to 110 
percent for acceptable results; otherwise, the laboratory must 
investigate procedures and instruments for potential problems.

    Note: The analytical procedure allows for the analysis of individual 
or combined filters and pads from the cassettes provided that equal 
volumes (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) are sampled through each 
cassette.

10.0 Calibrations
    10.1 Equipment evaluations. To ensure the integrity of this method, 
periodic calibrations and equipment replacements are necessary.
    10.1.1 Metering system. At 30-day intervals the metering system 
shall be calibrated. Connect the metering system inlet to the outlet of 
a wet test meter that is accurate to 1 percent. Refer to Figure 5-4 of 
Method 5 of this appendix. The wet-test meter shall have a capacity of 
30 liters/revolution [1 cubic foot (ft\3\)/revolution]. A spirometer of 
400 liters (14 ft\3\) or more capacity, or equivalent, may be used for 
calibration; however, a wet-test meter is usually more practical. The 
wet-test meter shall be periodically tested with a spirometer or a 
liquid displacement meter to ensure the accuracy. Spirometers or wet-
test meters of other sizes may be used, provided that the specified 
accuracies of the procedure are maintained. Run the metering system pump 
for about 15 min. with the orifice manometer indicating a median reading 
as expected in field use to allow the pump to warm up and to thoroughly 
wet the interior of the wet-test meter. Then, at each of a minimum of 
three orifice manometer settings, pass an exact quantity of gas through 
the wet-test meter and record the volume indicated by the dry gas meter. 
Also record the barometric pressure, the temperatures of the wet test 
meter, the inlet temperatures of the dry gas meter, and the temperatures 
of the outlet of the dry gas meter. Record all calibration data on a 
form similar to the one shown in Figure 5-5 of Method 5 of this appendix 
and calculate Y, the dry gas meter calibration factor, and [Delta]H@, 
the orifice calibration factor at each orifice setting. Allowable 
tolerances for Y and [Delta]H@ are given in Figure 5-6 of Method 5 of 
this appendix.
    10.1.2 Estimating volumes for initial test runs. For a facility's 
initial test runs, the regulated facility must have a target or desired 
volume of gases to be sampled and a target range of volumes to use 
during the calibration of the dry gas meter. Use Equations 14A-1 and 
14A-2 in section 12 of this method to derive the target dry gas meter 
volume (F<INF>v</INF>) for these purposes.
    10.1.3 Calibration of anemometers and temperature sensing devices. 
If the standard anemometers in Method 14 of this appendix are used, the 
calibration and integrity evaluations in sections 10.3.1.1 through 
10.3.1.3 of Method 14 of this appendix shall be used as well as the 
recording device described in section 2.1.3 of Method 14. The 
calibrations or complete change-outs of anemometers shall take place at 
a minimum of once per year. The temperature sensing and recording 
devices shall be calibrated according to the manufacturer's 
specifications.

[[Page 381]]

    10.1.4 Calibration of flowmeters. The calibration of flowmeters is 
necessary to ensure that an equal volume of sampled gas is entering each 
of the individual cassettes and that no large differences, which could 
possibly bias the sample, exist between the cassettes.
    10.1.4.1 Variable area, 65 mm flowmeters or equivalent shall be 
used. These flowmeters can be mounted on a common base for convenience. 
These flowmeters shall be calibrated by attaching a prepared cassette, 
complete with filters and pads, to the flowmeter and then to the system 
manifold. This manifold is an aluminum cylinder with valved inlets for 
connections to the flowmeters/cassettes and one outlet to a dry gas 
meter. The connection is then made to the wet-test meter and finally to 
a dry gas meter. All connections are made with tubing.
    10.1.4.2 Turn the dry gas meter on for 15 min. in preparation for 
the calibration. Turn the dry gas meter off and plug the intake hole of 
the cassette. Turn the dry gas meter back on to evaluate the entire 
system for leaks. If the dry gas meter shows a leakage rate of less than 
0.02 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min at 10 in. of Hg vacuum as noted on the dry gas 
meter, the system is acceptable to further calibration.
    10.1.4.3 With the dry gas meter turned on and the flow indicator 
ball at a selected flow rate, record the exact amount of gas pulled 
through the flowmeter by taking measurements from the wet test meter 
after exactly 10 min. Record the room temperature and barometric 
pressure. Conduct this test for all flowmeters in the system with all 
flowmeters set at the same indicator ball reading. When all flowmeters 
have gone through the procedure above, correct the volume pulled through 
each flowmeter to standard conditions. The acceptable difference between 
the highest and lowest flowmeter rate is 5 percent. Should one or more 
flowmeters be outside of the acceptable limit of 5 percent, repeat the 
calibration procedure at a lower or higher indicator ball reading until 
all flowmeters show no more than 5 percent difference among them.
    10.1.4.4 This flowmeter calibration shall be conducted at least once 
per year.
    10.1.5 Miscellaneous equipment calibrations. Miscellaneous equipment 
used such as an automatic recorder/ printer used to measure dry gas 
meter temperatures shall be calibrated according to the manufacturer's 
specifications in order to maintain the accuracy of the equipment.
11.0 Analytical Procedure
    11.1 The preferred primary analytical determination of the 
individual isolated samples or the combined particulate and gaseous 
samples shall be performed by an automated methodology. The analytical 
method for this technology shall be based on the manufacturer's 
instructions for equipment operation and shall also include the analysis 
of five standards with concentrations in the expected range of the 
actual samples. The results of the analysis of the five standards shall 
have a coefficient of correlation of at least 0.99. A check standard 
shall be analyzed as the last sample of the group to determine if 
instrument drift has occurred. The acceptable result for the check 
standard is 95 to 105 percent of the standard's true value.
    11.2 The secondary analytical method shall be by specific ion 
electrode if the samples are distilled or if a TISAB IV buffer is used 
to eliminate aluminum interferences. Five standards with concentrations 
in the expected range of the actual samples shall be analyzed, and a 
coefficient of correlation of at least 0.99 is the minimum acceptable 
limit for linearity. An exception for this limit for linearity is a 
condition when low-level standards in the range of 0.01 to 0.48 [micro]g 
fluoride/ml are analyzed. In this situation, a minimum coefficient of 
correlation of 0.97 is required. TISAB II shall be used for low-level 
analyses.
12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations
    12.1 Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra decimal 
point beyond that of the acquired data. Round off values after the final 
calculation. Other forms of calculations may be used as long as they 
give equivalent results.
    12.2 Estimating volumes for initial test runs.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.000
    
Where

F<INF>v</INF>=Desired volume of dry gas to be sampled, ft\3\.
F<INF>d</INF>=Desired or analytically optimum mass of TF per cassette, 
micrograms of TF per cassette ([micro]g/cassette).
X=Number of cassettes used.
F<INF>e</INF>=Typical concentration of TF in emissions to be sampled, 
[micro]g/ft \3\, calculated from Equation 14A-2.

[[Page 382]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.001

Where

R<INF>e</INF>=Typical emission rate from the facility, pounds of TF per 
ton (lb/ton) of aluminum.
R<INF>p</INF>=Typical production rate of the facility, tons of aluminum 
per minute (ton/min).
V<INF>r</INF>=Typical exit velocity of the roof monitor gases, feet per 
minute (ft/min).
A<INF>r</INF>=Open area of the roof monitor, square feet 
(ft<SUP>2</SUP>).

    12.2.1 Example calculation. Assume that the typical emission rate 
(R<INF>e</INF>) is 1.0 lb TF/ton of aluminum, the typical roof vent gas 
exit velocity (V<INF>r</INF>) is 250 ft/min, the typical production rate 
(R<INF>p</INF>) is 0.10 ton/min, the known open area for the roof 
monitor (A<INF>r</INF>) is 8,700 ft<SUP>2</SUP>, and the desired 
(analytically optimum) mass of TF per cassette is 1,500 [micro]g. First 
calculate the concentration of TF per cassette (F<INF>e</INF>) in 
[micro]g/ft<SUP>3</SUP> using Equation 14A-2. Then calculate the desired 
volume of gas to be sampled (F<INF>v</INF>) using Equation 14A-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.003

    This is a total of 575.40 ft<SUP>3</SUP> for eight cassettes or 
71.925 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/cassette.
    12.3 Calculations of TF emissions from field and laboratory data 
that would yield a production related emission rate can be calculated as 
follows:
    12.3.1 Obtain a standard cubic feet (scf) value for the volume 
pulled through the dry gas meter for all cassettes by using the field 
and calibration data and Equation 5-1 of Method 5 of this appendix.
    12.3.2 Derive the average quantity of TF per cassette (in [micro]g 
TF/cassette) by adding all laboratory data for all cassettes and 
dividing this value by the total number of cassettes used. Divide this 
average TF value by the corrected dry gas meter volume for each 
cassette; this value then becomes TF<INF>std</INF> ([micro]g/
ft<SUP>3</SUP>).
    12.3.3 Calculate the production-based emission rate (R<INF>e</INF>) 
in lb/ton using Equation 14A-5.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.004

    12.3.4 As an example calculation, assume eight cassettes located in 
a potline were used to sample for 72 hours during the run. The analysis 
of all eight cassettes yielded a total of 3,000 [micro]g of TF. The dry 
gas meter volume was corrected to yield a total of 75 scf per cassette, 
which yields a value for TF<INF>std</INF> of 3,000/75=5 [micro]g/
ft<SUP>3</SUP>. The open area of the roof monitor for the potline 
(A<INF>r</INF>) is 17,400 ft<SUP>2</SUP>. The exit velocity of the roof 
monitor gases (V<INF>r</INF>) is 250 ft/min. The production rate of 
aluminum over the previous 720 hours was 5,000 tons, which is 6.94 tons/
hr or 0.116 ton/min (R<INF>p</INF>). Substituting these values into 
Equation 14A-5 yields:

[[Page 383]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.005

    12.4 Corrections to volumes due to leakage. Should the post-test 
leak check leakage rate exceed 4 percent as described in section 8.3.2 
of this method, correct the volume as detailed in Case I in section 6.3 
of Method 5 of this appendix.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.020


[[Page 384]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.021


[[Page 385]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC97.022


[[Page 386]]



  Method 15--Determination of Hydrogen Sulfide, Carbonyl Sulfide, and 
           Carbon Disulfide Emissions From Stationary Sources

    Note: This method is not inclusive with respect to specifications 
(e.g., equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and 
analytical) essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated 
by reference from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain 
reliable results, persons using this method should have a thorough 
knowledge of gas chromatography techniques.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Sensitivity  (See Sec
            Analyte                  CAS No.              13.2)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon disulfide [CS2].........         75-15-0  0.5 ppmv
Carbonyl sulfide [COS].........        463-58-1  0.5 ppmv
Hydrogen sulfide [H2S].........       7783-06-4  0.5 ppmv
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This method applies to the determination of emissions of 
reduced sulfur compounds from tail gas control units of sulfur recovery 
plants, H<INF>2</INF>S in fuel gas for fuel gas combustion devices, and 
where specified in other applicable subparts of the regulations.
    1.2.2 The method described below uses the principle of gas 
chromatographic (GC) separation and flame photometric detection (FPD). 
Since there are many systems or sets of operating conditions that 
represent useable methods for determining sulfur emissions, all systems 
which employ this principle, but differ only in details of equipment and 
operation, may be used as alternative methods, provided that the 
calibration precision and sample-line loss criteria are met.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from the emission source and diluted 
with clean dry air (if necessary). An aliquot of the diluted sample is 
then analyzed for CS<INF>2</INF>, COS, and H<INF>2</INF>S by GC/FPD.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Moisture Condensation. Moisture condensation in the sample 
delivery system, the analytical column, or the FPD burner block can 
cause losses or interferences. This potential is eliminated by heating 
the probe, filter box, and connections, and by maintaining the 
SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber in an ice water bath. Moisture is removed in the 
SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber and heating the sample beyond this point is not 
necessary provided the ambient temperature is above 0 [deg]C (32 
[deg]F). Alternatively, moisture may be eliminated by heating the sample 
line, and by conditioning the sample with dry dilution air to lower its 
dew point below the operating temperature of the GC/FPD analytical 
system prior to analysis.
    4.2 Carbon Monoxide (CO) and Carbon Dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>). CO and 
CO<INF>2</INF> have substantial desensitizing effects on the FPD even 
after 9:1 dilution. (Acceptable systems must demonstrate that they have 
eliminated this interference by some procedure such as eluting CO and 
CO<INF>2</INF> before any of the sulfur compounds to be measured.) 
Compliance with this requirement can be demonstrated by submitting 
chromatograms of calibration gases with and without CO<INF>2</INF> in 
the diluent gas. The CO<INF>2</INF> level should be approximately 10 
percent for the case with CO<INF>2</INF> present. The two chromatograms 
should show agreement within the precision limits of Section 13.3.
    4.3 Elemental Sulfur. The condensation of sulfur vapor in the 
sampling system can lead to blockage of the particulate filter. This 
problem can be minimized by observing the filter for buildup and 
changing as needed.
    4.4 Sulfur Dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>). SO<INF>2</INF> is not a 
specific interferent but may be present in such large amounts that it 
cannot be effectively separated from the other compounds of interest. 
The SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber described in Section 6.1.3 will effectively 
remove SO<INF>2</INF> from the sample.
    4.5 Alkali Mist. Alkali mist in the emissions of some control 
devices may cause a rapid increase in the SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber pH, 
resulting in low sample recoveries. Replacing the SO<INF>2</INF> 
scrubber contents after each run will minimize the chances of 
interference in these cases.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test to establish appropriate safety and health practices 
and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations to performing 
this test.

[[Page 387]]

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. See Figure 15-1. The sampling train component 
parts are discussed in the following sections:
    6.1.1 Probe. The probe shall be made of Teflon or Teflon-lined 
stainless steel and heated to prevent moisture condensation. It shall be 
designed to allow calibration gas to enter the probe at or near the 
sample point entry. Any portion of the probe that contacts the stack gas 
must be heated to prevent moisture condensation. The probe described in 
Section 6.1.1 of Method 16A having a nozzle directed away from the gas 
stream is recommended for sources having particulate or mist emissions. 
Where very high stack temperatures prohibit the use of Teflon probe 
components, glass or quartz-lined probes may serve as substitutes.
    6.1.2 Particulate Filter. 50-mm Teflon filter holder and a 1- to 2-
micron porosity Teflon filter (available through Savillex Corporation, 
5325 Highway 101, Minnetonka, Minnesota 55343). The filter holder must 
be maintained in a hot box at a temperature of at least 120 [deg]C (248 
[deg]F).
    6.1.3 SO<INF>2</INF> Scrubber. Three 300-ml Teflon segment impingers 
connected in series with flexible, thick-walled, Teflon tubing. 
(Impinger parts and tubing available through Savillex.) The first two 
impingers contain 100 ml of citrate buffer, and the third impinger is 
initially dry. The tip of the tube inserted into the solution should be 
constricted to less than 3-mm (\1/8\-in.) ID and should be immersed to a 
depth of at least 50 cm (2 in.). Immerse the impingers in an ice water 
bath and maintain near 0 [deg]C. The scrubber solution will normally 
last for a 3-hour run before needing replacement. This will depend upon 
the effects of moisture and particulate matter on the solution strength 
and pH. Connections between the probe, particulate filter, and 
SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber shall be made of Teflon and as short in length 
as possible. All portions of the probe, particulate filter, and 
connections prior to the SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber (or alternative point 
of moisture removal) shall be maintained at a temperature of at least 
120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F).
    6.1.4 Sample Line. Teflon, no greater than 13-mm (\1/2\-in.) ID. 
Alternative materials, such as virgin Nylon, may be used provided the 
line-loss test is acceptable.
    6.1.5 Sample Pump. The sample pump shall be a leakless Teflon-coated 
diaphragm type or equivalent.
    6.2 Analysis. The following items are needed for sample analysis:
    6.2.1 Dilution System. The dilution system must be constructed such 
that all sample contacts are made of Teflon, glass, or stainless steel. 
It must be capable of approximately a 9:1 dilution of the sample.
    6.2.2 Gas Chromatograph (see Figure 15-2). The gas chromatograph 
must have at least the following components:
    6.2.2.1 Oven. Capable of maintaining the separation column at the 
proper operating temperature <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C.
    6.2.2.2 Temperature Gauge. To monitor column oven, detector, and 
exhaust temperature <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C.
    6.2.2.3 Flow System. Gas metering system to measure sample, fuel, 
combustion gas, and carrier gas flows.
    6.2.2.4 Flame Photometric Detector.
    6.2.2.4.1 Electrometer. Capable of full scale amplification of 
linear ranges of 10<SUP>-9</SUP> to 10<SUP>-4</SUP> amperes full scale.
    6.2.2.4.2 Power Supply. Capable of delivering up to 750 volts.
    6.2.2.5 Recorder. Compatible with the output voltage range of the 
electrometer.
    6.2.2.6 Rotary Gas Valves. Multiport Teflon-lined valves equipped 
with sample loop. Sample loop volumes shall be chosen to provide the 
needed analytical range. Teflon tubing and fittings shall be used 
throughout to present an inert surface for sample gas. The GC shall be 
calibrated with the sample loop used for sample analysis.
    6.2.2.7 GC Columns. The column system must be demonstrated to be 
capable of resolving three major reduced sulfur compounds: 
H<INF>2</INF>S, COS, and CS<INF>2</INF>. To demonstrate that adequate 
resolution has been achieved, a chromatogram of a calibration gas 
containing all three reduced sulfur compounds in the concentration range 
of the applicable standard must be submitted. Adequate resolution will 
be defined as base line separation of adjacent peaks when the amplifier 
attenuation is set so that the smaller peak is at least 50 percent of 
full scale. Base line separation is defined as a return to zero (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent) in the interval between peaks. Systems not 
meeting this criteria may be considered alternate methods subject to the 
approval of the Administrator.
    6.3 Calibration System (See Figure 15-3). The calibration system 
must contain the following components:
    6.3.1 Flow System. To measure air flow over permeation tubes within 
2 percent. Each flowmeter shall be calibrated after each complete test 
series with a wet-test meter. If the flow measuring device differs from 
the wet-test meter by more than 5 percent, the completed test shall be 
discarded. Alternatively, use the flow data that will yield the lowest 
flow measurement. Calibration with a wet-test meter before a test is 
optional. Flow over the permeation device may also be determined using a 
soap bubble flowmeter.
    6.3.2 Constant Temperature Bath. Device capable of maintaining the 
permeation tubes at the calibration temperature within 0.1 [deg]C.

[[Page 388]]

    6.3.3 Temperature Sensor. Thermometer or equivalent to monitor bath 
temperature within 0.1 [deg]C.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Fuel. Hydrogen gas (H<INF>2</INF>). Prepurified grade or better.
    7.2 Combustion Gas. Oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) or air, research purity 
or better.
    7.3 Carrier Gas. Prepurified grade or better.
    7.4 Diluent. Air containing less than 0.5 ppmv total sulfur 
compounds and less than 10 ppmv each of moisture and total hydrocarbons.
    7.5 Calibration Gases.
    7.5.1 Permeation Devices. One each of H<INF>2</INF>S, COS, and 
CS<INF>2</INF>, gravimetrically calibrated and certified at some 
convenient operating temperature. These tubes consist of hermetically 
sealed FEP Teflon tubing in which a liquified gaseous substance is 
enclosed. The enclosed gas permeates through the tubing wall at a 
constant rate. When the temperature is constant, calibration gases 
covering a wide range of known concentrations can be generated by 
varying and accurately measuring the flow rate of diluent gas passing 
over the tubes. These calibration gases are used to calibrate the GC/FPD 
system and the dilution system.
    7.5.2 Cylinder Gases. Cylinder gases may be used as alternatives to 
permeation devices. The gases must be traceable to a primary standard 
(such as permeation tubes) and not used beyond the certification 
expiration date.
    7.6 Citrate Buffer. Dissolve 300 g of potassium citrate and 41 g of 
anhydrous citric acid in 1 liter of water. Alternatively, 284 g of 
sodium citrate may be substituted for the potassium citrate. Adjust the 
pH to between 5.4 and 5.6 with potassium citrate or citric acid, as 
required.
    8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage
    8.1 Pretest Procedures. After the complete measurement system has 
been set up at the site and deemed to be operational, the following 
procedures should be completed before sampling is initiated. These 
procedures are not required, but would be helpful in preventing any 
problem which might occur later to invalidate the entire test.
    8.1.1 Leak-Check. Appropriate leak-check procedures should be 
employed to verify the integrity of all components, sample lines, and 
connections. The following procedure is suggested: For components 
upstream of the sample pump, attach the probe end of the sample line to 
a manometer or vacuum gauge, start the pump and pull a vacuum greater 
than 50 mm (2 in.) Hg, close off the pump outlet, and then stop the pump 
and ascertain that there is no leak for 1 minute. For components after 
the pump, apply a slight positive pressure and check for leaks by 
applying a liquid (detergent in water, for example) at each joint. 
Bubbling indicates the presence of a leak. As an alternative to the 
initial leak-test, the sample line loss test described in Section 8.3.1 
may be performed to verify the integrity of components.
    8.1.2 System Performance. Since the complete system is calibrated at 
the beginning and end of each day of testing, the precise calibration of 
each component is not critical. However, these components should be 
verified to operate properly. This verification can be performed by 
observing the response of flowmeters or of the GC output to changes in 
flow rates or calibration gas concentrations, respectively, and 
ascertaining the response to be within predicted limits. If any 
component or the complete system fails to respond in a normal and 
predictable manner, the source of the discrepancy should be identified 
and corrected before proceeding.
    8.2 Sample Collection and Analysis
    8.2.1 After performing the calibration procedures outlined in 
Section 10.0, insert the sampling probe into the test port ensuring that 
no dilution air enters the stack through the port. Begin sampling and 
dilute the sample approximately 9:1 using the dilution system. Note that 
the precise dilution factor is the one determined in Section 10.4. 
Condition the entire system with sample for a minimum of 15 minutes 
before beginning the analysis. Inject aliquots of the sample into the 
GC/FPD analyzer for analysis. Determine the concentration of each 
reduced sulfur compound directly from the calibration curves or from the 
equation for the least-squares line.
    8.2.2 If reductions in sample concentrations are observed during a 
sample run that cannot be explained by process conditions, the sampling 
must be interrupted to determine if the probe or filter is clogged with 
particulate matter. If either is found to be clogged, the test must be 
stopped and the results up to that point discarded. Testing may resume 
after cleaning or replacing the probe and filter. After each run, the 
probe and filter shall be inspected and, if necessary, replaced.
    8.2.3 A sample run is composed of 16 individual analyses (injects) 
performed over a period of not less than 3 hours or more than 6 hours.
    8.3 Post-Test Procedures.
    8.3.1 Sample Line Loss. A known concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S at 
the level of the applicable standard, <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20 percent, 
must be introduced into the sampling system at the opening of the probe 
in sufficient quantities to ensure that there is an excess of sample 
which must be vented to the atmosphere. The sample must be transported 
through the entire sampling system to the measurement system in the same 
manner as the emission samples.

[[Page 389]]

The resulting measured concentration is compared to the known value to 
determine the sampling system loss. For sampling losses greater than 20 
percent, the previous sample run is not valid. Sampling losses of 0-20 
percent must be corrected by dividing the resulting sample concentration 
by the fraction of recovery. The known gas sample may be calibration gas 
as described in Section 7.5. Alternatively, cylinder gas containing 
H<INF>2</INF>S mixed in nitrogen and verified according to Section 7.1.4 
of Method 16A may be used. The optional pretest procedures provide a 
good guideline for determining if there are leaks in the sampling 
system.
    8.3.2 Determination of Calibration Drift. After each run, or after a 
series of runs made within a 24-hour period, perform a partial 
recalibration using the procedures in Section 10.0. Only H<INF>2</INF>S 
(or other permeant) need be used to recalibrate the GC/FPD analysis 
system and the dilution system. Compare the calibration curves obtained 
after the runs to the calibration curves obtained under Section 10.3. 
The calibration drift should not exceed the limits set forth in Section 
13.4. If the drift exceeds this limit, the intervening run or runs 
should be considered invalid. As an option, the calibration data set 
which gives the highest sample values may be chosen by the tester.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.3.1.........................  Sample line loss   Ensures that
                                 check.             uncorrected negative
                                                    bias introduced by
                                                    sample loss is no
                                                    greater than 20
                                                    percent, and
                                                    provides for
                                                    correction of bias
                                                    of 20 percent or
                                                    less.
8.3.2.........................  Calibration drift  Ensures that bias
                                 test.              introduced by drift
                                                    in the measurement
                                                    system output during
                                                    the run is no
                                                    greater than 5
                                                    percent.
10.0..........................  Analytical         Ensures precision of
                                 calibration.       analytical results
                                                    within 5 percent.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Prior to any sampling run, calibrate the system using the following 
procedures. (If more than one run is performed during any 24-hour 
period, a calibration need not be performed prior to the second and any 
subsequent runs. However, the calibration drift must be determined as 
prescribed in Section 8.3.2 after the last run is made within the 24-
hour period.)

    Note: This section outlines steps to be followed for use of the GC/
FPD and the dilution system. The calibration procedure does not include 
detailed instructions because the operation of these systems is complex, 
and it requires an understanding of the individual system being used. 
Each system should include a written operating manual describing in 
detail the operating procedures associated with each component in the 
measurement system. In addition, the operator should be familiar with 
the operating principles of the components, particularly the GC/FPD. The 
references in Section 16.0 are recommended for review for this purpose.

    10.1 Calibration Gas Permeation Tube Preparation.
    10.1.1 Insert the permeation tubes into the tube chamber. Check the 
bath temperature to assure agreement with the calibration temperature of 
the tubes within 0.1 [deg]C. Allow 24 hours for the tubes to 
equilibrate. Alternatively, equilibration may be verified by injecting 
samples of calibration gas at 1-hour intervals. The permeation tubes can 
be assumed to have reached equilibrium when consecutive hourly samples 
agree within 5 percent of their mean.
    10.1.2 Vary the amount of air flowing over the tubes to produce the 
desired concentrations for calibrating the analytical and dilution 
systems. The air flow across the tubes must at all times exceed the flow 
requirement of the analytical systems. The concentration in ppmv 
generated by a tube containing a specific permeant can be calculated 
using Equation 15-1 in Section 12.2.
    10.2 Calibration of Analytical System. Generate a series of three or 
more known concentrations spanning the linear range of the FPD 
(approximately 0.5 to 10 ppmv for a 1-ml sample) for each of the three 
major sulfur compounds. Bypassing the dilution system, inject these 
standards into the GC/FPD and monitor the responses until three 
consecutive injections for each concentration agree within 5 percent of 
their mean. Failure to attain this precision indicates a problem in the 
calibration or analytical system. Any such problem must be identified 
and corrected before proceeding.
    10.3 Calibration Curves. Plot the GC/FPD response in current 
(amperes) versus their causative concentrations in ppmv on log-log 
coordinate graph paper for each sulfur compound. Alternatively, a least-
squares equation may be generated from the calibration data using 
concentrations versus the appropriate instrument response units.
    10.4 Calibration of Dilution System. Generate a known concentration 
of H<INF>2</INF>S using the permeation tube system. Adjust the flow rate 
of diluent air for the first dilution stage

[[Page 390]]

so that the desired level of dilution is approximated. Inject the 
diluted calibration gas into the GC/FPD system until the results of 
three consecutive injections for each dilution agree within 5 percent of 
their mean. Failure to attain this precision in this step is an 
indication of a problem in the dilution system. Any such problem must be 
identified and corrected before proceeding. Using the calibration data 
for H<INF>2</INF>S (developed under Section 10.3), determine the diluted 
calibration gas concentration in ppmv. Then calculate the dilution 
factor as the ratio of the calibration gas concentration before dilution 
to the diluted calibration gas concentration determined under this 
section. Repeat this procedure for each stage of dilution required. 
Alternatively, the GC/FPD system may be calibrated by generating a 
series of three or more concentrations of each sulfur compound and 
diluting these samples before injecting them into the GC/FPD system. 
These data will then serve as the calibration data for the unknown 
samples and a separate determination of the dilution factor will not be 
necessary. However, the precision requirements are still applicable.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.

C=Concentration of permeant produced, ppmv.
COS=Carbonyl sulfide concentration, ppmv.
CS<INF>2</INF>=Carbon disulfide concentration, ppmv.
d=Dilution factor, dimensionless.
H<INF>2</INF>S=Hydrogen sulfide concentration, ppmv.
K=24.04 L/g mole. (Gas constant at 20 [deg]C and 760 mm Hg)
L=Flow rate, L/min, of air over permeant 20 [deg]C, 760 mm Hg.
M=Molecular weight of the permeant, g/g-mole.
N=Number of analyses performed.
P<INF>r</INF>=Permeation rate of the tube, [micro]g/min.

    12.2 Permeant Concentration. Calculate the concentration generated 
by a tube containing a specific permeant (see Section 10.1) using the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.262

    12.3 Calculation of SO<INF>2</INF> Equivalent. SO<INF>2</INF> 
equivalent will be determined for each analysis made by summing the 
concentrations of each reduced sulfur compound resolved during the given 
analysis. The SO<INF>2</INF> equivalent is expressed as SO<INF>2</INF> 
in ppmv.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.263

    12.4 Average SO<INF>2</INF> Equivalent. This is determined using the 
following equation. Systems that do not remove moisture from the sample 
but condition the gas to prevent condensation must correct the average 
SO<INF>2</INF> equivalent for the fraction of water vapor present. This 
is not done under applications where the emission standard is not 
specified on a dry basis.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.264

Where:

Avg SO<INF>2</INF> equivalent=Average SO<INF>2</INF> equivalent in ppmv, 
dry basis.
Average SO<INF>2</INF> equivalent <INF>i</INF>=SO<INF>2</INF> in ppmv as 
determined by Equation 15-2.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. Coupled with a GC system using a 1-ml sample size, the 
maximum limit of the FPD for each sulfur compound is approximately 10 
ppmv. It may be necessary to

[[Page 391]]

dilute samples from sulfur recovery plants a hundredfold (99:1), 
resulting in an upper limit of about 1000 ppmv for each compound.
    13.2 Sensitivity. The minimum detectable concentration of the FPD is 
also dependent on sample size and would be about 0.5 ppmv for a 1-ml 
sample.
    13.3 Calibration Precision. A series of three consecutive injections 
of the same calibration gas, at any dilution, shall produce results 
which do not vary by more than 5 percent from the mean of the three 
injections.
    13.4 Calibration Drift. The calibration drift determined from the 
mean of three injections made at the beginning and end of any run or 
series of runs within a 24-hour period shall not exceed 5 percent.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                            16.0 References.

    1. O'Keeffe, A.E., and G.C. Ortman. ``Primary Standards for Trace 
Gas Analysis.'' Anal. Chem. 38,760. 1966.
    2. Stevens, R.K., A.E. O'Keeffe, and G.C. Ortman. ``Absolute 
Calibration of a Flame Photometric Detector to Volatile Sulfur Compounds 
at Sub-Part-Per-Million Levels.'' Environmental Science and Technology 
3:7. July 1969.
    3. Mulik, J.D., R.K. Stevens, and R. Baumgardner. ``An Analytical 
System Designed to Measure Multiple Malodorous Compounds Related to 
Kraft Mill Activities.'' Presented at the 12th Conference on Methods in 
Air Pollution and Industrial Hygiene Studies, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, April 6-8, 1971.
    4. Devonald, R.H., R.S. Serenius, and A.D. McIntyre. ``Evaluation of 
the Flame Photometric Detector for Analysis of Sulfur Compounds.'' Pulp 
and Paper Magazine of Canada, 73,3. March 1972.
    5. Grimley, K.W., W.S. Smith, and R.M. Martin. ``The Use of a 
Dynamic Dilution System in the Conditioning of Stack Gases for Automated 
Analysis by a Mobile Sampling Van.'' Presented at the 63rd Annual APCA 
Meeting in St. Louis, MO. June 14-19, 1970.
    6. General Reference. Standard Methods of Chemical Analysis Volume 
III-A and III-B: Instrumental Analysis. Sixth Edition. Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 392]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.265


[[Page 393]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.266


[[Page 394]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.267

Method 15A--Determination of Total Reduced Sulfur Emissions From Sulfur 
                 Recovery Plants in Petroleum Refineries

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 6, Method 15, 
and Method 16A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 395]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.            Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reduced sulfur compounds......  None assigned...  Not determined.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of emissions of reduced sulfur compounds from sulfur recovery plants 
where the emissions are in a reducing atmosphere, such as in Stretford 
units.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 An integrated gas sample is extracted from the stack, and 
combustion air is added to the oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>)-deficient gas at a 
known rate. The reduced sulfur compounds [including carbon disulfide 
(CS<INF>2</INF>), carbonyl sulfide (COS), and hydrogen sulfide 
(H<INF>2</INF>S)] are thermally oxidized to sulfur dioxide 
(SO<INF>2</INF>), which is then collected in hydrogen peroxide as 
sulfate ion and analyzed according to the Method 6 barium-thorin 
titration procedure.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Reduced sulfur compounds, other than CS<INF>2</INF>, COS, and 
H<INF>2</INF>S, that are present in the emissions will also be oxidized 
to SO<INF>2</INF>, causing a positive bias relative to emission 
standards that limit only the three compounds listed above. For example, 
thiophene has been identified in emissions from a Stretford unit and 
produced a positive bias of 30 percent in the Method 15A result. 
However, these biases may not affect the outcome of the test at units 
where emissions are low relative to the standard.
    4.2 Calcium and aluminum have been shown to interfere in the Method 
6 titration procedure. Since these metals have been identified in 
particulate matter emissions from Stretford units, a Teflon filter is 
required to minimize this interference.
    4.3 Dilution of the hydrogen peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>) 
absorbing solution can potentially reduce collection efficiency, causing 
a negative bias. When used to sample emissions containing 7 percent 
moisture or less, the midget impingers have sufficient volume to contain 
the condensate collected during sampling. Dilution of the 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> does not affect the collection of 
SO<INF>2</INF>. At higher moisture contents, the potassium citrate-
citric acid buffer system used with Method 16A should be used to collect 
the condensate.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.3 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 3 mg/m\3\ will cause lung damage in uninitiated. 1 mg/m\3\ for 8 
hours will cause lung damage or, in higher concentrations, death. 
Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts violently with metals 
and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The sampling train used in performing this 
method is shown in Figure 15A-1, and component parts are discussed 
below. Modifications to this sampling train are acceptable provided that 
the system performance check is met.
    6.1.1 Probe. 6.4-mm (\1/4\-in.) OD Teflon tubing sequentially 
wrapped with heat-resistant fiber strips, a rubberized heating tape 
(with a plug at one end), and heat-resistant adhesive tape. A flexible 
thermocouple or some other suitable temperature-measuring device shall 
be placed between the Teflon tubing and the fiber strips so that the 
temperature can be monitored. The probe should be sheathed in stainless 
steel to provide in-stack rigidity. A series of bored-out stainless 
steel fittings placed at the front of the sheath will prevent flue gas 
from entering between the probe and sheath. The sampling probe is 
depicted in Figure 15A-2.
    6.1.2 Particulate Filter. A 50-mm Teflon filter holder and a 1- to 
2-mm porosity Teflon filter (available through Savillex Corporation, 
5325 Highway 101, Minnetonka, Minnesota 55345). The filter holder must 
be

[[Page 396]]

maintained in a hot box at a temperature high enough to prevent 
condensation.
    6.1.3 Combustion Air Delivery System. As shown in the schematic 
diagram in Figure 15A-3. The rate meter should be selected to measure an 
air flow rate of 0.5 liter/min (0.02 ft\3\/min).
    6.1.4 Combustion Tube. Quartz glass tubing with an expanded 
combustion chamber 2.54 cm (1 in.) in diameter and at least 30.5 cm (12 
in.) long. The tube ends should have an outside diameter of 0.6 cm (\1/
4\ in.) and be at least 15.3 cm (6 in.) long. This length is necessary 
to maintain the quartz-glass connector near ambient temperature and 
thereby avoid leaks. Alternatively, the outlet may be constructed with a 
90 degree glass elbow and socket that would fit directly onto the inlet 
of the first peroxide impinger.
    6.1.5 Furnace. Of sufficient size to enclose the combustion tube. 
The furnace must have a temperature regulator capable of maintaining the 
temperature at 1100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 [deg]C (2,012 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>90 [deg]F). The furnace operating temperature must be 
checked with a thermocouple to ensure accuracy. Lindberg furnaces have 
been found to be satisfactory.
    6.1.6 Peroxide Impingers, Stopcock Grease, Temperature Sensor, 
Drying Tube, Valve, Pump, and Barometer. Same as in Method 6, Sections 
6.1.1.2, 6.1.1.4, 6.1.1.5, 6.1.1.6, 6.1.1.7, 6.1.1.8, and 6.1.2, 
respectively, except that the midget bubbler of Method 6, Section 
6.1.1.2 is not required.
    6.1.7 Vacuum Gauge and Rate Meter. At least 760 mm Hg (30 in. Hg) 
gauge and rotameter, or equivalent, capable of measuring flow rate to 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the selected flow rate and calibrated 
as in Section 10.2.
    6.1.8 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter capable of measuring the sample 
volume under the particular sampling conditions with an accuracy of 2 
percent.
    6.1.9 U-tube manometer. To measure the pressure at the exit of the 
combustion gas dry gas meter.
    6.2 Sample Recovery and Analysis. Same as Method 6, Sections 6.2 and 
6.3, except a 10-ml buret with 0.05-ml graduations is required for 
titrant volumes of less than 10.0 ml, and the spectrophotometer is not 
needed.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents must conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society. When such specifications are not 
available, the best available grade shall be used.

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents and standards are 
required for sample analysis:
    7.1.1 Water. Same as Method 6, Section 7.1.1.
    7.1.2 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>), 3 Percent by 
Volume. Same as Method 6, Section 7.1.3 (40 ml is needed per sample).
    7.1.3 Recovery Check Gas. Carbonyl sulfide in nitrogen [100 parts 
per million by volume (ppmv) or greater, if necessary] in an aluminum 
cylinder. Concentration certified by the manufacturer with an accuracy 
of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent or better, or verified by gas 
chromatography where the instrument is calibrated with a COS permeation 
tube.
    7.1.4 Combustion Gas. Air, contained in a gas cylinder equipped with 
a two-stage regulator. The gas shall contain less than 50 ppb of reduced 
sulfur compounds and less than 10 ppm total hydrocarbons.
    7.2 Sample Recovery and Analysis. Same as Method 6, Sections 7.2 and 
7.3.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Preparation of Sampling Train. For the Method 6 part of the 
train, measure 20 ml of 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> into the 
first and second midget impingers. Leave the third midget impinger empty 
and add silica gel to the fourth impinger. Alternatively, a silica gel 
drying tube may be used in place of the fourth impinger. Place crushed 
ice and water around all impingers. Maintain the oxidation furnace at 
1100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 [deg]C (2,012 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>90 
[deg]F) to ensure 100 percent oxidation of COS. Maintain the probe and 
filter temperatures at a high enough level (no visible condensation) to 
prevent moisture condensation and monitor the temperatures with a 
thermocouple.
    8.2 Leak-Check Procedure. Assemble the sampling train and leak-check 
as described in Method 6, Section 8.2. Include the combustion air 
delivery system from the needle valve forward in the leak-check.
    8.3 Sample Collection. Adjust the pressure on the second stage of 
the regulator on the combustion air cylinder to 10 psig. Adjust the 
combustion air flow rate to 0.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 L/min (1.1 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 ft\3\/hr) before injecting combustion air into 
the sampling train. Then inject combustion air into the sampling train, 
start the sample pump, and open the stack sample gas valve. Carry out 
these three operations within 15 to 30 seconds to avoid pressurizing the 
sampling train. Adjust the total sample flow rate to 2.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 L/min (4.2 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft\3\/hr). 
These flow rates produce an O<INF>2</INF> concentration of 5.0 percent 
in the stack gas, which must be maintained constantly to allow oxidation 
of reduced sulfur compounds to SO<INF>2</INF>. Adjust these flow rates 
during sampling as necessary. Monitor and record the combustion air 
manometer reading at regular intervals during the sampling period. 
Sample for 1 or 3 hours. At the end of sampling, turn off the sample 
pump and combustion air simultaneously (within 30 seconds of each 
other). All other procedures are the same as in Method 6, Section 8.3, 
except that the sampling train should not be purged. After collecting 
the

[[Page 397]]

sample, remove the probe from the stack and conduct a leak-check 
according to the procedures outlined in Section 8.2 of Method 6 
(mandatory). After each 3-hour test run (or after three 1-hour samples), 
conduct one system performance check (see Section 8.5). After this 
system performance check and before the next test run, it is recommended 
that the probe be rinsed and brushed and the filter replaced.

    Note: In Method 15, a test run is composed of 16 individual analyses 
(injects) performed over a period of not less than 3 hours or more than 
6 hours. For Method 15A to be consistent with Method 15, the following 
may be used to obtain a test run: (1) Collect three 60-minute samples or 
(2) collect one 3-hour sample. (Three test runs constitute a test.)

    8.4 Sample Recovery. Recover the hydrogen peroxide-containing 
impingers as detailed in Method 6, Section 8.4.
    8.5 System Performance Check.
    8.5.1 A system performance check is done (1) to validate the 
sampling train components and procedure (before testing, optional) and 
(2) to validate a test run (after a run, mandatory). Perform a check in 
the field before testing consisting of at least two samples (optional), 
and perform an additional check after each 3-hour run or after three 1-
hour samples (mandatory).
    8.5.2 The checks involve sampling a known concentration of COS and 
comparing the analyzed concentration with the known concentration. Mix 
the recovery gas with N<INF>2</INF> as shown in Figure 15A-4 if dilution 
is required. Adjust the flow rates to generate a COS concentration in 
the range of the stack gas or within 20 percent of the applicable 
standard at a total flow rate of at least 2.5 L/min (5.3 ft\3\/hr). Use 
Equation 15A-4 (see Section 12.5) to calculate the concentration of 
recovery gas generated. Calibrate the flow rate from both sources with a 
soap bubble flow tube so that the diluted concentration of COS can be 
accurately calculated. Collect 30-minute samples, and analyze in the 
same manner as the emission samples. Collect the samples through the 
probe of the sampling train using a manifold or some other suitable 
device that will ensure extraction of a representative sample.
    8.5.3 The recovery check must be performed in the field before 
replacing the particulate filter and before cleaning the probe. A sample 
recovery of 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20 percent must be obtained for 
the data to be valid and should be reported with the emission data, but 
should not be used to correct the data. However, if the performance 
check results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of 
the affected facility, the Administrator may decide to accept the 
results of the compliance test. Use Equation 15A-5 (see Section 12.6) to 
calculate the recovery efficiency.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.5...........................  System             Ensures validity of
                                 performance        sampling train
                                 check.             components and
                                                    analytical
                                                    procedure.
8.2, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensures accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume
10.0..........................  Barium standard    Ensures precision of
                                 solution           normality
                                 standardization.   determination.
11.1..........................  Replicate          Ensures precision of
                                 titrations.        titration
                                                    determinations.
11.2..........................  Audit sample       Evaluates analyst's
                                 analysis.          technique and
                                                    standards
                                                    preparation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Metering System, Temperature Sensors, Barometer, and Barium 
Perchlorate Solution. Same as Method 6, Sections 10.1, 10.2, 10.4, and 
10.5, respectively.
    10.2 Rate Meter. Calibrate with a bubble flow tube.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample Loss Check and Sample Analysis. Same as Method 6, 
Sections 11.1 and 11.2.
    11.2 Audit Sample Analysis. Same as Method 6, Section 11.3.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    In the calculations, retain at least one extra decimal figure beyond 
that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final calculations.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>COS</INF>=Concentration of COS recovery gas, ppm.
C<INF>RG(act)</INF>=Actual concentration of recovery check gas (after 
dilution), ppm.
C<INF>RG(m)</INF>=Measured concentration of recovery check gas 
generated, ppm.
C<INF>RS</INF>=Concentration of reduced sulfur compounds as 
SO<INF>2</INF>, dry basis, corrected to standard conditions, ppm.
N=Normality of barium perchlorate titrant, milliequivalents/ml.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at exit orifice of the dry gas 
meter, mm Hg.
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg.
Q<INF>COS</INF>=Flow rate of COS recovery gas, liters/min.
Q<INF>N</INF>=Flow rate of diluent N<INF>2</INF>, liters/min.
R=Recovery efficiency for the system performance check, percent.

[[Page 398]]

T<INF>m</INF>=Average dry gas meter absolute temperature, [deg]K.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K.
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of sample aliquot titrated, ml.
V<INF>ms</INF>=Dry gas volume as measured by the sample train dry gas 
meter, liters.
V<INF>mc</INF>=Dry gas volume as measured by the combustion air dry gas 
meter, liters.
V<INF>ms(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the sample train dry gas 
meter, corrected to standard conditions, liters.
V<INF>mc(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the combustion air dry 
gas meter, corrected to standard conditions, liters.
V<INF>soln</INF>=Total volume of solution in which the sulfur dioxide 
sample is contained, 100 ml.
V<INF>t</INF>=Volume of barium perchlorate titrant used for the sample 
(average of replicate titrations), ml.
V<INF>tb</INF>=Volume of barium perchlorate titrant used for the blank, 
ml.
Y=Calibration factor for sampling train dry gas meter.
Y<INF>c</INF>=Calibration factor for combustion air dry gas meter.
32.03=Equivalent weight of sulfur dioxide, mg/meq.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.411

    12.2 Dry Sample Gas Volume, Corrected to Standard Conditions.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.268
    
Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,
    =17.65 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    12.3 Combustion Air Gas Volume, corrected to Standard Conditions.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.269
    
    Note: Correct P<INF>bar</INF> for the average pressure of the 
manometer during the sampling period.

    12.4 Concentration of reduced sulfur compounds as ppm 
SO<INF>2</INF>.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.270

Where:

[[Page 399]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.271

    12.5 Concentration of Generated Recovery Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.272
    
    12.6 Recovery Efficiency for the System Performance Check.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.273
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Analytical Range. The lower detectable limit is 0.1 ppmv when 
sampling at 2 lpm for 3 hours or 0.3 ppmv when sampling at 2 lpm for 1 
hour. The upper concentration limit of the method exceeds concentrations 
of reduced sulfur compounds generally encountered in sulfur recovery 
plants.
    13.2 Precision. Relative standard deviations of 2.8 and 6.9 percent 
have been obtained when sampling a stream with a reduced sulfur compound 
concentration of 41 ppmv as SO<INF>2</INF> for 1 and 3 hours, 
respectively.
    13.3 Bias. No analytical bias has been identified. However, results 
obtained with this method are likely to contain a positive bias relative 
to emission regulations due to the presence of nonregulated sulfur 
compounds (that are present in petroleum) in the emissions. The 
magnitude of this bias varies accordingly, and has not been quantified.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. American Society for Testing and Materials Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards. Part 31: Water, Atmospheric Analysis. Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. 1974. pp. 40-42.
    2. Blosser, R.O., H.S. Oglesby, and A.K. Jain. A Study of Alternate 
SO<INF>2</INF> Scrubber Designs Used for TRS Monitoring. National 
Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Inc., New 
York, New York. Special Report 77-05. July 1977.
    3. Curtis, F., and G.D. McAlister. Development and Evaluation of an 
Oxidation/Method 6 TRS Emission Sampling Procedure. Emission Measurement 
Branch, Emission Standards and Engineering Division, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. February 
1980.
    4. Gellman, I. A Laboratory and Field Study of Reduced Sulfur 
Sampling and Monitoring Systems. National Council of the Paper Industry 
for Air and Stream Improvement, Inc., New York, New York. Atmospheric 
Quality Improvement Technical Bulletin No. 81. October 1975.
    5. Margeson, J.H., et al. A Manual Method for TRS Determination. 
Journal of Air Pollution Control Association. 35:1280-1286. December 
1985.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 400]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.274


[[Page 401]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.275


[[Page 402]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.276


[[Page 403]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.277


[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-5, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

           Appendix A-6 to Part 60--Test Methods 16 through 18

Method 16--Semicontinuous determination of sulfur emissions from 
stationary sources
Method 16A--Determination of total reduced sulfur emissions from 
stationary sources (impinger technique)
Method 16B--Determination of total reduced sulfur emissions from 
stationary sources

[[Page 404]]

Method 17--Determination of particulate emissions from stationary 
sources (in-stack filtration method)
Method 18--Measurement of gaseous organic compound emissions by gas 
chromatography
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining to 
any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are 
properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

    Method 16--Semicontinuous Determination of Sulfur Emissions From 
                           Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 4, Method 15, 
and Method 16A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dimethyl disulfide [(CH3)2S2]..        62-49-20  50 ppb.
Dimethyl sulfide [(CH3)2S].....         75-18-3  50 ppb.

[[Page 405]]

 
Hydrogen sulfide [H2S].........       7783-06-4  50 ppb.
Methyl mercaptan [CH4S]........         74-93-1  50 ppb.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of total reduced sulfur (TRS) compounds from recovery furnaces, lime 
kilns, and smelt dissolving tanks at kraft pulp mills and fuel gas 
combustion devices at petroleum refineries.

    Note: The method described below uses the principle of gas 
chromatographic (GC) separation and flame photometric detection (FPD). 
Since there are many systems or sets of operating conditions that 
represent useable methods of determining sulfur emissions, all systems 
which employ this principle, but differ only in details of equipment and 
operation, may be used as alternative methods, provided that the 
calibration precision and sample line loss criteria are met.

    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from the emission source and an 
aliquot is analyzed for hydrogen sulfide (H<INF>2</INF>S), methyl 
mercaptan (MeSH), dimethyl sulfide (DMS), and dimethyl disulfide (DMDS) 
by GC/FPD. These four compounds are known collectively as TRS.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Moisture. Moisture condensation in the sample delivery system, 
the analytical column, or the FPD burner block can cause losses or 
interferences. This is prevented by maintaining the probe, filter box, 
and connections at a temperature of at least 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F). 
Moisture is removed in the SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber and heating the 
sample beyond this point is not necessary when the ambient temperature 
is above 0 [deg]C (32 [deg]F). Alternatively, moisture may be eliminated 
by heating the sample line, and by conditioning the sample with dry 
dilution air to lower its dew point below the operating temperature of 
the GC/FPD analytical system prior to analysis.
    4.2 Carbon Monoxide (CO) and Carbon Dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>). CO and 
CO<INF>2</INF> have a substantial desensitizing effect on the flame 
photometric detector even after dilution. Acceptable systems must 
demonstrate that they have eliminated this interference by some 
procedure such as eluting these compounds before any of the compounds to 
be measured. Compliance with this requirement can be demonstrated by 
submitting chromatograms of calibration gases with and without 
CO<INF>2</INF> in the diluent gas. The CO<INF>2</INF> level should be 
approximately 10 percent for the case with CO<INF>2</INF> present. The 
two chromatograms should show agreement within the precision limits of 
Section 10.2.
    4.3 Particulate Matter. Particulate matter in gas samples can cause 
interference by eventual clogging of the analytical system. This 
interference is eliminated by using the Teflon filter after the probe.
    4.4 Sulfur Dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>). Sulfur dioxide is not a 
specific interferant but may be present in such large amounts that it 
cannot effectively be separated from the other compounds of interest. 
The SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber described in Section 6.1.3 will effectively 
remove SO<INF>2</INF> from the sample.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Hydrogen Sulfide. A flammable, poisonous gas with the odor of 
rotten eggs. H<INF>2</INF>S is extremely hazardous and can cause 
collapse, coma, and death within a few seconds of one or two inhalations 
at sufficient concentrations. Low concentrations irritate the mucous 
membranes and may cause nausea, dizziness, and headache after exposure.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1. Sample Collection. The following items are needed for sample 
collection.
    6.1.1 Probe. Teflon or Teflon-lined stainless steel. The probe must 
be heated to prevent moisture condensation. It must be designed to allow 
calibration gas to enter the probe at or near the sample point entry. 
Any portion of the probe that contacts the stack gas must be heated to 
prevent moisture condensation. Figure 16-1 illustrates the probe used in 
lime kilns and other sources where significant amounts of particulate 
matter are present. The probe is designed with the deflector shield 
placed between the sample and the gas inlet holes to reduce clogging of 
the filter and possible adsorption of sample gas. As an alternative, the 
probe described in Section 6.1.1 of Method 16A having a nozzle directed 
away from the gas stream may be used at sources having significant 
amounts of particulate matter.

[[Page 406]]

    6.1.2 Particulate Filter. 50-mm Teflon filter holder and a 1- to 2-
micron porosity Teflon filter (available through Savillex Corporation, 
5325 Highway 101, Minnetonka, Minnesota 55343). The filter holder must 
be maintained in a hot box at a temperature of at least 120 [deg]C (248 
[deg]F).
    6.1.3 SO<INF>2</INF> Scrubber. Three 300-ml Teflon segmented 
impingers connected in series with flexible, thick-walled, Teflon 
tubing. (Impinger parts and tubing available through Savillex.) The 
first two impingers contain 100 ml of citrate buffer and the third 
impinger is initially dry. The tip of the tube inserted into the 
solution should be constricted to less than 3 mm (\1/8\ in.) ID and 
should be immersed to a depth of at least 5 cm (2 in.). Immerse the 
impingers in an ice water bath and maintain near 0 [deg]C (32 [deg]F). 
The scrubber solution will normally last for a 3-hour run before needing 
replacement. This will depend upon the effects of moisture and 
particulate matter on the solution strength and pH. Connections between 
the probe, particulate filter, and SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber must be made 
of Teflon and as short in length as possible. All portions of the probe, 
particulate filter, and connections prior to the SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber 
(or alternative point of moisture removal) must be maintained at a 
temperature of at least 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F).
    6.1.4 Sample Line. Teflon, no greater than 1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) ID. 
Alternative materials, such as virgin Nylon, may be used provided the 
line loss test is acceptable.
    6.1.5 Sample Pump. The sample pump must be a leakless Teflon-coated 
diaphragm type or equivalent.
    6.2 Analysis. The following items are needed for sample analysis:
    6.2.1 Dilution System. Needed only for high sample concentrations. 
The dilution system must be constructed such that all sample contacts 
are made of Teflon, glass, or stainless steel.
    6.2.2 Gas Chromatograph. The gas chromatograph must have at least 
the following components:
    6.2.2.1 Oven. Capable of maintaining the separation column at the 
proper operating temperature <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F).
    6.2.2.2 Temperature Gauge. To monitor column oven, detector, and 
exhaust temperature <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F).
    6.2.2.3 Flow System. Gas metering system to measure sample, fuel, 
combustion gas, and carrier gas flows.
    6.2.2.4 Flame Photometric Detector.
    6.2.2.4.1 Electrometer. Capable of full scale amplification of 
linear ranges of 10<SUP>-9</SUP> to 10<SUP>-4</SUP> amperes full scale.
    6.2.2.4.2 Power Supply. Capable of delivering up to 750 volts.
    6.2.2.4.3 Recorder. Compatible with the output voltage range of the 
electrometer.
    6.2.2.4.4 Rotary Gas Valves. Multiport Teflon-lined valves equipped 
with sample loop. Sample loop volumes must be chosen to provide the 
needed analytical range. Teflon tubing and fittings must be used 
throughout to present an inert surface for sample gas. The gas 
chromatograph must be calibrated with the sample loop used for sample 
analysis.
    6.2.3 Gas Chromatogram Columns. The column system must be 
demonstrated to be capable of resolving the four major reduced sulfur 
compounds: H<INF>2</INF>S, MeSH, DMS, and DMDS. It must also demonstrate 
freedom from known interferences. To demonstrate that adequate 
resolution has been achieved, submit a chromatogram of a calibration gas 
containing all four of the TRS compounds in the concentration range of 
the applicable standard. Adequate resolution will be defined as base 
line separation of adjacent peaks when the amplifier attenuation is set 
so that the smaller peak is at least 50 percent of full scale. Baseline 
separation is defined as a return to zero <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
percent in the interval between peaks. Systems not meeting this criteria 
may be considered alternate methods subject to the approval of the 
Administrator.
    6.3 Calibration. A calibration system, containing the following 
components, is required (see Figure 16-2).
    6.3.1 Tube Chamber. Chamber of glass or Teflon of sufficient 
dimensions to house permeation tubes.
    6.3.2 Flow System. To measure air flow over permeation tubes at 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent. Flow over the permeation device may 
also be determined using a soap bubble flowmeter.
    6.3.3 Constant Temperature Bath. Device capable of maintaining the 
permeation tubes at the calibration temperature within 0.1 [deg]C (0.2 
[deg]F).
    6.3.4 Temperature Gauge. Thermometer or equivalent to monitor bath 
temperature within 1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F).

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Fuel. Hydrogen (H<INF>2</INF>), prepurified grade or better.
    7.2 Combustion Gas. Oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) or air, research purity 
or better.
    7.3 Carrier Gas. Prepurified grade or better.
    7.4 Diluent (if required). Air containing less than 50 ppb total 
sulfur compounds and less than 10 ppmv each of moisture and total 
hydrocarbons.
    7.5 Calibration Gases
    7.5.1 Permeation tubes, one each of H<INF>2</INF>S, MeSH, DMS, and 
DMDS, gravimetrically calibrated and certified at some convenient 
operating temperature. These tubes consist of hermetically sealed FEP 
Teflon tubing in which a liquified gaseous substance is enclosed. The 
enclosed gas permeates through the tubing wall at a constant rate. When 
the temperature is constant, calibration gases

[[Page 407]]

covering a wide range of known concentrations can be generated by 
varying and accurately measuring the flow rate of diluent gas passing 
over the tubes. These calibration gases are used to calibrate the GC/FPD 
system and the dilution system.
    7.5.2 Cylinder Gases. Cylinder gases may be used as alternatives to 
permeation devices. The gases must be traceable to a primary standard 
(such as permeation tubes) and not used beyond the certification 
expiration date.
    7.6 Citrate Buffer and Sample Line Loss Gas. Same as Method 15, 
Sections 7.6 and 7.7.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Same as Method 15, Section 8.0, except that the references to the 
dilution system may not be applicable.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.0...........................  Sample line loss   Ensures that
                                 check.             uncorrected negative
                                                    bias introduced by
                                                    sample loss is no
                                                    greater than 20
                                                    percent, and
                                                    provides for
                                                    correction of bias
                                                    of 20 percent or
                                                    less.
8.0...........................  Calibration drift  Ensures that bias
                                 test.              introduced by drift
                                                    in the measurement
                                                    system output during
                                                    the run is no
                                                    greater than 5
                                                    percent.
10.0..........................  Analytical         Ensures precision of
                                 calibration.       analytical results
                                                    within 5 percent.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 15, Section 10.0, with the following addition and 
exceptions:
    10.1 Use the four compounds that comprise TRS instead of the three 
reduced sulfur compounds measured by Method 15.
    10.2 Flow Meter. Calibration before each test run is recommended, 
but not required; calibration following each test series is mandatory. 
Calibrate each flow meter after each complete test series with a wet-
test meter. If the flow measuring device differs from the wet-test meter 
by 5 percent or more, the completed test runs must be voided. 
Alternatively, the flow data that yield the lower flow measurement may 
be used. Flow over the permeation device may also be determined using a 
soap bubble flowmeter.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method (see 
Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Concentration of Reduced Sulfur Compounds. Calculate the 
average concentration of each of the four analytes (i.e., DMDS, DMS, 
H<INF>2</INF>S, and MeSH) over the sample run (specified in Section 8.2 
of Method 15 as 16 injections).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.278

Where:

S<INF>i</INF>=Concentration of any reduced sulfur compound from the 
i<SUP>th</SUP> sample injection, ppm.
C=Average concentration of any one of the reduced sulfur compounds for 
the entire run, ppm.
N=Number of injections in any run period.

    12.2 TRS Concentration. Using Equation 16-2, calculate the TRS 
concentration for each sample run.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.279

Where:

C<INF>TRS</INF>=TRS concentration, ppmv.
C<INF>H2S</INF>=Hydrogen sulfide concentration, ppmv.
C<INF>MeSH</INF>=Methyl mercaptan concentration, ppmv.
C<INF>DMS</INF>=Dimethyl sulfide concentration, ppmv.
C<INF>DMDS</INF>=Dimethyl disulfide concentration, ppmv.
d=Dilution factor, dimensionless.

    12.3 Average TRS Concentration. Calculate the average TRS 
concentration for all sample runs performed.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.280

Where:


[[Page 408]]


Average TRS=Average total reduced sulfur in ppm.
TRS<INF>i</INF>=Total reduced sulfur in ppm as determined by Equation 
16-2.
N=Number of samples.
B<INF>wo</INF>=Fraction of volume of water vapor in the gas stream as 
determined by Method 4--Determination of Moisture in Stack Gases.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Analytical Range. The analytical range will vary with the 
sample loop size. Typically, the analytical range may extend from 0.1 to 
100 ppmv using 10- to 0.1-ml sample loop sizes. This eliminates the need 
for sample dilution in most cases.
    13.2 Sensitivity. Using the 10-ml sample size, the minimum 
detectable concentration is approximately 50 ppb.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. O'Keeffe, A.E., and G.C. Ortman. ``Primary Standards for Trace 
Gas Analysis.'' Analytical Chemical Journal, 38,76. 1966.
    2. Stevens, R.K., A.E. O'Keeffe, and G.C. Ortman. ``Absolute 
Calibration of a Flame Photometric Detector to Volatile Sulfur Compounds 
at Sub-Part-Per-Million Levels.'' Environmental Science and Technology, 
3:7. July 1969.
    3. Mulik, J.D., R.K. Stevens, and R. Baumgardner. ``An Analytical 
System Designed to Measure Multiple Malodorous Compounds Related to 
Kraft Mill Activities.'' Presented at the 12th Conference on Methods in 
Air Pollution and Industrial Hygiene Studies, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA. April 6-8, 1971.
    4. Devonald, R.H., R.S. Serenius, and A.D. McIntyre. ``Evaluation of 
the Flame Photometric Detector for Analysis of Sulfur Compounds.'' Pulp 
and Paper Magazine of Canada, 73,3. March 1972.
    5. Grimley, K.W., W.S. Smith, and R.M. Martin. ``The Use of a 
Dynamic Dilution System in the Conditioning of Stack Gases for Automated 
Analysis by a Mobile Sampling Van.'' Presented at the 63rd Annual APCA 
Meeting, St. Louis, MO. June 14-19, 1970.
    6. General Reference. Standard Methods of Chemical Analysis, Volumes 
III-A and III-B Instrumental Methods. Sixth Edition. Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 409]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.281


[[Page 410]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.282

    Method 16A--Determination of Total Reduced Sulfur Emissions From 
                 Stationary Sources (Impinger Technique)

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 6, and Method 
16.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 411]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total reduced sulfur (TRS)                     N/A  See Section 13.1.
 including:
    Dimethyl disulfide [(CH3)2S2].        62-49-20
    Dimethyl sulfide [(CH3)2S]....         75-18-3
    Hydrogen sulfide [H2S]........       7783-06-4
    Methyl mercaptan [CH4S].......         74-93-1
Reduced sulfur (RS) including:                 N/A
    H2S...........................       7783-06-4
    Carbonyl sulfide [COS]........        463-58-1
    Carbon disulfide [CS2]........         75-15-0
Reported as: Sulfur dioxide (SO2).       7449-09-5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of TRS emissions from recovery boilers, lime kilns, and smelt dissolving 
tanks at kraft pulp mills, reduced sulfur compounds (H<INF>2</INF>S, 
carbonyl sulfide, and carbon disulfide from sulfur recovery units at 
onshore natural gas processing facilities, and from other sources when 
specified in an applicable subpart of the regulations. The flue gas must 
contain at least 1 percent oxygen for complete oxidation of all TRS to 
SO<INF>2</INF>.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 An integrated gas sample is extracted from the stack. 
SO<INF>2</INF> is removed selectively from the sample using a citrate 
buffer solution. TRS compounds are then thermally oxidized to 
SO<INF>2</INF>, collected in hydrogen peroxide as sulfate, and analyzed 
by the Method 6 barium-thorin titration procedure.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Reduced sulfur compounds other than those regulated by the 
emission standards, if present, may be measured by this method. 
Therefore, carbonyl sulfide, which is partially oxidized to 
SO<INF>2</INF> and may be present in a lime kiln exit stack, would be a 
positive interferant.
    4.2 Particulate matter from the lime kiln stack gas (primarily 
calcium carbonate) can cause a negative bias if it is allowed to enter 
the citrate scrubber; the particulate matter will cause the pH to rise 
and H<INF>2</INF>S to be absorbed prior to oxidation. Furthermore, if 
the calcium carbonate enters the hydrogen peroxide impingers, the 
calcium will precipitate sulfate ion. Proper use of the particulate 
filter described in Section 6.1.3 will eliminate this interference.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs.
    5.2.2 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.3 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 3 mg/m\3\ will cause lung damage in uninitiated. 1 mg/m\3\ for 8 
hours will cause lung damage or, in higher concentrations, death. 
Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts violently with metals 
and organics.
    5.3 Hydrogen Sulfide (H<INF>2</INF>S). A flammable, poisonous gas 
with the odor of rotten eggs. H<INF>2</INF>S is extremely hazardous and 
can cause collapse, coma, and death within a few seconds of one or two 
inhalations at sufficient concentrations. Low concentrations irritate 
the mucous membranes and may cause nausea, dizziness, and headache after 
exposure.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The sampling train is shown in Figure 16A-1 
and component parts are discussed below. Modifications to this sampling 
train are acceptable provided the system performance check is met (see 
Section 8.5).
    6.1.1 Probe. Teflon tubing, 6.4-mm (\1/4\-in.) diameter, 
sequentially wrapped with heat-resistant fiber strips, a rubberized heat 
tape (plug at one end), and heat-resistant adhesive tape. A flexible 
thermocouple or other suitable temperature measuring device

[[Page 412]]

should be placed between the Teflon tubing and the fiber strips so that 
the temperature can be monitored to prevent softening of the probe. The 
probe should be sheathed in stainless steel to provide in-stack 
rigidity. A series of bored-out stainless steel fittings placed at the 
front of the sheath will prevent moisture and particulate from entering 
between the probe and sheath. A 6.4-mm (\1/4\-in.) Teflon elbow (bored 
out) should be attached to the inlet of the probe, and a 2.54 cm (1 in.) 
piece of Teflon tubing should be attached at the open end of the elbow 
to permit the opening of the probe to be turned away from the 
particulate stream; this will reduce the amount of particulate drawn 
into the sampling train. The probe is depicted in Figure 16A-2.
    6.1.2 Probe Brush. Nylon bristle brush with handle inserted into a 
3.2-mm (\1/8\-in.) Teflon tubing. The Teflon tubing should be long 
enough to pass the brush through the length of the probe.
    6.1.3 Particulate Filter. 50-mm Teflon filter holder and a 1- to 2-
[micro]m porosity, Teflon filter (available through Savillex 
Corporation, 5325 Highway 101, Minnetonka, Minnesota 55343). The filter 
holder must be maintained in a hot box at a temperature sufficient to 
prevent moisture condensation. A temperature of 121 [deg]C (250 [deg]F) 
was found to be sufficient when testing a lime kiln under sub-freezing 
ambient conditions.
    6.1.4 SO<INF>2</INF> Scrubber. Three 300-ml Teflon segmented 
impingers connected in series with flexible, thick-walled, Teflon 
tubing. (Impinger parts and tubing available through Savillex.) The 
first two impingers contain 100 ml of citrate buffer and the third 
impinger is initially dry. The tip of the tube inserted into the 
solution should be constricted to less than 3 mm (\1/8\-in.) ID and 
should be immersed to a depth of at least 5 cm (2 in.).
    6.1.5 Combustion Tube. Quartz glass tubing with an expanded 
combustion chamber 2.54 cm (1 in.) in diameter and at least 30.5 cm (12 
in.) long. The tube ends should have an outside diameter of 0.6 cm (\1/
4\ in.) and be at least 15.3 cm (6 in.) long. This length is necessary 
to maintain the quartz-glass connector near ambient temperature and 
thereby avoid leaks. Alternatively, the outlet may be constructed with a 
90-degree glass elbow and socket that would fit directly onto the inlet 
of the first peroxide impinger.
    6.1.6 Furnace. A furnace of sufficient size to enclose the 
combustion chamber of the combustion tube with a temperature regulator 
capable of maintaining the temperature at 800 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 
[deg]C (1472 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>180 [deg]F). The furnace operating 
temperature should be checked with a thermocouple to ensure accuracy.
    6.1.7 Peroxide Impingers, Stopcock Grease, Temperature Sensor, 
Drying Tube, Valve, Pump, and Barometer. Same as Method 6, Sections 
6.1.1.2, 6.1.1.4, 6.1.1.5, 6.1.1.6, 6.1.1.7, 6.1.1.8, and 6.1.2, 
respectively, except that the midget bubbler of Method 6, Section 
6.1.1.2 is not required.
    6.1.8 Vacuum Gauge. At least 760 mm Hg (30 in. Hg) gauge.
    6.1.9 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, accurate to within 5 
percent at the selected flow rate of approximately 2 liters/min (4.2 
ft\3\/hr).
    6.1.10 Volume Meter. Dry gas meter capable of measuring the sample 
volume under the sampling conditions of 2 liters/min (4.2 ft\3\/hr) with 
an accuracy of 2 percent.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. Polyethylene Bottles, 250-ml (one per sample).
    6.3 Sample Preparation and Analysis. Same as Method 6, Section 6.3, 
except a 10-ml buret with 0.05-ml graduations is required, and the 
spectrophotometer is not needed.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents must conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society. When such specifications are not 
available, the best available grade must be used.

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample analysis:
    7.1.1 Water. Same as in Method 6, Section 7.1.1.
    7.1.2 Citrate Buffer. Dissolve 300 g of potassium citrate (or 284 g 
of sodium citrate) and 41 g of anhydrous citric acid in 1 liter of water 
(200 ml is needed per test). Adjust the pH to between 5.4 and 5.6 with 
potassium citrate or citric acid, as required.
    7.1.3 Hydrogen Peroxide, 3 percent. Same as in Method 6, Section 
7.1.3 (40 ml is needed per sample).
    7.1.4 Recovery Check Gas. Hydrogen sulfide (100 ppmv or less) in 
nitrogen, stored in aluminum cylinders. Verify the concentration by 
Method 11 or by gas chromatography where the instrument is calibrated 
with an H<INF>2</INF>S permeation tube as described below. For Method 
11, the relative standard deviation should not exceed 5 percent on at 
least three 20-minute runs.

    Note: Alternatively, hydrogen sulfide recovery gas generated from a 
permeation device gravimetrically calibrated and certified at some 
convenient operating temperature may be used. The permeation rate of the 
device must be such that at a dilution gas flow rate of 3 liters/min 
(6.4 ft\3\/hr), an H<INF>2</INF>S concentration in the range of the 
stack gas or within 20 percent of the standard can be generated.

    7.1.5 Combustion Gas. Gas containing less than 50 ppb reduced sulfur 
compounds and less than 10 ppmv total hydrocarbons. The gas may be 
generated from a clean-air system that purifies ambient air and consists 
of the following components: Diaphragm pump, silica gel drying tube, 
activated charcoal

[[Page 413]]

tube, and flow rate measuring device. Flow from a compressed air 
cylinder is also acceptable.
    7.2 Sample Recovery and Analysis. Same as Method 6, Sections 7.2.1 
and 7.3, respectively.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Preparation of Sampling Train.
    8.1.1 For the SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber, measure 100 ml of citrate 
buffer into the first and second impingers; leave the third impinger 
empty. Immerse the impingers in an ice bath, and locate them as close as 
possible to the filter heat box. The connecting tubing should be free of 
loops. Maintain the probe and filter temperatures sufficiently high to 
prevent moisture condensation, and monitor with a suitable temperature 
sensor.
    8.1.2 For the Method 6 part of the train, measure 20 ml of 3 percent 
hydrogen peroxide into the first and second midget impingers. Leave the 
third midget impinger empty, and place silica gel in the fourth midget 
impinger. Alternatively, a silica gel drying tube may be used in place 
of the fourth impinger. Maintain the oxidation furnace at 800 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>100 [deg]C (1472 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>180 [deg]F). 
Place crushed ice and water around all impingers.
    8.2 Citrate Scrubber Conditioning Procedure. Condition the citrate 
buffer scrubbing solution by pulling stack gas through the Teflon 
impingers and bypassing all other sampling train components. A purge 
rate of 2 liters/min for 10 minutes has been found to be sufficient to 
obtain equilibrium. After the citrate scrubber has been conditioned, 
assemble the sampling train, and conduct (optional) a leak-check as 
described in Method 6, Section 8.2.
    8.3 Sample Collection. Same as in Method 6, Section 8.3, except the 
sampling rate is 2 liters/min (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) for 1 
or 3 hours. After the sample is collected, remove the probe from the 
stack, and conduct (mandatory) a post-test leak-check as described in 
Method 6, Section 8.2. The 15-minute purge of the train following 
collection should not be performed. After each 3-hour test run (or after 
three 1-hour samples), conduct one system performance check (see Section 
8.5) to determine the reduced sulfur recovery efficiency through the 
sampling train. After this system performance check and before the next 
test run, rinse and brush the probe with water, replace the filter, and 
change the citrate scrubber (optional but recommended).

    Note: In Method 16, a test run is composed of 16 individual analyses 
(injects) performed over a period of not less than 3 hours or more than 
6 hours. For Method 16A to be consistent with Method 16, the following 
may be used to obtain a test run: (1) collect three 60-minute samples or 
(2) collect one 3-hour sample. (Three test runs constitute a test.)

    8.4 Sample Recovery. Disconnect the impingers. Quantitatively 
transfer the contents of the midget impingers of the Method 6 part of 
the train into a leak-free polyethylene bottle for shipment. Rinse the 
three midget impingers and the connecting tubes with water and add the 
washings to the same storage container. Mark the fluid level. Seal and 
identify the sample container.
    8.5 System Performance Check.
    8.5.1 A system performance check is done (1) to validate the 
sampling train components and procedure (prior to testing; optional) and 
(2) to validate a test run (after a run). Perform a check in the field 
prior to testing consisting of at least two samples (optional), and 
perform an additional check after each 3 hour run or after three 1-hour 
samples (mandatory).
    8.5.2 The checks involve sampling a known concentration of 
H<INF>2</INF>S and comparing the analyzed concentration with the known 
concentration. Mix the H<INF>2</INF>S recovery check gas (Section 7.1.4) 
and combustion gas in a dilution system such as that shown in Figure 
16A-3. Adjust the flow rates to generate an H<INF>2</INF>S concentration 
in the range of the stack gas or within 20 percent of the applicable 
standard and an oxygen concentration greater than 1 percent at a total 
flow rate of at least 2.5 liters/min (5.3 ft\3\/hr). Use Equation 16A-3 
to calculate the concentration of recovery gas generated. Calibrate the 
flow rate from both sources with a soap bubble flow meter so that the 
diluted concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S can be accurately calculated.
    8.5.3 Collect 30-minute samples, and analyze in the same manner as 
the emission samples. Collect the sample through the probe of the 
sampling train using a manifold or some other suitable device that will 
ensure extraction of a representative sample.
    8.5.4 The recovery check must be performed in the field prior to 
replacing the SO<INF>2</INF> scrubber and particulate filter and before 
the probe is cleaned. Use Equation 16A-4 (see Section 12.5) to calculate 
the recovery efficiency. Report the recovery efficiency with the 
emission data; do not correct the emission data for the recovery 
efficiency. A sample recovery of 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20 percent 
must be obtained for the emission data to be valid. However, if the 
recovery efficiency is not in the 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20 percent 
range but the results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance 
status of the affected facility, the Administrator may decide to accept 
the results of the compliance test.

                           9.0 Quality Control

[[Page 414]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.5...........................  System             Ensure validity of
                                 performance        sampling train
                                 check.             components and
                                                    analytical
                                                    procedure.
8.2, 10.0.....................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.0..........................  Barium standard    Ensure precision of
                                 solution           normality
                                 standardization.   determination.
11.1..........................  Replicate          Ensure precision of
                                 titrations.        titration
                                                    determinations.
11.2..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analyst's
                                 analysis.          technique and
                                                    standards
                                                    preparation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            10.0 Calibration

    Same as Method 6, Section 10.0.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample Loss Check and Sample Analysis. Same as Method 6, 
Sections 11.1 and 11.2, respectively, with the following exception: for 
1-hour sampling, take a 40-ml aliquot, add 160 ml of 100 percent 
isopropanol and four drops of thorin.
    11.2 Audit Sample Analysis. Same as Method 6, Section 11.3.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    In the calculations, at least one extra decimal figure should be 
retained beyond that of the acquired data. Figures should be rounded off 
after final calculations.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>TRS</INF>=Concentration of TRS as SO<INF>2</INF>, dry basis 
corrected to standard conditions, ppmv.
C<INF>RG(act)</INF>=Actual concentration of recovery check gas (after 
dilution), ppm.
C<INF>RG(m)</INF>=Measured concentration of recovery check gas 
generated, ppm.
C<INF>H2S</INF>=Verified concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S recovery gas.
N=Normality of barium perchlorate titrant, milliequivalents/ml.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure at exit orifice of the dry gas 
meter, mm Hg (in. Hg).
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).
Q<INF>H2S</INF>=Calibrated flow rate of H<INF>2</INF>S recovery gas, 
liters/min.
Q<INF>CG</INF>=Calibrated flow rate of combustion gas, liters/min.
R=Recovery efficiency for the system performance check, percent.
T<INF>m</INF>=Average dry gas meter absolute temperature, [deg]K 
([deg]R).
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K (528 [deg]R).
V<INF>a</INF>=Volume of sample aliquot titrated, ml.
V<INF>m</INF>=Dry gas volume as measured by the dry gas meter, liters 
(dcf).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, liters (dscf).
V<INF>soln</INF>=Total volume of solution in which the sulfur dioxide 
sample is contained, 100 ml.
V<INF>t</INF>=Volume of barium perchlorate titrant used for the sample, 
ml (average of replicate titrations).
V<INF>tb</INF>=Volume of barium perchlorate titrant used for the blank, 
ml.
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor.
32.03=Equivalent weight of sulfur dioxide, mg/meq.

    12.2 Dry Sample Gas Volume, Corrected to Standard Conditions.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.283
    
Where:

K<INF>1</INF>=0.3855 [deg]K/mm Hg for metric units,
    =17.65 [deg]R/in. Hg for English units.

    12.3 Concentration of TRS as ppm SO<INF>2</INF>.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.284
    
Where:

[[Page 415]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.285

    12.4 Concentration of Recovery Gas Generated in the System 
Performance Check.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.286

    12.5 Recovery Efficiency for the System Performance Check.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.287
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Analytical Range. The lower detectable limit is 0.1 ppmv 
SO<INF>2</INF> when sampling at 2 liters/min (4.2 ft\3\/hr) for 3 hours 
or 0.3 ppmv when sampling at 2 liters/min (4.2 ft\3\/hr) for 1 hour. The 
upper concentration limit of the method exceeds the TRS levels generally 
encountered at kraft pulp mills.
    13.2 Precision. Relative standard deviations of 2.0 and 2.6 percent 
were obtained when sampling a recovery boiler for 1 and 3 hours, 
respectively.
    13.3 Bias.
    13.3.1 No bias was found in Method 16A relative to Method 16 in a 
separate study at a recovery boiler.
    13.3.2 Comparison of Method 16A with Method 16 at a lime kiln 
indicated that there was no bias in Method 16A. However, instability of 
the source emissions adversely affected the comparison. The precision of 
Method 16A at the lime kiln was similar to that obtained at the recovery 
boiler (Section 13.2.1).
    13.3.3 Relative standard deviations of 2.7 and 7.7 percent have been 
obtained for system performance checks.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    As an alternative to the procedures specified in Section 7.1.4, the 
following procedure may be used to verify the H<INF>2</INF>S 
concentration of the recovery check gas.
    16.1 Summary. The H<INF>2</INF>S is collected from the calibration 
gas cylinder and is absorbed in zinc acetate solution to form zinc 
sulfide. The latter compound is then measured iodometrically.
    16.2 Range. The procedure has been examined in the range of 5 to 
1500 ppmv.
    16.3 Interferences. There are no known interferences to this 
procedure when used to analyze cylinder gases containing H<INF>2</INF>S 
in nitrogen.
    16.4 Precision and Bias. Laboratory tests have shown a relative 
standard deviation of less than 3 percent. The procedure showed no bias 
when compared to a gas chromatographic method that used gravimetrically 
certified permeation tubes for calibration.
    16.5 Equipment and Supplies.
    16.5.1 Sampling Apparatus. The sampling train is shown in Figure 
16A-4. Its component parts are discussed in Sections 16.5.1.1 through 
16.5.2.
    16.5.1.1 Sampling Line. Teflon tubing (\1/4\-in.) to connect the 
cylinder regulator to the sampling valve.
    16.5.1.2 Needle Valve. Stainless steel or Teflon needle valve to 
control the flow rate of gases to the impingers.
    16.5.1.3 Impingers. Three impingers of approximately 100-ml 
capacity, constructed to permit the addition of reagents through the gas 
inlet stem. The impingers shall be connected in series with leak-free 
glass or Teflon connectors. The impinger bottoms have a standard 24/25 
ground-glass fitting. The stems are from standard 6.4-mm (\1/4\-in.) 
ball joint midget impingers, custom lengthened by about 1 in. When 
fitted together, the stem end should be approximately 1.27 cm (\1/2\ 
in.) from the bottom (Southern Scientific, Inc., Micanopy, Florida: Set 
Number S6962-048). The third in-line impinger acts as a drop-out bottle.
    16.5.1.4 Drying Tube, Rate Meter, and Barometer. Same as Method 11, 
Sections 6.1.5, 6.1.8, and 6.1.10, respectively.
    16.5.1.5 Cylinder Gas Regulator. Stainless steel, to reduce the 
pressure of the gas stream entering the Teflon sampling line to a safe 
level.
    16.5.1.6 Soap Bubble Meter. Calibrated for 100 and 500 ml, or two 
separate bubble meters.
    16.5.1.7 Critical Orifice. For volume and rate measurements. The 
critical orifice may be fabricated according to Section 16.7.3 and must 
be calibrated as specified in Section 16.12.4.
    16.5.1.8 Graduated Cylinder. 50-ml size.
    16.5.1.9 Volumetric Flask. 1-liter size.
    16.5.1.10 Volumetric Pipette. 15-ml size.

[[Page 416]]

    16.5.1.11 Vacuum Gauge. Minimum 20 in. Hg capacity.
    16.5.1.12 Stopwatch.
    16.5.2 Sample Recovery and Analysis.
    16.5.2.1 Erlenmeyer Flasks. 125- and 250-ml sizes.
    16.5.2.2 Pipettes. 2-, 10-, 20-, and 100-ml volumetric.
    16.5.2.3 Burette. 50-ml size.
    16.5.2.4 Volumetric Flask. 1-liter size.
    16.5.2.5 Graduated Cylinder. 50-ml size.
    16.5.2.6 Wash Bottle.
    16.5.2.7 Stirring Plate and Bars.
    16.6 Reagents and Standards. Unless otherwise indicated, all 
reagents must conform to the specifications established by the Committee 
on Analytical Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such 
specifications are available. Otherwise, use the best available grade.
    16.6.1 Water. Same as Method 11, Section 7.1.3.
    16.6.2 Zinc Acetate Absorbing Solution. Dissolve 20 g zinc acetate 
in water, and dilute to 1 liter.
    16.6.3 Potassium Bi-iodate [KH(IO<INF>3</INF>)<INF>2</INF>] 
Solution, Standard 0.100 N. Dissolve 3.249 g anhydrous 
KH(IO<INF>3</INF>)<INF>2</INF> in water, and dilute to 1 liter.
    16.6.4 Sodium Thiosulfate (Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF>) 
Solution, Standard 0.1 N. Same as Method 11, Section 7.3.2. Standardize 
according to Section 16.12.2.
    16.6.5 Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> Solution, Standard 
0.01 N. Pipette 100.0 ml of 0.1 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution into a 1-liter 
volumetric flask, and dilute to the mark with water.
    16.6.6 Iodine Solution, 0.1 N. Same as Method 11, Section 7.2.3.
    16.6.7 Standard Iodine Solution, 0.01 N. Same as in Method 11, 
Section 7.2.4. Standardize according to Section 16.12.3.
    16.6.8 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl) Solution, 10 Percent by Weight. Add 
230 ml concentrated HCl (specific gravity 1.19) to 770 ml water.
    16.6.9 Starch Indicator Solution. To 5 g starch (potato, arrowroot, 
or soluble), add a little cold water, and grind in a mortar to a thin 
paste. Pour into 1 liter of boiling water, stir, and let settle 
overnight. Use the clear supernatant. Preserve with 1.25 g salicylic 
acid, 4 g zinc chloride, or a combination of 4 g sodium propionate and 2 
g sodium azide per liter of starch solution. Some commercial starch 
substitutes are satisfactory.
    16.7 Pre-test Procedures.
    16.7.1 Selection of Gas Sample Volumes. This procedure has been 
validated for estimating the volume of cylinder gas sample needed when 
the H<INF>2</INF>S concentration is in the range of 5 to 1500 ppmv. The 
sample volume ranges were selected in order to ensure a 35 to 60 percent 
consumption of the 20 ml of 0.01 N iodine (thus ensuring a 0.01 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> titer of approximately 7 to 12 
ml). The sample volumes for various H<INF>2</INF>S concentrations can be 
estimated by dividing the approximate ppm-liters desired for a given 
concentration range by the H<INF>2</INF>S concentration stated by the 
manufacturer. For example, for analyzing a cylinder gas containing 
approximately 10 ppmv H<INF>2</INF>S, the optimum sample volume is 65 
liters (650 ppm-liters/10 ppmv). For analyzing a cylinder gas containing 
approximately 1000 ppmv H<INF>2</INF>S, the optimum sample volume is 1 
liter (1000 ppm-liters/1000 ppmv).

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Approximate
    Approximate cylinder gas H2S concentration (ppmv)       ppm-liters
                                                              desired
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5 to <30................................................             650
30 to <500..............................................             800
500 to <1500............................................            1000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    16.7.2 Critical Orifice Flow Rate Selection. The following table 
shows the ranges of sample flow rates that are desirable in order to 
ensure capture of H<INF>2</INF>S in the impinger solution. Slight 
deviations from these ranges will not have an impact on measured 
concentrations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Critical  orifice  flow rate
  Cylinder gas H2S concentration (ppmv)               (ml/min)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5 to 50 ppmv.............................  1500 <plus-minus<ls-thn-
                                            eq>500
50 to 250 ppmv...........................  500 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>250
250 to <1000 ppmv........................  200 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50
<ls-thn-eq>1000 ppmv.....................  75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    16.7.3 Critical Orifice Fabrication. Critical orifice of desired 
flow rates may be fabricated by selecting an orifice tube of desired 
length and connecting \1/16\-in.x\1/4\-in. (0.16 cmx0.64 cm) reducing 
fittings to both ends. The inside diameters and lengths of orifice tubes 
needed to obtain specific flow rates are shown below.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                  Flowrate  (ml/      Altech
                 Tube  (in. OD)                   Tube  (in. ID)   Length  (in.)       min)         Catalog No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/16\..........................................           0.007             1.2              85          301430
\1/16\..........................................           0.01              3.2             215          300530
\1/16\..........................................           0.01              1.2             350          300530
\1/16\..........................................           0.02              1.2            1400          300230
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    16.7.4 Determination of Critical Orifice Approximate Flow Rate. 
Connect the critical orifice to the sampling system as shown in Figure 
16A-4 but without the H<INF>2</INF>S cylinder.

[[Page 417]]

Connect a rotameter in the line to the first impinger. Turn on the pump, 
and adjust the valve to give a reading of about half atmospheric 
pressure. Observe the rotameter reading. Slowly increase the vacuum 
until a stable flow rate is reached, and record this as the critical 
vacuum. The measured flow rate indicates the expected critical flow rate 
of the orifice. If this flow rate is in the range shown in Section 
16.7.2, proceed with the critical orifice calibration according to 
Section 16.12.4.
    16.7.5 Determination of Approximate Sampling Time. Determine the 
approximate sampling time for a cylinder of known concentration. Use the 
optimum sample volume obtained in Section 16.7.1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.288

    16.8 Sample Collection.
    16.8.1 Connect the Teflon tubing, Teflon tee, and rotameter to the 
flow control needle valve as shown in Figure 16A-4. Vent the rotameter 
to an exhaust hood. Plug the open end of the tee. Five to 10 minutes 
prior to sampling, open the cylinder valve while keeping the flow 
control needle valve closed. Adjust the delivery pressure to 20 psi. 
Open the needle valve slowly until the rotameter shows a flow rate 
approximately 50 to 100 ml above the flow rate of the critical orifice 
being used in the system.
    16.8.2 Place 50 ml of zinc acetate solution in two of the impingers, 
connect them and the empty third impinger (dropout bottle) and the rest 
of the equipment as shown in Figure 16A-4. Make sure the ground-glass 
fittings are tight. The impingers can be easily stabilized by using a 
small cardboard box in which three holes have been cut, to act as a 
holder. Connect the Teflon sample line to the first impinger. Cover the 
impingers with a dark cloth or piece of plastic to protect the absorbing 
solution from light during sampling.
    16.8.3 Record the temperature and barometric pressure. Note the gas 
flow rate through the rotameter. Open the closed end of the tee. Connect 
the sampling tube to the tee, ensuring a tight connection. Start the 
sampling pump and stopwatch simultaneously. Note the decrease in flow 
rate through the excess flow rotameter. This decrease should equal the 
known flow rate of the critical orifice being used. Continue sampling 
for the period determined in Section 16.7.5.
    16.8.4 When sampling is complete, turn off the pump and stopwatch. 
Disconnect the sampling line from the tee and plug it. Close the needle 
valve followed by the cylinder valve. Record the sampling time.
    16.9 Blank Analysis. While the sample is being collected, run a 
blank as follows: To a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask, add 100 ml of zinc 
acetate solution, 20.0 ml of 0.01 N iodine solution, and 2 ml HCl 
solution. Titrate, while stirring, with 0.01 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> until the solution is light 
yellow. Add starch, and continue titrating until the blue color 
disappears. Analyze a blank with each sample, as the blank titer has 
been observed to change over the course of a day.

    Note: Iodine titration of zinc acetate solutions is difficult to 
perform because the solution turns slightly white in color near the end 
point, and the disappearance of the blue color is hard to recognize. In 
addition, a blue color may reappear in the solution about 30 to 45 
seconds after the titration endpoint is reached. This should not be 
taken to mean the original endpoint was in error. It is recommended that 
persons conducting this test perform several titrations to be able to 
correctly identify the endpoint. The importance of this should be 
recognized because the results of this analytical procedure are 
extremely sensitive to errors in titration.

    16.10 Sample Analysis. Sample treatment is similar to the blank 
treatment. Before detaching the stems from the bottoms of the impingers, 
add 20.0 ml of 0.01 N iodine solution through the stems of the impingers 
holding the zinc acetate solution, dividing it between the two (add 
about 15 ml to the first impinger and the rest to the second). Add 2 ml 
HCl solution through the stems, dividing it as with the iodine. 
Disconnect the sampling line, and store the impingers for 30 minutes. At 
the end of 30 minutes, rinse the impinger stems into the impinger 
bottoms. Titrate the impinger contents with 0.01 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF>. Do not transfer the contents 
of the impinger to a flask because this may result in a loss of iodine 
and cause a positive bias.
    16.11 Post-test Orifice Calibration. Conduct a post-test critical 
orifice calibration run using the calibration procedures outlined in 
Section 16.12.4. If the Q<INF>std</INF> obtained before and after the 
test differs by more than 5 percent, void the sample; if not, proceed to 
perform the calculations.
    16.12 Calibrations and Standardizations.
    16.12.1 Rotameter and Barometer. Same as Method 11, Sections 10.1.3 
and 10.1.4.
    16.12.2 Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> Solution, 0.1 N. 
Standardize the 0.1 N Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution 
as follows:

[[Page 418]]

To 80 ml water, stirring constantly, add 1 ml concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>, 10.0 ml of 0.100 N 
KH(IO<INF>3</INF>)<INF>2</INF> and 1 g potassium iodide. Titrate 
immediately with 0.1 N Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> until 
the solution is light yellow. Add 3 ml starch solution, and titrate 
until the blue color just disappears. Repeat the titration until 
replicate analyses agree within 0.05 ml. Take the average volume of 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> consumed to calculate the 
normality to three decimal figures using Equation 16A-5.
    16.12.3 Iodine Solution, 0.01 N. Standardize the 0.01 N iodine 
solution as follows: Pipet 20.0 ml of 0.01 N iodine solution into a 125-
ml Erlenmeyer flask. Titrate with standard 0.01 N 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution until the solution is 
light yellow. Add 3 ml starch solution, and continue titrating until the 
blue color just disappears. If the normality of the iodine tested is not 
0.010, add a few ml of 0.1 N iodine solution if it is low, or a few ml 
of water if it is high, and standardize again. Repeat the titration 
until replicate values agree within 0.05 ml. Take the average volume to 
calculate the normality to three decimal figures using Equation 16A-6.
    16.12.4 Critical Orifice. Calibrate the critical orifice using the 
sampling train shown in Figure 16A-4 but without the H<INF>2</INF>S 
cylinder and vent rotameter. Connect the soap bubble meter to the Teflon 
line that is connected to the first impinger. Turn on the pump, and 
adjust the needle valve until the vacuum is higher than the critical 
vacuum determined in Section 16.7.4. Record the time required for gas 
flow to equal the soap bubble meter volume (use the 100-ml soap bubble 
meter for gas flow rates below 100 ml/min, otherwise use the 500-ml soap 
bubble meter). Make three runs, and record the data listed in Table 16A-
1. Use these data to calculate the volumetric flow rate of the orifice.
    16.13 Calculations.
    16.13.1 Nomenclature.

B<INF>wa</INF>=Fraction of water vapor in ambient air during orifice 
calibration.
C<INF>H</INF>2<INF>S</INF>=H<INF>2</INF>S concentration in cylinder gas, 
ppmv.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.289

M<INF>a</INF>=Molecular weight of ambient air saturated at impinger 
temperature, g/g-mole.
M<INF>s</INF>=Molecular weight of sample gas (nitrogen) saturated at 
impinger temperature, g/g-mole.

    Note: (For tests carried out in a laboratory where the impinger 
temperature is 25 [deg]C, M<INF>a</INF>=28.5 g/g-mole and 
M<INF>s</INF>=27.7 g/g-mole.)

N<INF>I</INF>=Normality of standard iodine solution (0.01 N), g-eq/
liter.
N<INF>T</INF>=Normality of standard 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution (0.01 N), g-eq/liter.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg.
P<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute pressure, 760 mm Hg.
Q<INF>std</INF>=Average volumetric flow rate through critical orifice, 
liters/min.
T<INF>amb</INF>=Absolute ambient temperature, [deg]K.
T<INF>std</INF>=Standard absolute temperature, 293 [deg]K.
[thetas]<INF>s</INF>=Sampling time, min.
[thetas]<INF>sb</INF>=Time for soap bubble meter flow rate measurement, 
min.
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Sample gas volume measured by the critical orifice, 
corrected to standard conditions, liters.
V<INF>sb</INF>=Volume of gas as measured by the soap bubble meter, ml.
V<INF>sb(std)</INF>=Volume of gas as measured by the soap bubble meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, liters.
V<INF>I</INF>=Volume of standard iodine solution (0.01 N) used, ml.
V<INF>T</INF>=Volume of standard 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution (0.01 N) used, ml.
V<INF>TB</INF>=Volume of standard 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> solution (0.01 N) used for the 
blank, ml.

    16.13.2 Normality of Standard 
Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> Solution (0.1 N).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.290

    16.13.3 Normality of Standard Iodine Solution (0.01 N).
      
      

[[Page 419]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.291

    16.13.4 Sample Gas Volume.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.292
    
    16.13.5 Concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S in the Gas Cylinder.

                             17.0 References
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.293

    1. American Public Health Association, American Water Works 
Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation. Standard Methods 
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. Washington, DC. American 
Public Health Association. 1975. pp. 316-317.
    2. American Society for Testing and Materials. Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards. Part 31: Water, Atmospheric Analysis. Philadelphia, PA. 1974. 
pp. 40-42.
    3. Blosser, R.O. A Study of TRS Measurement Methods. National 
Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Inc., New 
York, NY. Technical Bulletin No. 434. May 1984. 14 pp.
    4. Blosser, R.O., H.S. Oglesby, and A.K. Jain. A Study of Alternate 
SO<INF>2</INF> Scrubber Designs Used for TRS Monitoring. A Special 
Report by the National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream 
Improvement, Inc., New York, NY. July 1977.
    5. Curtis, F., and G.D. McAlister. Development and Evaluation of an 
Oxidation/Method 6 TRS Emission Sampling Procedure. Emission Measurement 
Branch, Emission Standards and Engineering Division, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. February 1980.
    6. Gellman, I. A Laboratory and Field Study of Reduced Sulfur 
Sampling and Monitoring Systems. National Council of the Paper Industry 
for Air and Stream Improvement, Inc., New York, NY. Atmospheric Quality 
Improvement Technical Bulletin No. 81. October 1975.
    7. Margeson, J.H., J.E. Knoll, and M.R. Midgett. A Manual Method for 
TRS Determination. Source Branch, Quality Assurance Division, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.
    8. National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream 
Improvement. An Investigation of H<INF>2</INF>S and SO<INF>2</INF>. 
Calibration Cylinder Gas Stability and Their Standardization Using Wet 
Chemical Techniques. Special Report 76-06. New York, NY. August 1976.
    9. National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream 
Improvement. Wet Chemical Method for Determining the H<INF>2</INF>S 
Concentration of Calibration Cylinder Gases. Technical Bulletin Number 
450. New York, NY. January 1985. 23 pp.
    10. National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream 
Improvement. Modified Wet Chemical Method for Determining the 
H<INF>2</INF>S Concentration of Calibration Cylinder Gases. Draft 
Report. New York, NY. March 1987. 29 pp.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 420]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.294


[[Page 421]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.295


[[Page 422]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.296


[[Page 423]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.297

Date____________________________________________________________________
Critical orifice ID_____________________________________________________
Soap bubble meter volume, Vsb---- liters
Time, [thetas]sb
Run no. 1 ---- min ---- sec
Run no. 2 ---- min ---- sec
Run no. 3 ---- min ---- sec
Average ---- min ---- sec
Covert the seconds to fraction of minute:
Time=---- min + ---- Sec/60=---- min
Barometric pressure, P<INF>bar</INF>=---- mm Hg
Ambient temperature, t <INF>amb</INF>=273 + ---- [deg]C=---- [deg]K=---- 
mm Hg. (This should be approximately 0.4 times barometric pressure.)
Pump vacuum,

[[Page 424]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.298

             Table 16A-1. Critical Orifice Calibration Data

    Method 16B--Determination of Total Reduced Sulfur Emissions From 
                           Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 6C, Method 16, and Method 16A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total reduced sulfur (TRS) including:                                N/A
    Dimethyl disulfide (DMDS), [(CH3)2S2]...............        62-49-20
    Dimethyl sulfide (DMS), [(CH3)2S]...................         75-18-3
    Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)..............................       7783-06-4
    Methyl mercaptan (MeSH), [CH4S].....................         74-93-1
Reported as: Sulfur dioxide (SO2).......................       7449-09-5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for determining TRS 
emissions from recovery furnaces (boilers), lime kilns, and smelt 
dissolving tanks at kraft pulp mills, and from other sources when 
specified in an applicable subpart of the regulations. The flue gas must 
contain at least 1 percent oxygen for complete oxidation of all TRS to 
SO<INF>2</INF>.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 An integrated gas sample is extracted from the stack. The 
SO<INF>2</INF> is removed selectively from the sample using a citrate 
buffer solution. The TRS compounds are then thermally oxidized to 
SO<INF>2</INF> and analyzed as SO<INF>2</INF> by gas chromatography (GC) 
using flame photometric detection (FPD).

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Reduced sulfur compounds other than those regulated by the 
emission standards, if present, may be measured by this method. 
Therefore, carbonyl sulfide, which is partially oxidized to 
SO<INF>2</INF> and may be present in a lime kiln exit stack, would be a 
positive interferant.
    4.2 Particulate matter from the lime kiln stack gas (primarily 
calcium carbonate) can cause a negative bias if it is allowed to enter 
the citrate scrubber; the particulate matter will cause the pH to rise 
and H<INF>2</INF>S to be absorbed before oxidation. Proper use of the 
particulate filter, described in Section 6.1.3 of Method 16A, will 
eliminate this interference.
    4.3 Carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) have 
substantial desensitizing effects on the FPD even after dilution. 
Acceptable systems must demonstrate that they have eliminated this 
interference by some procedure such as eluting these compounds before 
the SO<INF>2</INF>. Compliance with this requirement can be demonstrated 
by submitting chromatograms of calibration gases with and without 
CO<INF>2</INF> in diluent gas. The CO<INF>2</INF> level should be 
approximately 10 percent for the case with CO<INF>2</INF> present. The 
two chromatograms should show agreement within the precision limits of 
Section 13.0.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Hydrogen Sulfide (H<INF>2</INF>S). A flammable, poisonous gas 
with the odor of rotten eggs. H<INF>2</INF>S is extremely hazardous and 
can cause collapse, coma, and death within a few seconds of one or two 
inhalations at sufficient concentrations. Low concentrations irritate

[[Page 425]]

the mucous membranes and may cause nausea, dizziness, and headache after 
exposure.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The sampling train is shown in Figure 16B-1. 
Modifications to the apparatus are accepted provided the system 
performance check in Section 8.4.1 is met.
    6.1.1 Probe, Probe Brush, Particulate Filter, SO<INF>2</INF> 
Scrubber, Combustion Tube, and Furnace. Same as in Method 16A, Sections 
6.1.1 to 6.1.6.
    6.1.2 Sampling Pump. Leakless Teflon-coated diaphragm type or 
equivalent.
    6.2 Analysis.
    6.2.1 Dilution System (optional), Gas Chromatograph, Oven, 
Temperature Gauges, Flow System, Flame Photometric Detector, 
Electrometer, Power Supply, Recorder, Calibration System, Tube Chamber, 
Flow System, and Constant Temperature Bath. Same as in Method 16, 
Sections 6.2.1, 6.2.2, and 6.3.
    6.2.2 Gas Chromatograph Columns. Same as in Method 16, Section 
6.2.3. Other columns with demonstrated ability to resolve SO<INF>2</INF> 
and be free from known interferences are acceptable alternatives. Single 
column systems such as a 7-ft Carbsorb B HT 100 column have been found 
satisfactory in resolving SO<INF>2</INF> from CO<INF>2</INF>.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as in Method 16, Section 7.0, except for the following:
    7.1 Calibration Gas. SO<INF>2</INF> permeation tube gravimetrically 
calibrated and certified at some convenient operating temperature. These 
tubes consist of hermetically sealed FEP Teflon tubing in which a 
liquefied gaseous substance is enclosed. The enclosed gas permeates 
through the tubing wall at a constant rate. When the temperature is 
constant, calibration gases covering a wide range of known 
concentrations can be generated by varying and accurately measuring the 
flow rate of diluent gas passing over the tubes. In place of 
SO<INF>2</INF> permeation tubes, cylinder gases containing 
SO<INF>2</INF> in nitrogen may be used for calibration. The cylinder gas 
concentration must be verified according to Section 8.2.1 of Method 6C. 
The calibration gas is used to calibrate the GC/FPD system and the 
dilution system.
    7.2 Recovery Check Gas.
    7.2.1 Hydrogen sulfide [100 parts per million by volume (ppmv) or 
less] in nitrogen, stored in aluminum cylinders. Verify the 
concentration by Method 11, the procedure discussed in Section 16.0 of 
Method 16A, or gas chromatography where the instrument is calibrated 
with an H<INF>2</INF>S permeation tube as described below. For the wet-
chemical methods, the standard deviation should not exceed 5 percent on 
at least three 20-minute runs.
    7.2.2 Hydrogen sulfide recovery gas generated from a permeation 
device gravimetrically calibrated and certified at some convenient 
operation temperature may be used. The permeation rate of the device 
must be such that at a dilution gas flow rate of 3 liters/min (64 ft\3\/
hr), an H<INF>2</INF>S concentration in the range of the stack gas or 
within 20 percent of the emission standard can be generated.
    7.3 Combustion Gas. Gas containing less than 50 ppbv reduced sulfur 
compounds and less than 10 ppmv total hydrocarbons. The gas may be 
generated from a clean-air system that purifies ambient air and consists 
of the following components: diaphragm pump, silica gel drying tube, 
activated charcoal tube, and flow rate measuring device. Gas from a 
compressed air cylinder is also acceptable.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Procedures. Same as in Method 15, Section 8.1.
    8.2 Sample Collection. Before any source sampling is performed, 
conduct a system performance check as detailed in Section 8.4.1 to 
validate the sampling train components and procedures. Although this 
test is optional, it would significantly reduce the possibility of 
rejecting tests as a result of failing the post-test performance check. 
At the completion of the pretest system performance check, insert the 
sampling probe into the test port making certain that no dilution air 
enters the stack though the port. Condition the entire system with 
sample for a minimum of 15 minutes before beginning analysis. If the 
sample is diluted, determine the dilution factor as in Section 10.4 of 
Method 15.
    8.3 Analysis. Inject aliquots of the sample into the GC/FPD analyzer 
for analysis. Determine the concentration of SO<INF>2</INF> directly 
from the calibration curves or from the equation for the least-squares 
line.
    8.4. Post-Test Procedures
    8.4.1 System Performance Check. Same as in Method 16A, Section 8.5. 
A sufficient number of sample injections should be made so that the 
precision requirements of Section 13.2 are satisfied.
    8.4.2 Determination of Calibration Drift. Same as in Method 15, 
Section 8.3.2.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2, 8.3......................  System             Ensure validity of
                                 performance        sampling train
                                 check.             components and
                                                    analytical
                                                    procedure.

[[Page 426]]

 
8.1...........................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
10.0..........................  Analytical         Ensure precision of
                                 calibration.       analytical results
                                                    within 5 percent.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            10.0 Calibration

    Same as in Method 16, Section 10, except SO<INF>2</INF> is used 
instead of H<INF>2</INF>S.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method 
(see section 8.3).
    12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations
12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>S</INF><INF>O</INF><INF>2</INF>=Sulfur dioxide concentration, 
ppmv.
C<INF>T</INF><INF>R</INF><INF>S</INF>=Total reduced sulfur concentration 
as determined by Equation 16B-1, ppmv.
d=Dilution factor, dimensionless.
N=Number of samples.

    12.2 SO<INF>2</INF> Concentration. Determine the concentration of 
SO<INF>2</INF>, C<INF>S</INF><INF>O</INF><INF>2</INF>, directly from the 
calibration curves. Alternatively, the concentration may be calculated 
using the equation for the least-squares line.
    12.3 TRS Concentration.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.299
    
    12.4 Average TRS Concentration
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.300
    
                        13.0 Method Performance.

    13.1 Range and Sensitivity. Coupled with a GC using a 1-ml sample 
size, the maximum limit of the FPD for SO<INF>2</INF> is approximately 
10 ppmv. This limit is extended by diluting the sample gas before 
analysis or by reducing the sample aliquot size. For sources with 
emission levels between 10 and 100 ppm, the measuring range can be best 
extended by reducing the sample size.
    13.2 GC/FPD Calibration and Precision. A series of three consecutive 
injections of the sample calibration gas, at any dilution, must produce 
results which do not vary by more than 5 percent from the mean of the 
three injections.
    13.3 Calibration Drift. The calibration drift determined from the 
mean of the three injections made at the beginning and end of any run or 
series of runs within a 24-hour period must not exceed 5 percent.
    13.4 System Calibration Accuracy. Losses through the sample 
transport system must be measured and a correction factor developed to 
adjust the calibration accuracy to 100 percent.
    13.5 Field tests between this method and Method 16A showed an 
average difference of less than 4.0 percent. This difference was not 
determined to be significant.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Same as in Method 16, Section 16.0.
    2. National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream 
Improvement, Inc, A Study of TRS Measurement Methods. Technical Bulletin 
No. 434. New York, NY. May 1984. 12p.
    3. Margeson, J.H., J.E. Knoll, and M.R. Midgett. A Manual Method for 
TRS Determination. Draft available from the authors. Source Branch, 
Quality Assurance Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 427]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.301

Method 17--Determination of Particulate Matter Emissions From Stationary 
                                 Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 5.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.


[[Page 428]]


    Note: Particulate matter is not an absolute quantity. It is a 
function of temperature and pressure. Therefore, to prevent variability 
in PM emission regulations and/or associated test methods, the 
temperature and pressure at which PM is to be measured must be carefully 
defined. Of the two variables (i.e., temperature and pressure), 
temperature has the greater effect upon the amount of PM in an effluent 
gas stream; in most stationary source categories, the effect of pressure 
appears to be negligible. In Method 5, 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F) is 
established as a nominal reference temperature. Thus, where Method 5 is 
specified in an applicable subpart of the standard, PM is defined with 
respect to temperature. In order to maintain a collection temperature of 
120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F), Method 5 employs a heated glass sample probe 
and a heated filter holder. This equipment is somewhat cumbersome and 
requires care in its operation. Therefore, where PM concentrations (over 
the normal range of temperature associated with a specified source 
category) are known to be independent of temperature, it is desirable to 
eliminate the glass probe and the heating systems, and to sample at 
stack temperature.

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of PM emissions, where PM concentrations are known to be independent of 
temperature over the normal range of temperatures characteristic of 
emissions from a specified source category. It is intended to be used 
only when specified by an applicable subpart of the standards, and only 
within the applicable temperature limits (if specified), or when 
otherwise approved by the Administrator. This method is not applicable 
to stacks that contain liquid droplets or are saturated with water 
vapor. In addition, this method shall not be used as written if the 
projected cross-sectional area of the probe extension-filter holder 
assembly covers more than 5 percent of the stack cross-sectional area 
(see Section 8.1.2).
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Particulate matter is withdrawn isokinetically from the source 
and collected on a glass fiber filter maintained at stack temperature. 
The PM mass is determined gravimetrically after the removal of 
uncombined water.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as Method 5, Section 3.0.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sampling Train. A schematic of the sampling train used in this 
method is shown in Figure 17-1. The sampling train components and 
operation and maintenance are very similar to Method 5, which should be 
consulted for details.
    6.1.1 Probe Nozzle, Differential Pressure Gauge, Metering System, 
Barometer, Gas Density Determination Equipment. Same as in Method 5, 
Sections 6.1.1, 6.1.4, 6.1.8, 6.1.9, and 6.1.10, respectively.
    6.1.2 Filter Holder. The in-stack filter holder shall be constructed 
of borosilicate or quartz glass, or stainless steel. If a gasket is 
used, it shall be made of silicone rubber, Teflon, or stainless steel. 
Other holder and gasket materials may be used, subject to the approval 
of the Administrator. The filter holder shall be designed to provide a 
positive seal against leakage from the outside or around the filter.
    6.1.3 Probe Extension. Any suitable rigid probe extension may be 
used after the filter holder.
    6.1.4 Pitot Tube. Same as in Method 5, Section 6.1.3.
    6.1.4.1 It is recommended (1) that the pitot tube have a known 
baseline coefficient, determined as outlined in Section 10 of Method 2; 
and (2) that this known coefficient be preserved by placing the pitot 
tube in an interference-free arrangement with respect to the sampling 
nozzle, filter holder, and temperature sensor (see Figure 17-1). Note 
that the 1.9 cm (\3/4\-in.) free-space between the nozzle and pitot tube 
shown in Figure 17-1, is based on a 1.3 cm (\1/2\-in.) ID nozzle. If the 
sampling train is designed for sampling at higher flow rates than that 
described in APTD-0581, thus necessitating the use of larger sized 
nozzles, the free-space shall be 1.9 cm (\3/4\-in.) with the largest 
sized nozzle in place.
    6.1.4.2 Source-sampling assemblies that do not meet the minimum 
spacing requirements of Figure 17-1 (or the equivalent of these 
requirements, e.g., Figure 2-4 of Method 2) may be used; however, the 
pitot tube coefficients of such assemblies shall be determined by 
calibration, using methods subject to the approval of the Administrator.

[[Page 429]]

    6.1.5 Condenser. It is recommended that the impinger system or 
alternatives described in Method 5 be used to determine the moisture 
content of the stack gas. Flexible tubing may be used between the probe 
extension and condenser. Long tubing lengths may affect the moisture 
determination.
    6.2 Sample Recovery. Probe-liner and probe-nozzle brushes, wash 
bottles, glass sample storage containers, petri dishes, graduated 
cylinder and/or balance, plastic storage containers, funnel and rubber 
policeman, funnel. Same as in Method 5, Sections 6.2.1 through 6.2.8, 
respectively.
    6.3 Sample Analysis. Glass weighing dishes, desiccator, analytical 
balance, balance, beakers, hygrometer, temperature sensor. Same as in 
Method 5, Sections 6.3.1 through 6.3.7, respectively.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sampling. Filters, silica gel, water, crushed ice, stopcock 
grease. Same as in Method 5, Sections 7.1.1, 7.1.2, 7.1.3, 7.1.4, and 
7.1.5, respectively. Thimble glass fiber filters may also be used.
    7.2 Sample Recovery. Acetone (reagent grade). Same as in Method 5, 
Section 7.2.
    7.3 Sample Analysis. Acetone and Desiccant. Same as in Method 5, 
Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2, respectively.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sampling.
    8.1.1 Pretest Preparation. Same as in Method 5, Section 8.1.1.
    8.1.2 Preliminary Determinations. Same as in Method 5, Section 
8.1.2, except as follows: Make a projected-area model of the probe 
extension-filter holder assembly, with the pitot tube face openings 
positioned along the centerline of the stack, as shown in Figure 17-2. 
Calculate the estimated cross-section blockage, as shown in Figure 17-2. 
If the blockage exceeds 5 percent of the duct cross sectional area, the 
tester has the following options exist: (1) a suitable out-of-stack 
filtration method may be used instead of in-stack filtration; or (2) a 
special in-stack arrangement, in which the sampling and velocity 
measurement sites are separate, may be used; for details concerning this 
approach, consult with the Administrator (see also Reference 1 in 
Section 17.0). Select a probe extension length such that all traverse 
points can be sampled. For large stacks, consider sampling from opposite 
sides of the stack to reduce the length of probes.
    8.1.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Same as in Method 5, Section 
8.1.3, except the following: Using a tweezer or clean disposable 
surgical gloves, place a labeled (identified) and weighed filter in the 
filter holder. Be sure that the filter is properly centered and the 
gasket properly placed so as not to allow the sample gas stream to 
circumvent the filter. Check filter for tears after assembly is 
completed. Mark the probe extension with heat resistant tape or by some 
other method to denote the proper distance into the stack or duct for 
each sampling point. Assemble the train as in Figure 17-1, using a very 
light coat of silicone grease on all ground glass joints and greasing 
only the outer portion (see APTD-0576) to avoid possibility of 
contamination by the silicone grease. Place crushed ice around the 
impingers.
    8.1.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Same as in Method 5, Section 8.1.4, 
except that the filter holder is inserted into the stack during the 
sampling train leak-check. To do this, plug the inlet to the probe 
nozzle with a material that will be able to withstand the stack 
temperature. Insert the filter holder into the stack and wait 
approximately 5 minutes (or longer, if necessary) to allow the system to 
come to equilibrium with the temperature of the stack gas stream.
    8.1.5 Sampling Train Operation. The operation is the same as in 
Method 5. Use a data sheet such as the one shown in Figure 5-3 of Method 
5, except that the filter holder temperature is not recorded.
    8.1.6 Calculation of Percent Isokinetic. Same as in Method 5, 
Section 12.11.
    8.2 Sample Recovery.
    8.2.1 Proper cleanup procedure begins as soon as the probe extension 
assembly is removed from the stack at the end of the sampling period. 
Allow the assembly to cool.
    8.2.2 When the assembly can be safely handled, wipe off all external 
particulate matter near the tip of the probe nozzle and place a cap over 
it to prevent losing or gaining particulate matter. Do not cap off the 
probe tip tightly while the sampling train is cooling down as this would 
create a vacuum in the filter holder, forcing condenser water backward.
    8.2.3 Before moving the sample train to the cleanup site, disconnect 
the filter holder-probe nozzle assembly from the probe extension; cap 
the open inlet of the probe extension. Be careful not to lose any 
condensate, if present. Remove the umbilical cord from the condenser 
outlet and cap the outlet. If a flexible line is used between the first 
impinger (or condenser) and the probe extension, disconnect the line at 
the probe extension and let any condensed water or liquid drain into the 
impingers or condenser. Disconnect the probe extension from the 
condenser; cap the probe extension outlet. After wiping off the silicone 
grease, cap off the condenser inlet. Ground glass stoppers, plastic 
caps, or serum caps (whichever are appropriate) may be used to close 
these openings.
    8.2.4 Transfer both the filter holder-probe nozzle assembly and the 
condenser to the cleanup area. This area should be clean and protected 
from the wind so that the chances

[[Page 430]]

of contaminating or losing the sample will be minimized.
    8.2.5 Save a portion of the acetone used for cleanup as a blank. 
Take 200 ml of this acetone from the wash bottle being used and place it 
in a glass sample container labeled ``acetone blank.'' Inspect the train 
prior to and during disassembly and not any abnormal conditions. Treat 
the sample as discussed in Method 5, Section 8.2.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    The calibrations of the probe nozzle, pitot tube, metering system, 
temperature sensors, and barometer are the same as in Method 5, Sections 
10.1 through 10.3, 10.5, and 10.6, respectively.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Same as in Method 5, Section 11.0. Analytical data should be 
recorded on a form similar to that shown in Figure 5-6 of Method 5.

                  12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations.

    Same as in Method 5, Section 12.0.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    Same as in Method 5, Section 16.0.

                             17.0 References

    Same as in Method 5, Section 17.0, with the addition of the 
following:

    1. Vollaro, R.F. Recommended Procedure for Sample Traverses in Ducts 
Smaller than 12 Inches in Diameter. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Emission Measurement Branch. Research Triangle Park, NC. 
November 1976.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 431]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.302


[[Page 432]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.303

  Method 18--Measurement of Gaseous Organic Compound Emissions By Gas 
                             Chromatography

    Note: This method is not inclusive with respect to specifications 
(e.g., equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and 
analytical) essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated 
by reference from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain 
reliable results, persons using this method should have a thorough 
knowledge of at least the following additional test methods: Method 1, 
Method 2, Method 3.
    Note: This method should not be attempted by persons unfamiliar with 
the performance characteristics of gas chromatography, nor by those 
persons who are unfamiliar with source sampling. Particular care

[[Page 433]]

should be exercised in the area of safety concerning choice of equipment 
and operation in potentially explosive atmospheres.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Total gaseous organic compounds.
    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This method is designed to measure gaseous organics emitted 
from an industrial source. While designed for ppm level sources, some 
detectors are quite capable of detecting compounds at ambient levels, 
e.g., ECD, ELCD, and helium ionization detectors. Some other types of 
detectors are evolving such that the sensitivity and applicability may 
well be in the ppb range in only a few years.
    1.2.2 This method will not determine compounds that (1) are 
polymeric (high molecular weight), (2) can polymerize before analysis, 
or (3) have very low vapor pressures at stack or instrument conditions.
    1.3 Range. The lower range of this method is determined by the 
sampling system; adsorbents may be used to concentrate the sample, thus 
lowering the limit of detection below the 1 part per million (ppm) 
typically achievable with direct interface or bag sampling. The upper 
limit is governed by GC detector saturation or column overloading; the 
upper range can be extended by dilution of sample with an inert gas or 
by using smaller volume gas sampling loops. The upper limit can also be 
governed by condensation of higher boiling compounds.
    1.4 Sensitivity. The sensitivity limit for a compound is defined as 
the minimum detectable concentration of that compound, or the 
concentration that produces a signal-to-noise ratio of three to one. The 
minimum detectable concentration is determined during the presurvey 
calibration for each compound.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    The major organic components of a gas mixture are separated by gas 
chromatography (GC) and individually quantified by flame ionization, 
photoionization, electron capture, or other appropriate detection 
principles. The retention times of each separated component are compared 
with those of known compounds under identical conditions. Therefore, the 
analyst confirms the identity and approximate concentrations of the 
organic emission components beforehand. With this information, the 
analyst then prepares or purchases commercially available standard 
mixtures to calibrate the GC under conditions identical to those of the 
samples. The analyst also determines the need for sample dilution to 
avoid detector saturation, gas stream filtration to eliminate 
particulate matter, and prevention of moisture condensation.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Resolution interferences that may occur can be eliminated by 
appropriate GC column and detector choice or by shifting the retention 
times through changes in the column flow rate and the use of temperature 
programming.
    4.2 The analytical system is demonstrated to be essentially free 
from contaminants by periodically analyzing blanks that consist of 
hydrocarbon-free air or nitrogen.
    4.3 Sample cross-contamination that occurs when high-level and low-
level samples or standards are analyzed alternately is best dealt with 
by thorough purging of the GC sample loop between samples.
    4.4 To assure consistent detector response, calibration gases are 
contained in dry air. To adjust gaseous organic concentrations when 
water vapor is present in the sample, water vapor concentrations are 
determined for those samples, and a correction factor is applied.
    4.5 The gas chromatograph run time must be sufficient to clear all 
eluting peaks from the column before proceeding to the next run (in 
order to prevent sample carryover).

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method. The analyzer users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedure.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Equipment needed for the presurvey sampling procedure can be 
found in Section 16.1.1.
    6.2 Equipment needed for the integrated bag sampling and analysis 
procedure can be found in Section 8.2.1.1.1.
    6.3 Equipment needed for direct interface sampling and analysis can 
be found in Section 8.2.2.1.
    6.4 Equipment needed for the dilution interface sampling and 
analysis can be found in Section 8.2.3.1.
    6.5 Equipment needed for adsorbent tube sampling and analysis can be 
found in Section 8.2.4.1.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Reagents needed for the presurvey sampling procedure can be 
found in Section 16.1.2.

[[Page 434]]

    7.2 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. When making compliance 
determinations, and upon availability, an audit sample may be obtained 
from the appropriate EPA Regional Office or from the responsible 
enforcement authority.

    Note: The responsible enforcement autority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.2 Final Sampling and Analysis Procedure. Considering safety (flame 
hazards) and the source conditions, select an appropriate sampling and 
analysis procedure (Section 8.2.1, 8.2.2, 8.2.3 or 8.2.4). In situations 
where a hydrogen flame is a hazard and no intrinsically safe GC is 
suitable, use the flexible bag collection technique or an adsorption 
technique.
    8.2.1 Integrated Bag Sampling and Analysis.
    8.2.1.1 Evacuated Container Sampling Procedure. In this procedure, 
the bags are filled by evacuating the rigid air-tight container holding 
the bags. Use a field sample data sheet as shown in Figure 18-10. 
Collect triplicate samples from each sample location.
    8.2.1.1.1 Apparatus.
    8.2.1.1.1.1 Probe. Stainless steel, Pyrex glass, or Teflon tubing 
probe, according to the duct temperature, with Teflon tubing of 
sufficient length to connect to the sample bag. Use stainless steel or 
Teflon unions to connect probe and sample line.
    8.2.1.1.1.2 Quick Connects. Male (2) and female (2) of stainless 
steel construction.
    8.2.1.1.1.3 Needle Valve. To control gas flow.
    8.2.1.1.1.4 Pump. Leakless Teflon-coated diaphragm-type pump or 
equivalent. To deliver at least 1 liter/min.
    8.2.1.1.1.5 Charcoal Adsorption Tube. Tube filled with activated 
charcoal, with glass wool plugs at each end, to adsorb organic vapors.
    8.2.1.1.1.6 Flowmeter. 0 to 500-ml flow range; with manufacturer's 
calibration curve.
    8.2.1.1.2 Sampling Procedure. To obtain a sample, assemble the 
sample train as shown in Figure 18-9. Leak-check both the bag and the 
container. Connect the vacuum line from the needle valve to the Teflon 
sample line from the probe. Place the end of the probe at the centroid 
of the stack or at a point no closer to the walls than 1 m, and start 
the pump. Set the flow rate so that the final volume of the sample is 
approximately 80 percent of the bag capacity. After allowing sufficient 
time to purge the line several times, connect the vacuum line to the 
bag, and evacuate until the rotameter indicates no flow. Then position 
the sample and vacuum lines for sampling, and begin the actual sampling, 
keeping the rate proportional to the stack velocity. As a precaution, 
direct the gas exiting the rotameter away from sampling personnel. At 
the end of the sample period, shut off the pump, disconnect the sample 
line from the bag, and disconnect the vacuum line from the bag 
container. Record the source temperature, barometric pressure, ambient 
temperature, sampling flow rate, and initial and final sampling time on 
the data sheet shown in Figure 18-10. Protect the Tedlar bag and its 
container from sunlight. Record the time lapsed between sample 
collection and analysis, and then conduct the recovery procedure in 
Section 8.4.2.
    8.2.1.2 Direct Pump Sampling Procedure. Follow 8.2.1.1, except place 
the pump and needle valve between the probe and the bag. Use a pump and 
needle valve constructed of inert material not affected by the stack 
gas. Leak-check the system, and then purge with stack gas before 
connecting to the previously evacuated bag.
    8.2.1.3 Explosion Risk Area Bag Sampling Procedure. Follow 8.2.1.1 
except replace the pump with another evacuated can (see Figure 18-9a). 
Use this method whenever there is a possibility of an explosion due to 
pumps, heated probes, or other flame producing equipment.
    8.2.1.4 Other Modified Bag Sampling Procedures. In the event that 
condensation is observed in the bag while collecting the sample and a 
direct interface system cannot be used, heat the bag during collection, 
and maintain it at a suitably elevated temperature during all subsequent 
operations. (Note: Take care to leak-check the system prior to the 
dilutions so as not to create a potentially explosive atmosphere.) As an 
alternative, collect the sample gas, and simultaneously dilute it in the 
Tedlar bag.
    8.2.1.4.1 First Alternative Procedure. Heat the box containing the 
sample bag to 120 [deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C). Then 
transport the bag as rapidly as possible to the analytical area while 
maintaining the heating, or cover the box with an insulating blanket. In 
the analytical area, keep the box heated to 120 [deg]C (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C) until analysis. Be sure that the method of 
heating the box and the control for the heating circuit are compatible 
with the safety restrictions required in each area.
    8.2.1.4.2 Second Alternative Procedure. Prefill the Tedlar bag with 
a known quantity of inert gas. Meter the inert gas into the bag 
according to the procedure for the preparation of gas concentration 
standards of volatile liquid materials (Section 10.1.2.2), but eliminate 
the midget impinger section. Take the partly filled bag to the source, 
and meter the source gas into the bag through heated sampling lines and 
a heated flowmeter, or Teflon positive displacement pump. Verify the 
dilution factors before sampling each bag

[[Page 435]]

through dilution and analysis of gases of known concentration.
    8.2.1.5 Analysis of Bag Samples.
    8.2.1.5.1 Apparatus. Same as Section 8.1. A minimum of three gas 
standards are required.
    8.2.1.5.2 Procedure.
    8.2.1.5.2.1 Establish proper GC operating conditions as described in 
Section 10.2, and record all data listed in Figure 18-7. Prepare the GC 
so that gas can be drawn through the sample valve. Flush the sample loop 
with calibration gas mixture, and activate the valve (sample pressure at 
the inlet to the GC introduction valve should be similar during 
calibration as during actual sample analysis). Obtain at least three 
chromatograms for the mixture. The results are acceptable when the peak 
areas for the three injections agree to within 5 percent of their 
average. If they do not agree, run additional samples or correct the 
analytical techniques until this requirement is met. Then analyze the 
other two calibration mixtures in the same manner. Prepare a calibration 
curve as described in Section 10.2.
    8.2.1.5.2.2 Analyze the two field audit samples as described in 
Section 9.2 by connecting each Tedlar bag containing an audit gas 
mixture to the sampling valve. Calculate the results; record and report 
the data to the audit supervisor.
    8.2.1.5.2.3 Analyze the three source gas samples by connecting each 
bag to the sampling valve with a piece of Teflon tubing identified with 
that bag. Analyze each bag sample three times. Record the data in Figure 
18-11. If certain items do not apply, use the notation ``N.A.'' If the 
bag has been maintained at an elevated temperature as described in 
Section 8.2.1.4, determine the stack gas water content by Method 4. 
After all samples have been analyzed, repeat the analysis of the mid-
level calibration gas for each compound. Compare the average response 
factor of the pre- and post-test analysis for each compound. If they 
differ by <ls-thn-eq>5percent, analyze the other calibration gas levels 
for that compound, and prepare a calibration curve using all the pre- 
and post-test calibration gas mixture values. If the two response factor 
averages (pre-and post-test) differ by less than 5 percent from their 
mean value, the tester has the option of using only the pre-test 
calibration curve to generate the concentration values.
    8.2.1.6 Determination of Bag Water Vapor Content. Measure the 
ambient temperature and barometric pressure near the bag. From a water 
saturation vapor pressure table, determine and record the water vapor 
content of the bag as a decimal figure. (Assume the relative humidity to 
be 100 percent unless a lesser value is known.) If the bag has been 
maintained at an elevated temperature as described in Section 8.2.1.4, 
determine the stack gas water content by Method 4.
    8.2.1.7 Audit Gas Analysis. Immediately prior to the analysis of the 
stack gas samples, perform audit analyses as described in Section 9.2.
    8.2.1.8 Emission Calculations. From the calibration curve described 
in Section 8.2.1.5, select the value of C<INF>s</INF> that corresponds 
to the peak area. Calculate the concentration C<INF>c</INF> in ppm, dry 
basis, of each organic in the sample using Equation 18-5 in Section 
12.6.
    8.2.2 Direct Interface Sampling and Analysis Procedure. The direct 
interface procedure can be used provided that the moisture content of 
the gas does not interfere with the analysis procedure, the physical 
requirements of the equipment can be met at the site, and the source gas 
concentration falls within the linear range of the detector. Adhere to 
all safety requirements with this method.
    8.2.2.1 Apparatus.
    8.2.2.1.1 Probe. Constructed of stainless steel, Pyrex glass, or 
Teflon tubing as dictated by duct temperature and reactivity of target 
compounds. A filter or glass wool plug may be needed if particulate is 
present in the stack gas. If necessary, heat the probe with heating tape 
or a special heating unit capable of maintaining a temperature greater 
than 110 [deg]C.
    8.2.2.1.2 Sample Lines. 6.4-mm OD (or other diameter as needed) 
Teflon lines, heat-traced to prevent condensation of material (greater 
than 110 [deg]C).
    8.2.2.1.3 Quick Connects. To connect sample line to gas sampling 
valve on GC instrument and to pump unit used to withdraw source gas. Use 
a quick connect or equivalent on the cylinder or bag containing 
calibration gas to allow connection of the calibration gas to the gas 
sampling valve.
    8.2.2.1.4 Thermocouple Readout Device. Potentiometer or digital 
thermometer, to measure source temperature and probe temperature.
    8.2.2.1.5 Heated Gas Sampling Valve. Of two-position, six-port 
design, to allow sample loop to be purged with source gas or to direct 
source gas into the GC instrument.
    8.2.2.1.6 Needle Valve. To control gas sampling rate from the 
source.
    8.2.2.1.7 Pump. Leakless Teflon-coated diaphragm-type pump or 
equivalent, capable of at least 1 liter/minute sampling rate.
    8.2.2.1.8 Flowmeter. Of suitable range to measure sampling rate.
    8.2.2.1.9 Charcoal Adsorber. To adsorb organic vapor vented from the 
source to prevent exposure of personnel to source gas.
    8.2.2.1.10 Gas Cylinders. Carrier gas, oxygen and fuel as needed to 
run GC and detector.
    8.2.2.1.11 Gas Chromatograph. Capable of being moved into the field, 
with detector, heated gas sampling valve, column required

[[Page 436]]

to complete separation of desired components, and option for temperature 
programming.
    8.2.2.1.12 Recorder/Integrator. To record results.
    8.2.2.2 Procedure. Calibrate the GC using the procedures in Section 
8.2.1.5.2.1. To obtain a stack gas sample, assemble the sampling system 
as shown in Figure 18-12. Make sure all connections are tight. Turn on 
the probe and sample line heaters. As the temperature of the probe and 
heated line approaches the target temperature as indicated on the 
thermocouple readout device, control the heating to maintain a 
temperature greater than 110 [deg]C. Conduct a 3-point calibration of 
the GC by analyzing each gas mixture in triplicate. Generate a 
calibration curve. Place the inlet of the probe at the centroid of the 
duct, or at a point no closer to the walls than 1 m, and draw source gas 
into the probe, heated line, and sample loop. After thorough flushing, 
analyze the stack gas sample using the same conditions as for the 
calibration gas mixture. For each run, sample, analyze, and record five 
consecutive samples. A test consists of three runs (five samples per run 
times three runs, for a total of fifteen samples). After all samples 
have been analyzed, repeat the analysis of the mid-level calibration gas 
for each compound. For each calibration standard, compare the pre- and 
post-test average response factors (RF) for each compound. If the two 
calibration RF values (pre- and post-analysis) differ by more than 5 
percent from their mean value, then analyze the other calibration gas 
levels for that compound and determine the stack gas sample 
concentrations by comparison to both calibration curves (this is done by 
preparing a calibration curve using all the pre and post-test 
calibration gas mixture values). If the two calibration RF values differ 
by less than 5 percent from their mean value, the tester has the option 
of using only the pre-test calibration curve to generate the 
concentration values. Record this calibration data and the other 
required data on the data sheet shown in Figure 18-11, deleting the 
dilution gas information.

    Note: Take care to draw all samples, calibration mixtures, and 
audits through the sample loop at the same pressure.

    8.2.2.3 Determination of Stack Gas Moisture Content. Use Method 4 to 
measure the stack gas moisture content.
    8.2.2.4 Quality Assurance. Same as Section 8.2.1.7. Introduce the 
audit gases in the sample line immediately following the probe.
    8.2.2.5 Emission Calculations. Same as Section 8.2.1.8.
    8.2.3 Dilution Interface Sampling and Analysis Procedure. Source 
samples that contain a high concentration of organic materials may 
require dilution prior to analysis to prevent saturating the GC 
detector. The apparatus required for this direct interface procedure is 
basically the same as that described in the Section 8.2.2, except a 
dilution system is added between the heated sample line and the gas 
sampling valve. The apparatus is arranged so that either a 10:1 or 100:1 
dilution of the source gas can be directed to the chromatograph. A pump 
of larger capacity is also required, and this pump must be heated and 
placed in the system between the sample line and the dilution apparatus.
    8.2.3.1 Apparatus. The equipment required in addition to that 
specified for the direct interface system is as follows:
    8.2.3.1.1 Sample Pump. Leakless Teflon-coated diaphragm-type that 
can withstand being heated to 120 [deg]C and deliver 1.5 liters/minute.
    8.2.3.1.2 Dilution Pumps. Two Model A-150 Komhyr Teflon positive 
displacement type delivering 150 cc/minute, or equivalent. As an option, 
calibrated flowmeters can be used in conjunction with Teflon-coated 
diaphragm pumps.
    8.2.3.1.3 Valves. Two Teflon three-way valves, suitable for 
connecting to Teflon tubing.
    8.2.3.1.4 Flowmeters. Two, for measurement of diluent gas.
    8.2.3.1.5 Diluent Gas with Cylinders and Regulators. Gas can be 
nitrogen or clean dry air, depending on the nature of the source gases.
    8.2.3.1.6 Heated Box. Suitable for being heated to 120 [deg]C, to 
contain the three pumps, three-way valves, and associated connections. 
The box should be equipped with quick connect fittings to facilitate 
connection of: (1) the heated sample line from the probe, (2) the gas 
sampling valve, (3) the calibration gas mixtures, and (4) diluent gas 
lines. A schematic diagram of the components and connections is shown in 
Figure 18-13. The heated box shown in Figure 18-13 is designed to 
receive a heated line from the probe. An optional design is to build a 
probe unit that attaches directly to the heated box. In this way, the 
heated box contains the controls for the probe heaters, or, if the box 
is placed against the duct being sampled, it may be possible to 
eliminate the probe heaters. In either case, a heated Teflon line is 
used to connect the heated box to the gas sampling valve on the 
chromatograph.

    Note: Care must be taken to leak-check the system prior to the 
dilutions so as not to create a potentially explosive atmosphere.

    8.2.3.2 Procedure.
    8.2.3.2.1 Assemble the apparatus by connecting the heated box, shown 
in Figure 18-13, between the heated sample line from the probe and the 
gas sampling valve on the chromatograph. Vent the source gas from the 
gas sampling valve directly to the charcoal filter, eliminating the pump 
and rotameter. Heat the sample probe, sample line, and

[[Page 437]]

heated box. Insert the probe and source thermocouple at the centroid of 
the duct, or to a point no closer to the walls than 1 m. Measure the 
source temperature, and adjust all heating units to a temperature 0 to 3 
[deg]C above this temperature. If this temperature is above the safe 
operating temperature of the Teflon components, adjust the heating to 
maintain a temperature high enough to prevent condensation of water and 
organic compounds (greater than 110 [deg]C). Calibrate the GC through 
the dilution system by following the procedures in Section 8.2.1.5.2.1. 
Determine the concentration of the diluted calibration gas using the 
dilution factor and the certified concentration of the calibration gas. 
Record the pertinent data on the data sheet shown in Figure 18-11.
    8.2.3.2.2 Once the dilution system and GC operations are 
satisfactory, proceed with the analysis of source gas, maintaining the 
same dilution settings as used for the standards.
    8.2.3.2.3 Analyze the audit samples using either the dilution 
system, or directly connect to the gas sampling valve as required. 
Record all data and report the results to the audit supervisor.
    8.2.3.3 Determination of Stack Gas Moisture Content. Same as Section 
8.2.2.3.
    8.2.3.4 Quality Assurance. Same as Section 8.2.2.4.
    8.2.3.5 Emission Calculations. Same as section 8.2.2.5, with the 
dilution factor applied.
    8.2.4 Adsorption Tube Procedure. Any commercially available 
adsorbent is allowed for the purposes of this method, as long as the 
recovery study criteria in Section 8.4.3 are met. Help in choosing the 
adsorbent may be found by calling the distributor, or the tester may 
refer to National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 
methods for the particular organics to be sampled. For some adsorbents, 
the principal interferent will be water vapor. If water vapor is thought 
to be a problem, the tester may place a midget impinger in an ice bath 
before the adsorbent tubes. If this option is chosen, the water catch in 
the midget impinger shall be analyzed for the target compounds. Also, 
the spike for the recovery study (in Section 8.4.3) shall be conducted 
in both the midget impinger and the adsorbent tubes. The combined 
recovery (add the recovered amount in the impinger and the adsorbent 
tubes to calculate R) shall then meet the criteria in Section 8.4.3.

    Note: Post-test leak-checks are not allowed for this technique since 
this can result in sample contamination.

    8.2.4.1 Additional Apparatus. The following items (or equivalent) 
are suggested.
    8.2.4.1.1 Probe. Borosilicate glass or stainless steel, 
approximately 6-mm ID, with a heating system if water condensation is a 
problem, and a filter (either in-stack or out-of-stack, heated to stack 
temperature) to remove particulate matter. In most instances, a plug of 
glass wool is a satisfactory filter.
    8.2.4.1.2 Flexible Tubing. To connect probe to adsorption tubes. Use 
a material that exhibits minimal sample adsorption.
    8.2.4.1.3 Leakless Sample Pump. Flow controlled, constant rate pump, 
with a set of limiting (sonic) orifices.
    8.2.4.1.4 Bubble-Tube Flowmeter. Volume accuracy within 1 percent, 
to calibrate pump.
    8.2.4.1.5 Stopwatch. To time sampling and pump rate calibration.
    8.2.4.1.6 Adsorption Tubes. Precleaned adsorbent, with mass of 
adsorbent to be determined by calculating breakthrough volume and 
expected concentration in the stack.
    8.2.4.1.7 Barometer. Accurate to 5 mm Hg, to measure atmospheric 
pressure during sampling and pump calibration.
    8.2.4.1.8 Rotameter. O to 100 cc/min, to detect changes in flow rate 
during sampling.
    8.2.4.2 Sampling and Analysis.
    8.2.4.2.1 Calibrate the pump and limiting orifice flow rate through 
adsorption tubes with the bubble tube flowmeter before sampling. The 
sample system can be operated as a ``recirculating loop'' for this 
operation. Record the ambient temperature and barometric pressure. Then, 
during sampling, use the rotameter to verify that the pump and orifice 
sampling rate remains constant.
    8.2.4.2.2 Use a sample probe, if required, to obtain the sample at 
the centroid of the duct, or at a point no closer to the walls than 1 m. 
Minimize the length of flexible tubing between the probe and adsorption 
tubes. Several adsorption tubes can be connected in series, if the extra 
adsorptive capacity is needed. Adsorption tubes should be maintained 
vertically during the test in order to prevent channeling. Provide the 
gas sample to the sample system at a pressure sufficient for the 
limiting orifice to function as a sonic orifice. Record the total time 
and sample flow rate (or the number of pump strokes), the barometric 
pressure, and ambient temperature. Obtain a total sample volume 
commensurate with the expected concentration(s) of the volatile 
organic(s) present, and recommended sample loading factors (weight 
sample per weight adsorption media). Laboratory tests prior to actual 
sampling may be necessary to predetermine this volume. If water vapor is 
present in the sample at concentrations above 2 to 3 percent, the 
adsorptive capacity may be severely reduced. Operate the gas 
chromatograph according to the manufacturer's instructions. After 
establishing optimum conditions, verify and document these conditions 
during all operations. Calibrate the instrument. Analyze the audit 
samples (see Section 16.1.4.3), then the emission samples.
    8.2.4.3 Standards and Calibration. If using thermal desorption, 
obtain calibration gases

[[Page 438]]

using the procedures in Section 10.1. If using solvent extraction, 
prepare liquid standards in the desorption solvent. Use a minimum of 
three different standards; select the concentrations to bracket the 
expected average sample concentration. Perform the calibration before 
and after each day's sample analyses using the procedures in Section 
8.2.1.5.2.1.
    8.2.4.4 Quality Assurance.
    8.2.4.4.1 Determine the recovery efficiency of the pollutants of 
interest according to Section 8.4.3.
    8.2.4.4.2 Determination of Sample Collection Efficiency (Optional). 
If sample breakthrough is thought to be a problem, a routine procedure 
for determining breakthrough is to analyze the primary and backup 
portions of the adsorption tubes separately. If the backup portion 
exceeds 10 percent of the total amount (primary and back-up), it is 
usually a sign of sample breakthrough. For the purposes of this method, 
only the recovery efficiency value (Section 8.4.3) is used to determine 
the appropriateness of the sampling and analytical procedure.
    8.2.4.4.3 Volume Flow Rate Checks. Perform this check immediately 
after sampling with all sampling train components in place. Use the 
bubble-tube flowmeter to measure the pump volume flow rate with the 
orifice used in the test sampling, and record the result. If it has 
changed by more than 5 but less than 20 percent, calculate an average 
flow rate for the test. If the flow rate has changed by more than 20 
percent, recalibrate the pump and repeat the sampling.
    8.2.4.4.4 Calculations. Correct all sample volumes to standard 
conditions. If a sample dilution system has been used, multiply the 
results by the appropriate dilution ratio. Correct all results according 
to the applicable procedure in Section 8.4.3. Report results as ppm by 
volume, dry basis.
    8.3 Reporting of Results. At the completion of the field analysis 
portion of the study, ensure that the data sheets shown in Figure 18-11 
have been completed. Summarize this data on the data sheets shown in 
Figure 18-15.
    8.4 Recovery Study. After conducting the presurvey and identifying 
all of the pollutants of interest, conduct the appropriate recovery 
study during the test based on the sampling system chosen for the 
compounds of interest.
    8.4.1 Recovery Study for Direct Interface or Dilution Interface 
Sampling. If the procedures in Section 8.2.2 or 8.2.3 are to be used to 
analyze the stack gas, conduct the calibration procedure as stated in 
Section 8.2.2.2 or 8.2.3.2, as appropriate. Upon successful completion 
of the appropriate calibration procedure, attach the mid-level 
calibration gas for at least one target compound to the inlet of the 
probe or as close as possible to the inlet of the probe, but before the 
filter. Repeat the calibration procedure by sampling and analyzing the 
mid-level calibration gas through the entire sampling and analytical 
system in triplicate. The mean of the calibration gas response sampled 
through the probe shall be within 10 percent of the analyzer response. 
If the difference in the two means is greater than 10 percent, check for 
leaks throughout the sampling system and repeat the analysis of the 
standard through the sampling system until this criterion is met.
    8.4.2 Recovery Study for Bag Sampling.
    8.4.2.1 Follow the procedures for the bag sampling and analysis in 
Section 8.2.1. After analyzing all three bag samples, choose one of the 
bag samples and tag this bag as the spiked bag. Spike the chosen bag 
sample with a known mixture (gaseous or liquid) of all of the target 
pollutants. The theoretical concentration, in ppm, of each spiked 
compound in the bag shall be 40 to 60 percent of the average 
concentration measured in the three bag samples. If a target compound 
was not detected in the bag samples, the concentration of that compound 
to be spiked shall be 5 times the limit of detection for that compound. 
Store the spiked bag for the same period of time as the bag samples 
collected in the field. After the appropriate storage time has passed, 
analyze the spiked bag three times. Calculate the average fraction 
recovered (R) of each spiked target compound with the equation in 
Section 12.7.
    8.4.2.2 For the bag sampling technique to be considered valid for a 
compound, 0.70 <= R <= 1.30. If the R value does not meet this criterion 
for a target compound, the sampling technique is not acceptable for that 
compound, and therefore another sampling technique shall be evaluated 
for acceptance (by repeating the recovery study with another sampling 
technique). Report the R value in the test report and correct all field 
measurements with the calculated R value for that compound by using the 
equation in Section 12.8.
    8.4.3 Recovery Study for Adsorption Tube Sampling. If following the 
adsorption tube procedure in Section 8.2.4, conduct a recovery study of 
the compounds of interest during the actual field test. Set up two 
identical sampling trains. Collocate the two sampling probes in the 
stack. The probes shall be placed in the same horizontal plane, where 
the first probe tip is 2.5 cm from the outside edge of the other. One of 
the sampling trains shall be designated the spiked train and the other 
the unspiked train. Spike all of the compounds of interest (in gaseous 
or liquid form) onto the adsorbent tube(s) in the spiked train before 
sampling. The mass of each spiked compound shall be 40 to 60 percent of 
the mass expected to be collected with the unspiked train. Sample the 
stack

[[Page 439]]

gas into the two trains simultaneously. Analyze the adsorbents from the 
two trains utilizing identical analytical procedures and 
instrumentation. Determine the fraction of spiked compound recovered (R) 
using the equations in Section 12.9.
    8.4.3.1 Repeat the procedure in Section 8.4.3 twice more, for a 
total of three runs. In order for the adsorbent tube sampling and 
analytical procedure to be acceptable for a compound, 0.70<=R<=1.30 (R 
in this case is the average of three runs). If the average R value does 
not meet this criterion for a target compound, the sampling technique is 
not acceptable for that compound, and therefore another sampling 
technique shall be evaluated for acceptance (by repeating the recovery 
study with another sampling technique). Report the R value in the test 
report and correct all field measurements with the calculated R value 
for that compound by using the equation in Section 12.8.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4.1.........................  Recovery study     Ensure that there are
                                 for direct         no significant leaks
                                 interface or       in the sampling
                                 dilution           system.
                                 interface
                                 sampling.
8.4.2.........................  Recovery study     Demonstrate that
                                 for bag sampling.  proper sampling/
                                                    analysis procedures
                                                    were selected.
8.4.3.........................  Recovery study     Demonstrate that
                                 for adsorption     proper sampling/
                                 tube sampling.     analysis procedures
                                                    were selected.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.2 Quality Assurance for Laboratory Procedures. Immediately after 
the preparation of the calibration curves, the analysis audit described 
in 40 CFR Part 61, Appendix C, Procedure 2: ``Procedure for Field 
Auditing GC Analysis,'' should be performed if audit materials are 
available. The information required to document the analysis of the 
audit samples has been included on the example data sheets shown in 
Figures 18-3 and 18-7. The audit analyses should agree with the 
certified audit concentrations within 10 percent. Audit sample results 
shall be submitted according to directions provided with the audit 
samples.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization.

    10.1 Calibration Standards. Obtain calibration gas standards for 
each target compound to be analyzed. Commercial cylinder gases certified 
by the manufacturer to be accurate to within 1 percent of the certified 
label value are preferable, although cylinder gases certified by the 
manufacturer to 2 percent accuracy are allowed. Another option allowed 
by this method is for the tester to obtain high concentration certified 
cylinder gases and then use a dilution system meeting the requirements 
of Test Method 205, 40 CFR Part 51, Appendix M to make multi-level 
calibration gas standards. Prepare or obtain enough calibration 
standards so that there are three different concentrations of each 
organic compound expected to be measured in the source sample. For each 
organic compound, select those concentrations that bracket the 
concentrations expected in the source samples. A calibration standard 
may contain more than one organic compound. If samples are collected in 
adsorbent tubes and extracted using solvent extraction, prepare or 
obtain standards in the same solvent used for the sample extraction 
procedure. Verify the stability of all standards for the time periods 
they are used.
    10.2 Preparation of Calibration Curves.
    10.2.1 Establish proper GC conditions, then flush the sampling loop 
for 30 seconds. Allow the sample loop pressure to equilibrate to 
atmospheric pressure, and activate the injection valve. Record the 
standard concentration, attenuator factor, injection time, chart speed, 
retention time, peak area, sample loop temperature, column temperature, 
and carrier gas flow rate. Analyze each standard in triplicate.
    10.2.2 Repeat this procedure for each standard. Prepare a graphical 
plot of concentration (C<INF>s</INF>) versus the calibration area 
values. Perform a regression analysis, and draw the least square line.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Analysis Development
    11.1.1 Selection of GC Parameters
    11.1.1.1 Column Choice. Based on the initial contact with plant 
personnel concerning the plant process and the anticipated emissions, 
choose a column that provides good resolution and rapid analysis time. 
The choice of an appropriate column can be aided by a literature search, 
contact with manufacturers of GC columns, and discussion with personnel 
at the emission source.

    Note: Most column manufacturers keep excellent records on their 
products. Their technical service departments may be able to recommend 
appropriate columns and detector type for separating the anticipated 
compounds, and they may be able to provide information on interferences, 
optimum operating conditions, and column limitations. Plants with 
analytical laboratories may be

[[Page 440]]

able to provide information on their analytical procedures.

    11.1.1.2 Preliminary GC Adjustment. Using the standards and column 
obtained in Section 11.1.1.1, perform initial tests to determine 
appropriate GC conditions that provide good resolution and minimum 
analysis time for the compounds of interest.
    11.1.1.3 Preparation of Presurvey Samples. If the samples were 
collected on an adsorbent, extract the sample as recommended by the 
manufacturer for removal of the compounds with a solvent suitable to the 
type of GC analysis. Prepare other samples in an appropriate manner.
    11.1.1.4 Presurvey Sample Analysis.
    11.1.1.4.1 Before analysis, heat the presurvey sample to the duct 
temperature to vaporize any condensed material. Analyze the samples by 
the GC procedure, and compare the retention times against those of the 
calibration samples that contain the components expected to be in the 
stream. If any compounds cannot be identified with certainty by this 
procedure, identify them by other means such as GC/mass spectroscopy 
(GC/MS) or GC/infrared techniques. A GC/MS system is recommended.
    11.1.1.4.2 Use the GC conditions determined by the procedure of 
Section 11.1.1.2 for the first injection. Vary the GC parameters during 
subsequent injections to determine the optimum settings. Once the 
optimum settings have been determined, perform repeat injections of the 
sample to determine the retention time of each compound. To inject a 
sample, draw sample through the loop at a constant rate (100 ml/min for 
30 seconds). Be careful not to pressurize the gas in the loop. Turn off 
the pump and allow the gas in the sample loop to come to ambient 
pressure. Activate the sample valve, and record injection time, loop 
temperature, column temperature, carrier flow rate, chart speed, and 
attenuator setting. Calculate the retention time of each peak using the 
distance from injection to the peak maximum divided by the chart speed. 
Retention times should be repeatable within 0.5 seconds.
    11.1.1.4.3 If the concentrations are too high for appropriate 
detector response, a smaller sample loop or dilutions may be used for 
gas samples, and, for liquid samples, dilution with solvent is 
appropriate. Use the standard curves (Section 10.2) to obtain an 
estimate of the concentrations.
    11.1.1.4.4 Identify all peaks by comparing the known retention times 
of compounds expected to be in the retention times of peaks in the 
sample. Identify any remaining unidentified peaks which have areas 
larger than 5 percent of the total using a GC/MS, or estimation of 
possible compounds by their retention times compared to known compounds, 
with confirmation by further GC analysis.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.

B<INF>ws</INF>=Water vapor content of the bag sample or stack gas, 
proportion by volume.
C<INF>s</INF>=Concentration of the organic from the calibration curve, 
ppm.
G<INF>v</INF>=Gas volume or organic compound injected, ml.
L<INF>v</INF>=Liquid volume of organic injected, [micro]l.
M=Molecular weight of organic, g/g-mole.
m<INF>s</INF>=Total mass of compound measured on adsorbent with spiked 
train ([micro]g).
m<INF>u</INF>=Total mass of compound measured on adsorbent with unspiked 
train ([micro]g).
m<INF>v</INF>=Mass per volume of spiked compound measured ([micro]g/L).
P<INF>i</INF>=Barometric or absolute sample loop pressure at time of 
sample analysis, mm Hg.
P<INF>m</INF>=Absolute pressure of dry gas meter, mm Hg.
P<INF>r</INF>=Reference pressure, the barometric pressure or absolute 
sample loop pressure recorded during calibration, mm Hg.
P<INF>s</INF>=Absolute pressure of syringe before injection, mm Hg.
q<INF>c</INF>=Flow rate of the calibration gas to be diluted.
q<INF>c1</INF>=Flow rate of the calibration gas to be diluted in stage 
1.
q<INF>c2</INF>=Flow rate of the calibration gas to be diluted in stage 
2.
q<INF>d</INF>=Diluent gas flow rate.
q<INF>d1</INF>=Flow rate of diluent gas in stage 1.
q<INF>d2</INF>=Flow rate of diluent gas in stage 2.
s=Theoretical concentration (ppm) of spiked target compound in the bag.
S=Theoretical mass of compound spiked onto adsorbent in spiked train 
([micro]g).
t=Measured average concentration (ppm) of target compound and source 
sample (analysis results subsequent to bag spiking)
T<INF>i</INF>=Sample loop temperature at the time of sample analysis, 
[deg]K.
T<INF>m</INF>=Absolute temperature of dry gas meter, [deg]K.
T<INF>s</INF>=Absolute temperature of syringe before injection, [deg]K.
u=Source sample average concentration (ppm) of target compound in the 
bag (analysis results before bag spiking).
V<INF>m</INF>=Gas volume indicated by dry gas meter, liters.
v<INF>s</INF>=volume of stack gas sampled with spiked train (L).
v<INF>u</INF>=volume of stack gas sampled with unspiked train (L).
X=Mole or volume fraction of the organic in the calibration gas to be 
diluted.
Y=Dry gas meter calibration factor, dimensionless.
[micro]l=Liquid organic density as determined, g/ml.

24.055=Ideal gas molar volume at 293 [deg]K and 760 mm Hg, liters/g-
mole.

1000=Conversion factor, ml/liter.
10\6\=Conversion to ppm.


[[Page 441]]


    12.2 Calculate the concentration, C<INF>s</INF>, in ppm using the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.304

    12.3 Calculate the concentration, C<INF>s</INF>, in ppm of the 
organic in the final gas mixture using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.305

    12.4 Calculate each organic standard concentration, C<INF>s</INF>, 
in ppm using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.306

    12.5 Calculate each organic standard concentration, C<INF>s</INF>, 
in ppm using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.307

    12.6 Calculate the concentration, C<INF>c</INF>, in ppm, dry basis, 
of each organic is the sample using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.308

    12.7 Calculate the average fraction recovered (R) of each spiked 
target compound using the following equation:

[[Page 442]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.309

    12.8 Correct all field measurements with the calculated R value for 
that compound using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.310

    12.9 Determine the mass per volume of spiked compound measured using 
the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.311

    12.10 Calculate the fraction of spiked compound recovered, R, using 
the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.312

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Since a potential sample may contain a variety of compounds 
from various sources, a specific precision limit for the analysis of 
field samples is impractical. Precision in the range of 5 to 10 percent 
relative standard deviation (RSD) is typical for gas chromatographic 
techniques, but an experienced GC operator with a reliable instrument 
can readily achieve 5 percent RSD. For this method, the following 
combined GC/operator values are required.
    (a) Precision. Triplicate analyses of calibration standards fall 
within 5 percent of their mean value.
    (b) Accuracy. Analysis results of prepared audit samples are within 
10 percent of preparation values.
    (c) Recovery. After developing an appropriate sampling and 
analytical system for the pollutants of interest, conduct the procedure 
in Section 8.4. Conduct the appropriate recovery study in Section 8.4 at 
each sampling point where the method is being applied. Submit the data 
and results of the recovery procedure with the reporting of results 
under Section 8.3.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Optional Presurvey and Presurvey Sampling.

    Note: Presurvey screening is optional. Presurvey sampling should be 
conducted for sources where the target pollutants are not known from 
previous tests and/or process knowledge.

    Perform a presurvey for each source to be tested. Refer to Figure 
18-1. Some of the information can be collected from literature surveys 
and source personnel. Collect gas samples that can be analyzed to 
confirm the identities and approximate concentrations of the organic 
emissions.
    16.1.1 Apparatus. This apparatus list also applies to Sections 8.2 
and 11.
    16.1.1.1 Teflon Tubing. (Mention of trade names or specific products 
does not constitute endorsement by the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency.) Diameter and length determined by connection requirements of 
cylinder regulators and the GC. Additional tubing is necessary to 
connect the GC sample loop to the sample.
    16.1.1.2 Gas Chromatograph. GC with suitable detector, columns, 
temperature-controlled sample loop and valve assembly, and temperature 
programmable oven, if necessary. The GC shall achieve sensitivity 
requirements for the compounds under study.
    16.1.1.3 Pump. Capable of pumping 100 ml/min. For flushing sample 
loop.
    16.1.1.4 Flow Meter. To measure flow rates.
    16.1.1.5 Regulators. Used on gas cylinders for GC and for cylinder 
standards.
    16.1.1.6 Recorder. Recorder with linear strip chart is minimum 
acceptable. Integrator (optional) is recommended.
    16.1.1.7 Syringes. 0.5-ml, 1.0- and 10-microliter size, calibrated, 
maximum accuracy (gas tight) for preparing calibration standards. Other 
appropriate sizes can be used.

[[Page 443]]

    16.1.1.8 Tubing Fittings. To plumb GC and gas cylinders.
    16.1.1.9 Septa. For syringe injections.
    16.1.1.10 Glass Jars. If necessary, clean, colored glass jars with 
Teflon-lined lids for condensate sample collection. Size depends on 
volume of condensate.
    16.1.1.11 Soap Film Flowmeter. To determine flow rates.
    16.1.1.12 Tedlar Bags. 10- and 50-liter capacity, for preparation of 
standards.
    16.1.1.13 Dry Gas Meter with Temperature and Pressure Gauges. 
Accurate to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent, for preparation of gas 
standards.
    16.1.1.14 Midget Impinger/Hot Plate Assembly. For preparation of gas 
standards.
    16.1.1.15 Sample Flasks. For presurvey samples, must have gas-tight 
seals.
    16.1.1.16 Adsorption Tubes. If necessary, blank tubes filled with 
necessary adsorbent (charcoal, Tenax, XAD-2, etc.) for presurvey 
samples.
    16.1.1.17 Personnel Sampling Pump. Calibrated, for collecting 
adsorbent tube presurvey samples.
    16.1.1.18 Dilution System. Calibrated, the dilution system is to be 
constructed following the specifications of an acceptable method.
    16.1.1.19 Sample Probes. Pyrex or stainless steel, of sufficient 
length to reach centroid of stack, or a point no closer to the walls 
than 1 m.
    16.1.1.20 Barometer. To measure barometric pressure.
    16.1.2 Reagents.
    16.1.2.1 Water. Deionized distilled.
    16.1.2.2 Methylene chloride.
    16.1.2.3 Calibration Gases. A series of standards prepared for every 
compound of interest.
    16.1.2.4 Organic Compound Solutions. Pure (99.9 percent), or as pure 
as can reasonably be obtained, liquid samples of all the organic 
compounds needed to prepare calibration standards.
    16.1.2.5 Extraction Solvents. For extraction of adsorbent tube 
samples in preparation for analysis.
    16.1.2.6 Fuel. As recommended by the manufacturer for operation of 
the GC.
    16.1.2.7 Carrier Gas. Hydrocarbon free, as recommended by the 
manufacturer for operation of the detector and compatibility with the 
column.
    16.1.2.8 Zero Gas. Hydrocarbon free air or nitrogen, to be used for 
dilutions, blank preparation, and standard preparation.
    16.1.3 Sampling.
    16.1.3.1 Collection of Samples with Glass Sampling Flasks. Presurvey 
samples may be collected in precleaned 250-ml double-ended glass 
sampling flasks. Teflon stopcocks, without grease, are preferred. Flasks 
should be cleaned as follows: Remove the stopcocks from both ends of the 
flasks, and wipe the parts to remove any grease. Clean the stopcocks, 
barrels, and receivers with methylene chloride (or other non-target 
pollutant solvent, or heat and humidified air). Clean all glass ports 
with a soap solution, then rinse with tap and deionized distilled water. 
Place the flask in a cool glass annealing furnace, and apply heat up to 
500 [deg]C. Maintain at this temperature for 1 hour. After this time 
period, shut off and open the furnace to allow the flask to cool. Return 
the stopcocks to the flask receivers. Purge the assembly with high-
purity nitrogen for 2 to 5 minutes. Close off the stopcocks after 
purging to maintain a slight positive nitrogen pressure. Secure the 
stopcocks with tape. Presurvey samples can be obtained either by drawing 
the gases into the previously evacuated flask or by drawing the gases 
into and purging the flask with a rubber suction bulb.
    16.1.3.1.1 Evacuated Flask Procedure. Use a high-vacuum pump to 
evacuate the flask to the capacity of the pump; then close off the 
stopcock leading to the pump. Attach a 6-mm outside diameter (OD) glass 
tee to the flask inlet with a short piece of Teflon tubing. Select a 6-
mm OD borosilicate sampling probe, enlarged at one end to a 12-mm OD and 
of sufficient length to reach the centroid of the duct to be sampled. 
Insert a glass wool plug in the enlarged end of the probe to remove 
particulate matter. Attach the other end of the probe to the tee with a 
short piece of Teflon tubing. Connect a rubber suction bulb to the third 
leg of the tee. Place the filter end of the probe at the centroid of the 
duct, and purge the probe with the rubber suction bulb. After the probe 
is completely purged and filled with duct gases, open the stopcock to 
the grab flask until the pressure in the flask reaches duct pressure. 
Close off the stopcock, and remove the probe from the duct. Remove the 
tee from the flask and tape the stopcocks to prevent leaks during 
shipment. Measure and record the duct temperature and pressure.
    16.1.3.1.2 Purged Flask Procedure. Attach one end of the sampling 
flask to a rubber suction bulb. Attach the other end to a 6-mm OD glass 
probe as described in Section 8.3.3.1.1. Place the filter end of the 
probe at the centroid of the duct, or at a point no closer to the walls 
than 1 m, and apply suction with the bulb to completely purge the probe 
and flask. After the flask has been purged, close off the stopcock near 
the suction bulb, and then close off the stopcock near the probe. Remove 
the probe from the duct, and disconnect both the probe and suction bulb. 
Tape the stopcocks to prevent leakage during shipment. Measure and 
record the duct temperature and pressure.
    16.1.3.2 Flexible Bag Procedure. Tedlar or aluminized Mylar bags can 
also be used to obtain the presurvey sample. Use new bags, and leak-
check them before field use. In addition, check the bag before use for 
contamination by filling it with nitrogen or air, and

[[Page 444]]

analyzing the gas by GC at high sensitivity. Experience indicates that 
it is desirable to allow the inert gas to remain in the bag about 24 
hours or longer to check for desorption of organics from the bag. Follow 
the leak-check and sample collection procedures given in Section 8.2.1.
    16.1.3.3 Determination of Moisture Content. For combustion or water-
controlled processes, obtain the moisture content from plant personnel 
or by measurement during the presurvey. If the source is below 59 
[deg]C, measure the wet bulb and dry bulb temperatures, and calculate 
the moisture content using a psychrometric chart. At higher 
temperatures, use Method 4 to determine the moisture content.
    16.1.4 Determination of Static Pressure. Obtain the static pressure 
from the plant personnel or measurement. If a type S pitot tube and an 
inclined manometer are used, take care to align the pitot tube 90[deg] 
from the direction of the flow. Disconnect one of the tubes to the 
manometer, and read the static pressure; note whether the reading is 
positive or negative.
    16.1.5 Collection of Presurvey Samples with Adsorption Tube. Follow 
Section 8.2.4 for presurvey sampling.

                             17.0 References

    1. American Society for Testing and Materials. C1 Through C5 
Hydrocarbons in the Atmosphere by Gas Chromatography. ASTM D 2820-72, 
Part 23. Philadelphia, Pa. 23:950-958. 1973.
    2. Corazon, V.V. Methodology for Collecting and Analyzing Organic 
Air Pollutants. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle 
Park, N.C. Publication No. EPA-600/2-79-042. February 1979.
    3. Dravnieks, A., B.K. Krotoszynski, J. Whitfield, A. O'Donnell, and 
T. Burgwald. Environmental Science and Technology. 5(12):1200-1222. 
1971.
    4. Eggertsen, F.T., and F.M. Nelsen. Gas Chromatographic Analysis of 
Engine Exhaust and Atmosphere. Analytical Chemistry. 30(6): 1040-1043. 
1958.
    5. Feairheller, W.R., P.J. Marn, D.H. Harris, and D.L. Harris. 
Technical Manual for Process Sampling Strategies for Organic Materials. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, N.C. 
Publication No. EPA 600/2-76-122. April 1976. 172 p.
    6. Federal Register, 39 FR 9319-9323. 1974.
    7. Federal Register, 39 FR 32857-32860. 1974.
    8. Federal Register, 23069-23072 and 23076-23090. 1976.
    9. Federal Register, 46569-46571. 1976.
    10. Federal Register, 41771-41776. 1977.
    11. Fishbein, L. Chromatography of Environmental Hazards, Volume II. 
Elesevier Scientific Publishing Company. New York, N.Y. 1973.
    12. Hamersma, J.W., S.L. Reynolds, and R.F. Maddalone. EPA/IERL-RTP 
Procedures Manual: Level 1 Environmental Assessment. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, N.C. Publication No. EPA 600/
276-160a. June 1976. 130 p.
    13. Harris, J.C., M.J. Hayes, P.L. Levins, and D.B. Lindsay. EPA/
IERL-RTP Procedures for Level 2 Sampling and Analysis of Organic 
Materials. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, 
N.C. Publication No. EPA 600/7-79-033. February 1979. 154 p.
    14. Harris, W.E., H.W. Habgood. Programmed Temperature Gas 
Chromatography. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York. 1966.
    15. Intersociety Committee. Methods of Air Sampling and Analysis. 
American Health Association. Washington, D.C. 1972.
    16. Jones, P.W., R.D. Grammer, P.E. Strup, and T.B. Stanford. 
Environmental Science and Technology. 10:806-810. 1976.
    17. McNair Han Bunelli, E.J. Basic Gas Chromatography. Consolidated 
Printers. Berkeley. 1969.
    18. Nelson, G.O. Controlled Test Atmospheres, Principles and 
Techniques. Ann Arbor. Ann Arbor Science Publishers. 1971. 247 p.
    19. NIOSH Manual of Analytical Methods, Volumes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health. Center for Disease Control. 4676 
Columbia Parkway, Cincinnati, Ohio 45226. April 1977--August 1981. May 
be available from the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. Stock Number/Price:

Volume 1--O17-033-00267-3/$13
Volume 2--O17-033-00260-6/$11
Volume 3--O17-033-00261-4/$14
Volume 4--O17-033-00317-3/$7.25
Volume 5--O17-033-00349-1/$10
Volume 6--O17-033-00369-6/$9
Volume 7--O17-033-00396-5/$7

Prices subject to change. Foreign orders add 25 percent.
    20. Schuetzle, D., T.J. Prater, and S.R. Ruddell. Sampling and 
Analysis of Emissions from Stationary Sources; I. Odor and Total 
Hydrocarbons. Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association. 25(9): 
925-932. 1975.
    21. Snyder, A.D., F.N. Hodgson, M.A. Kemmer and J.R. McKendree. 
Utility of Solid Sorbents for Sampling Organic Emissions from Stationary 
Sources. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, 
N.C. Publication No. EPA 600/2-76-201. July 1976. 71 p.
    22. Tentative Method for Continuous Analysis of Total Hydrocarbons 
in the Atmosphere. Intersociety Committee, American Public Health 
Association. Washington, D.C. 1972. p. 184-186.

[[Page 445]]

    23. Zwerg, G. CRC Handbook of Chromatography, Volumes I and II. 
Sherma, Joseph (ed.). CRC Press. Cleveland. 1972.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

I. Name of company______________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Contracts_______________________________________________________________
Phone___________________________________________________________________
Process to be sampled___________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Duct or vent to be sampled______________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
II. Process description_________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Raw material____________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Products________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

Operating cycle
Check: Batch -------- Continuous -------- Cyclic --------
Timing of batch or cycle________________________________________________
Best time to test_______________________________________________________

III. Sampling site______________________________________________________
A. Description__________________________________________________________
Site decription_________________________________________________________
Duct shape and size_____________________________________________________
Material________________________________________________________________
Wall thickness -------- inches
Upstream distance -------- inches -------- diameter
Downstream distance -------- inches -------- diameter
Size of port____________________________________________________________
Size of access area_____________________________________________________
Hazards -------- Ambient temp. -------- [deg]F

B. Properties of gas stream
Temperature -------- [deg]C -------- [deg]F, Data source --------
Velocity --------, Data source --------
Static pressure -------- inches H<INF>2</INF>O, Data source --------
Moisture content --------%, Data source --------
Particulate content --------, Data source--------

Gaseous components
N<INF>2</INF> -------- % Hydrocarbons -------- ppm
O<INF>2</INF> --------% --------
CO -------- % -------- --------
CO<INF>2</INF> -------- % -------- --------
SO<INF>2</INF> -------- % -------- --------

Hydrocarbon components
-------- -------- ppm
-------- -------- ppm
-------- -------- ppm
-------- -------- ppm
-------- -------- ppm
-------- -------- ppm

C. Sampling considerations
Location to set up GC___________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Special hazards to be considered________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Power available at duct_________________________________________________
Power available for GC__________________________________________________
Plant safety requirements_______________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Vehicle traffic rules___________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Plant entry requirements________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Security agreements_____________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Potential problems______________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

D. Site diagrams. (Attach additional sheets if required).

               Figure 18-1. Preliminary Survey Data Sheet

Components to be analyzed and Expected concentration
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Suggested chromatographic column________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Column flow rate -- ml/min
Head pressure -------- mm Hg

Column temperature: Isothermal -------- [deg]C, Programmed from -------- 
[deg]C to -------- [deg]C at -------- [deg]C/min
Injection port/sample loop temperature -------- [deg]C
Detector temperature -------- [deg]C
Detector flow rates: Hydrogen -------- ml/min., head pressure -------- 
mm Hg, Air/Oxygen -------- ml/min., head pressure -------- mm Hg.
Chart speed -------- inches/minute
Compound data:
Compound and Retention time and Attenuation
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

           Figure 18-2. Chromatographic Conditions Data Sheet

[[Page 446]]



                   Figure 18-3. Preparation of Standards in Tedlar Bags and Calibration Curve
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                  Standards
                                                           -----------------------------------------------------
                                                             Mixture <greek-   Mixture <greek-   Mixture <greek-
                                                                   i>1               i>2               i>3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Standards Preparation Data:
    Organic:
        Bag number or identification......................
        Dry gas meter calibration factor..................
        Final meter reading (liters)......................
        Initial meter reading (liters)....................
        Metered volume (liters)...........................
        Average meter temperature ([deg]K)................
        Average meter pressure, gauge (mm Hg).............
        Average atmospheric perssure (mm Hg)..............
        Average meter pressure, absolute (mm Hg)..........
        Syringe temperature ([deg]K) (see Section
         10.1.2.1)........................................
        Syringe pressure, absolute (mm Hg) (see Section
         10.1.2.1)........................................
        Volume of gas in syringe (ml) (Section 10.1.2.1)..
        Density of liquid organic (g/ml) (Section
         10.1.2.1)........................................
        Volume of liquid in syringe (ml) (Section
         10.1.2.1)........................................
GC Operating Conditions:
    Sample loop volume (ml)...............................
    Sample loop temperature ( [deg]C).....................
    Carrier gas flow rate (ml/min)........................
Column temperature:
    Initial ( [deg]C).....................................
    Rate change ( [deg]C/min).............................
    Final ( [deg]C).......................................
Organic Peak Identification and Calculated Concentrations:
    Injection time (24 hour clock)........................
    Distance to peak (cm).................................
    Chart speed (cm/min)..................................
    Organic retention time (min)..........................
    Attenuation factor....................................
    Peak height (mm)......................................
    Peak area (mm2).......................................
    Peak area * attenuation factor (mm2)..................
    Calculated concentration (ppm) (Equation 18-3 or 18-4)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plot peak area * attenuation factor against calculated concentration to obtain calibration curve.

Flowmeter number or identification______________________________________
Flowmeter Type__________________________________________________________
Method: Bubble meter---- Spirometer---- Wet test meter ----
Readings at laboratory conditions:
Laboratory temperature (T<INF>lab</INF>) ---- [deg]K
Laboratory barometric pressure (P<INF>lab</INF>)---- mm Hg
Flow data:

                                                    Flowmeter
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Reading (as marked)                     Temp. ([deg]K)                      Pressure (absolute)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                               Calibration Device
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Time (min)                           Gas volume a                           Flow rate b
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------

[[Page 447]]

 
 
-------------------------------------
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 a Vol. of gas may be measured in milliliters, liters or cubic feet.
b Convert to standard conditions (20 [deg]C and 760 mm Hg). Plot flowmeter reading against flow rate (standard
  conditions), and draw a smooth curve. If the flowmeter being calibrated is a rotameter or other flow device
  that is viscosity dependent, it may be necessary to generate a ``family'' of calibration curves that cover the
  operating pressure and temperature ranges of the flowmeter. While the following technique should be verified
  before application, it may be possible to calculate flow rate reading for rotameters at standard conditions
  Qstd as follows:

  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.313
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Flow rate (laboratory conditions)        Flow rate (STD conditions)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   Figure 18-4. Flowmeter Calibration

[[Page 448]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.314


[[Page 449]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.315


                            Preparation of Standards by Dilution of Cylinder Standard
                   [Cylinder Standard: Organic -------- Certified Concentration -------- ppm]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                         Date:
     Standards preparation data:      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Mixture 1                Mixture 2                Mixture 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stage 1:
    Standard gas flowmeter reading...
    Diluent gas flowmeter reading
    Laboratory temperature ([deg]K)
    Barometric pressure (mm Hg)
    Flowmeter gage pressure (mm Hg)
    Flow rate cylinder gas at
     standard conditions (ml/min)
    Flow rate diluent gas at standard
     conditions (ml/min)
    Calculated concentration (ppm)
Stage 2 (if used):
    Standard gas flowmeter reading
    Diluent gas flowmeter reading
    Flow rate Stage 1 gas at standard
     conditions (ml/min)
    Flow rate diluent gas at standard
     conditions
    Calculated concentration (ppm)
GC Operating Conditions:
    Sample loop volume (ml)
    Sample loop temperature ( [deg]C)
    Carrier gas flow rate (ml/min)
Column temperature:
    Initial ( [deg]C)

[[Page 450]]

 
    Program rate ( [deg]C/min)
    Final ( [deg]C)
Organic Peak Identification and
 Calculated Concentrations:
    Injection time (24-hour clock)
    Distance to peak (cm)
    Chart speed (cm/min)
    Retention time (min)
    Attenuation factor
    Peak area (mm \2\)
    Peak area *attenuation factor
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plot peak area *attenuation factor against calculated concentration to obtain calibration curve.

    Figure 18-7. Standards Prepared by Dilution of Cylinder Standard
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.316


[[Page 451]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.317


[[Page 452]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.318


                                     Plant-------- Date-------- Site--------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Sample 1        Sample 2        Sample 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source temperature ( [deg]C)....................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
Barometric pressure (mm Hg).....................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
Ambient temperature ( [deg]C)...................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
Sample flow rate (appr.)........................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
Bag number......................................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
Start time......................................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
Finish time.....................................................  ..............  ..............  ..............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Figure 18-10. Field Sample Data Sheet--Tedlar Bag Collection Method

         Plant ------------------ Date ---------------- Location
                        ------------------------
 
 
1. General information:
    Source temperature ( [deg]C)......................  ................
    Probe temperature ( [deg]C).......................  ................
    Ambient temperature ( [deg]C).....................  ................
    Atmospheric pressure (mm).........................  ................
    Source pressure ('Hg).............................  ................
    Absolute source pressure (mm).....................  ................
    Sampling rate (liter/min).........................  ................
    Sample loop volume (ml)...........................  ................
    Sample loop temperature ( [deg]C).................  ................
    Columnar temperature:
        Initial ( [deg]C) time (min)..................  ................

[[Page 453]]

 
        Program rate ( [deg]C/min)....................  ................
        Final ( [deg]C)/time (min)....................  ................
    Carrier gas flow rate (ml/min)....................  ................
    Detector temperature ( [deg]C)....................  ................
    Injection time (24-hour basis)....................  ................
    Chart Speed (mm/min)..............................  ................
    Dilution gas flow rate (ml/min)...................  ................
    Dilution gas used (symbol)........................  ................
    Dilution ratio....................................  ................
 


                                     2. Field Analysis Data--Calibration Gas
                                     2. [Run No. -------- Time ------------]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Components              Area             Attenuation            A x A Factor            Conc.-- (ppm)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
------------------------
                         ...............  ......................  ......................  ......................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                Figure 18-11. Field Analysis Data Sheets

[[Page 454]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.319


[[Page 455]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.320


                                Gaseous Organic Sampling and Analysis Check List
                                [Respond with initials or number as appropriate]
 
                                                                                                Date
 
1. Presurvey data:
    A. Grab sample collected........................  [squ]                         ------
        B. Grab sample analyzed for composition.....  [squ]                         ------
        Method GC...................................  [squ]                         ------
            GC/MS...................................  [squ]                         ------
            Other...................................  [squ]                         ------
    C. GC-FID analysis performed....................  [squ]                         ------
2. Laboratory calibration data:
    A. Calibration curves prepared..................  [squ]                         ------
        Number of components........................  [squ]                         ------
        Number of concentrations/component (3         [squ]                         ------
         required).
    B. Audit samples (optional):
    Analysis completed..............................  [squ]                         ------
    Verified for concentration......................  [squ]                         ------
    OK obtained for field work......................  [squ]                         ------
3. Sampling procedures:
    A. Method:
        Bag sample..................................  [squ]                         ------
        Direct interface............................  [squ]                         ------
        Dilution interface..........................  [squ]                         ------
    B. Number of samples collected..................  [squ]                         ------
4. Field Analysis:
    A. Total hydrocarbon analysis performed.........  [squ]                         ------
    B. Calibration curve prepared...................  [squ]                         ------
        Number of components........................  [squ]                         ------
        Number of concentrations per component (3     [squ]                         ------
         required).
 


[[Page 456]]

               Gaseous Organic Sampling and Analysis Data

Plant___________________________________________________________________
Date____________________________________________________________________
Location________________________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Source sample 1                       Source sample 2                     Source sample 3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. General information:
    Source temperature ( [deg]C)......  ..................................  ..................................
    Probe temperature ( [deg]C).......  ..................................  ..................................
    Ambient temperature ( [deg]C).....  ..................................  ..................................
    Atmospheric pressure (mm Hg)......  ..................................  ..................................
    Source pressure (mm Hg)...........  ..................................  ..................................
    Sampling rate (ml/min)............  ..................................  ..................................
    Sample loop volume (ml)...........  ..................................  ..................................
    Sample loop temperature ( [deg]C).  ..................................  ..................................
    Sample collection time (24-hr       ..................................  ..................................
     basis).
    Column temperature:
        Initial ( [deg]C).............  ..................................  ..................................
        Program rate ( [deg]C/min)....  ..................................  ..................................
        Final ( [deg]C)...............  ..................................  ..................................
    Carrier gas flow rate (ml/min)....  ..................................  ..................................
    Detector temperature ( [deg]C)....  ..................................  ..................................
    Chart speed (cm/min)..............  ..................................  ..................................
    Dilution gas flow rate (ml/min)...  ..................................  ..................................
    Diluent gas used (symbol).........  ..................................  ..................................
    Dilution ratio....................  ..................................  ..................................
Performed by: (signature):------------------------ Date:------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                Figure 18-14. Sampling and Analysis Sheet

[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-6, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

          Appendix A-7 to Part 60--Test Methods 19 through 25E

Method 19--Determination of sulfur dioxide removal efficiency and 
particulate, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides emission rates
Method 20--Determination of nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, and diluent 
emissions from stationary gas turbines
Method 21--Determination of volatile organic compound leaks
Method 22--Visual determination of fugitive emissions from material 
sources and smoke emissions from flares
Method 23--Determination of Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-Dioxins and 
Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans From Stationary Sources
Method 24--Determination of volatile matter content, water content, 
density, volume solids, and weight solids of surface coatings
Method 24A--Determination of volatile matter content and density of 
printing inks and related coatings
Method 25--Determination of total gaseous nonmethane organic emissions 
as carbon
Method 25A--Determination of total gaseous organic concentration using a 
flame ionization analyzer
Method 25B--Determination of total gaseous organic concentration using a 
nondispersive infrared analyzer
Method 25C--Determination of nonmethane organic compounds (NMOC) in MSW 
landfill gases
Method 25D--Determination of the Volatile Organic Concentration of Waste 
Samples
Method 25E--Determination of Vapor Phase Organic Concentration in Waste 
Samples
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining

[[Page 457]]

to any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are 
properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

   Method 19--Determination of Sulfur Dioxide Removal Efficiency and 
  Particulate Matter, Sulfur Dioxide, and Nitrogen Oxide Emission Rates

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes. This method provides data reduction procedures 
relating to the following pollutants, but does not include any sample 
collection or analysis procedures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.            Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nitrogen oxides (NOX),
 including:
    Nitric oxide (NO).........  10102-43-9.......  N/A
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)....  10102-44-0.......
Particulate matter (PM).......  None assigned....  N/A
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)..........  7499-09-05.......  N/A
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. Where specified by an applicable subpart of the 
regulations, this method is applicable for the determination of (a) PM, 
SO<INF>2</INF>, and NO<INF>X</INF> emission rates; (b) sulfur removal 
efficiencies of fuel pretreatment and SO<INF>2</INF> control devices; 
and (c) overall reduction of potential SO<INF>2</INF> emissions.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Emission Rates. Oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) or carbon dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>) concentrations and appropriate F factors (ratios of 
combustion gas volumes to heat inputs) are used to calculate pollutant 
emission rates from pollutant concentrations.
    2.2 Sulfur Reduction Efficiency and SO<INF>2</INF> Removal 
Efficiency. An overall SO<INF>2</INF> emission reduction efficiency is 
computed from the efficiency of fuel pretreatment systems, where

[[Page 458]]

applicable, and the efficiency of SO<INF>2</INF> control devices.
    2.2.1 The sulfur removal efficiency of a fuel pretreatment system is 
determined by fuel sampling and analysis of the sulfur and heat contents 
of the fuel before and after the pretreatment system.
    2.2.2 The SO<INF>2</INF> removal efficiency of a control device is 
determined by measuring the SO<INF>2</INF> rates before and after the 
control device.
    2.2.2.1 The inlet rates to SO<INF>2</INF> control systems (or, when 
SO<INF>2</INF> control systems are not used, SO<INF>2</INF> emission 
rates to the atmosphere) are determined by fuel sampling and analysis.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                          5.0 Safety [Reserved]

                  6.0 Equipment and Supplies [Reserved]

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

 8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport [Reserved]

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                  11.0 Analytical Procedures [Reserved]

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature

B<INF>wa</INF>=Moisture fraction of ambient air, percent.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Moisture fraction of effluent gas, percent.
%C=Concentration of carbon from an ultimate analysis of fuel, weight 
percent.
C<INF>d</INF>=Pollutant concentration, dry basis, ng/scm (lb/scf)
%CO<INF>2d</INF>,%CO<INF>2w</INF>=Concentration of carbon dioxide on a 
dry and wet basis, respectively, percent.
C<INF>w</INF>=Pollutant concentration, wet basis, ng/scm (lb/scf).
D=Number of sampling periods during the performance test period.
E=Pollutant emission rate, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>a</INF>=Average pollutant rate for the specified performance test 
period, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>ao</INF>, E<INF>ai</INF>=Average pollutant rate of the control 
device, outlet and inlet, respectively, for the performance test period, 
ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>bi</INF>=Pollutant rate from the steam generating unit, ng/J (lb/
million Btu)
E<INF>bo</INF>=Pollutant emission rate from the steam generating unit, 
ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>ci</INF>=Pollutant rate in combined effluent, ng/J (lb/million 
Btu).
E<INF>co</INF>=Pollutant emission rate in combined effluent, ng/J (lb/
million Btu).
E<INF>d</INF>=Average pollutant rate for each sampling period (e.g., 24-
hr Method 6B sample or 24-hr fuel sample) or for each fuel lot (e.g., 
amount of fuel bunkered), ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>di</INF>=Average inlet SO<INF>2</INF> rate for each sampling 
period d, ng/J (lb/million Btu)
E<INF>g</INF>=Pollutant rate from gas turbine, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>ga</INF>=Daily geometric average pollutant rate, ng/J (lbs/million 
Btu) or ppm corrected to 7 percent O<INF>2</INF>.
E<INF>jo</INF>,E<INF>ji</INF>=Matched pair hourly arithmetic average 
pollutant rate, outlet and inlet, respectively, ng/J (lb/million Btu) or 
ppm corrected to 7 percent O<INF>2</INF>.
E<INF>h</INF>=Hourly average pollutant, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
E<INF>hj</INF>=Hourly arithmetic average pollutant rate for hour ``j,'' 
ng/J (lb/million Btu) or ppm corrected to 7 percent O<INF>2</INF>.
EXP=Natural logarithmic base (2.718) raised to the value enclosed by 
brackets.
F<INF>d</INF>, F<INF>w</INF>, F<INF>c</INF>=Volumes of combustion 
components per unit of heat content, scm/J (scf/million Btu).
GCV=Gross calorific value of the fuel consistent with the ultimate 
analysis, kJ/kg (Btu/lb).
GCV<INF>p</INF>, GCV<INF>r</INF>=Gross calorific value for the product 
and raw fuel lots, respectively, dry basis, kJ/kg (Btu/lb).
%H=Concentration of hydrogen from an ultimate analysis of fuel, weight 
percent.
H=Total number of operating hours for which pollutant rates are 
determined in the performance test period.
H<INF>b</INF>=Heat input rate to the steam generating unit from fuels 
fired in the steam generating unit, J/hr (million Btu/hr).
H<INF>g</INF>=Heat input rate to gas turbine from all fuels fired in the 
gas turbine, J/hr (million Btu/hr).
%H<INF>2</INF>O=Concentration of water from an ultimate analysis of 
fuel, weight percent.
H<INF>r</INF>=Total numbers of hours in the performance test period 
(e.g., 720 hours for 30-day performance test period).
K=Conversion factor, 10<SUP>-5</SUP> (kJ/J)/(%) [106 Btu/million Btu].
K<INF>c</INF>=(9.57 scm/kg)/% [(1.53 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>cc</INF>=(2.0 scm/kg)/% [(0.321 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>hd</INF>=(22.7 scm/kg)/% [(3.64 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>hw</INF>=(34.74 scm/kg)/% [(5.57 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>n</INF>=(0.86 scm/kg)/% [(0.14 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>o</INF>=(2.85 scm/kg)/% [(0.46 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>s</INF>=(3.54 scm/kg)/% [(0.57 scf/lb)/%].
K<INF>w</INF>=(1.30 scm/kg)/% [(0.21 scf/lb)/%].
ln=Natural log of indicated value.
L<INF>p</INF>,L<INF>r</INF>=Weight of the product and raw fuel lots, 
respectively, metric ton (ton).
%N=Concentration of nitrogen from an ultimate analysis of fuel, weight 
percent.
N=Number of fuel lots during the averaging period.

[[Page 459]]

n=Number of fuels being burned in combination.
n<INF>d</INF>=Number of operating hours of the affected facility within 
the performance test period for each E<INF>d</INF> determined.
n<INF>t</INF>=Total number of hourly averages for which paired inlet and 
outlet pollutant rates are available within the 24-hr midnight to 
midnight daily period.
%O=Concentration of oxygen from an ultimate analysis of fuel, weight 
percent.
%O<INF>2d</INF>, %O<INF>2w</INF>=Concentration of oxygen on a dry and 
wet basis, respectively, percent.
P<INF>s</INF>=Potential SO<INF>2</INF> emissions, percent.
%R<INF>f</INF>=SO<INF>2</INF> removal efficiency from fuel pretreatment, 
percent.
%R<INF>g</INF>=SO<INF>2</INF> removal efficiency of the control device, 
percent.
%R<INF>ga</INF>=Daily geometric average percent reduction.
%R<INF>o</INF>=Overall SO<INF>2</INF> reduction, percent.
%S=Sulfur content of as-fired fuel lot, dry basis, weight percent.
S<INF>e</INF>=Standard deviation of the hourly average pollutant rates 
for each performance test period, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
%S<INF>f</INF>=Concentration of sulfur from an ultimate analysis of 
fuel, weight percent.
S<INF>i</INF>=Standard deviation of the hourly average inlet pollutant 
rates for each performance test period, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
S<INF>o</INF>=Standard deviation of the hourly average emission rates 
for each performance test period, ng/J (lb/million Btu).
%S<INF>p</INF>, %S<INF>r</INF>=Sulfur content of the product and raw 
fuel lots respectively, dry basis, weight percent.
t<INF>0.95</INF>=Values shown in Table 19-3 for the indicated number of 
data points n.
X<INF>k</INF>=Fraction of total heat input from each type of fuel k.

    12.2 Emission Rates of PM, SO<INF>2</INF>, and NO<INF>X</INF>. 
Select from the following sections the applicable procedure to compute 
the PM, S<INF>O2</INF>, or NO<INF>X</INF> emission rate (E) in ng/J (lb/
million Btu). The pollutant concentration must be in ng/scm (lb/scf) and 
the F factor must be in scm/J (scf/million Btu). If the pollutant 
concentration (C) is not in the appropriate units, use Table 19-1 in 
Section 17.0 to make the proper conversion. An F factor is the ratio of 
the gas volume of the products of combustion to the heat content of the 
fuel. The dry F factor (F<INF>d</INF>) includes all components of 
combustion less water, the wet F factor (F<INF>w</INF>) includes all 
components of combustion, and the carbon F factor (F<INF>c</INF>) 
includes only carbon dioxide.

    Note: Since F<INF>w</INF> factors include water resulting only from 
the combustion of hydrogen in the fuel, the procedures using 
F<INF>w</INF> factors are not applicable for computing E from steam 
generating units with wet scrubbers or with other processes that add 
water (e.g., steam injection).

    12.2.1 Oxygen-Based F Factor, Dry Basis. When measurements are on a 
dry basis for both O (%O<INF>2d</INF>) and pollutant (C<INF>d</INF>) 
concentrations, use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.321

    12.2.2 Oxygen-Based F Factor, Wet Basis. When measurements are on a 
wet basis for both O<INF>2</INF> (%O<INF>2w</INF>) and pollutant 
(C<INF>w</INF>) concentrations, use either of the following:
    12.2.2.1 If the moisture fraction of ambient air (B<INF>wa</INF>) is 
measured:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.322

    Instead of actual measurement, B<INF>wa</INF> may be estimated 
according to the procedure below.

    Note: The estimates are selected to ensure that negative errors will 
not be larger than -1.5 percent. However, positive errors, or over-
estimation of emissions by as much as 5 percent may be introduced 
depending upon the geographic location of the facility and the 
associated range of ambient moisture.

    12.2.2.1.1 B<INF>wa</INF>=0.027. This value may be used at any 
location at all times.
    12.2.2.1.2 B<INF>wa</INF>=Highest monthly average of B<INF>wa</INF> 
that occurred within the previous calendar year at the nearest Weather 
Service Station. This value shall be determined annually and may be used 
as an estimate for the entire current calendar year.
    12.2.2.1.3 B<INF>wa</INF>=Highest daily average of Bwa that occurred 
within a calendar month at the nearest Weather Service Station, 
calculated from the data from the past 3 years. This value shall be 
computed for each month and may be used as an estimate for the current 
respective calendar month.
    12.2.2.2 If the moisture fraction (B<INF>ws</INF>) of the effluent 
gas is measured:

[[Page 460]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.323

    12.2.3 Oxygen-Based F Factor, Dry/Wet Basis.
    12.2.3.1 When the pollutant concentration is measured on a wet basis 
(C<INF>w</INF>) and O<INF>2</INF> concentration is measured on a dry 
basis (%O<INF>2d</INF>), use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.324

    12.2.3.2 When the pollutant concentration is measured on a dry basis 
(C<INF>d</INF>) and the O<INF>2</INF> concentration is measured on a wet 
basis (%O<INF>2w</INF>), use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.325

    12.2.4 Carbon Dioxide-Based F Factor, Dry Basis. When measurements 
are on a dry basis for both CO<INF>2</INF> (%CO<INF>2d</INF>) and 
pollutant (C<INF>d</INF>) concentrations, use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.326

    12.2.5 Carbon Dioxide-Based F Factor, Wet Basis. When measurements 
are on a wet basis for both CO<INF>2</INF> (%CO<INF>2w</INF>) and 
pollutant (C<INF>w</INF>) concentrations, use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.327

    12.2.6 Carbon Dioxide-Based F Factor, Dry/Wet Basis.
    12.2.6.1 When the pollutant concentration is measured on a wet basis 
(C<INF>w</INF>) and CO<INF>2</INF> concentration is measured on a dry 
basis (%CO<INF>2d</INF>), use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.328

    12.2.6.2 When the pollutant concentration is measured on a dry basis 
(C<INF>d</INF>) and CO<INF>2</INF> concentration is measured on a wet 
basis (%CO<INF>2w</INF>), use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.329

    12.2.7 Direct-Fired Reheat Fuel Burning. The effect of direct-fired 
reheat fuel burning (for the purpose of raising the temperature of the 
exhaust effluent from wet scrubbers to above the moisture dew-point) on 
emission rates will be less than 1.0 percent and, therefore, may be 
ignored.
    12.2.8 Combined Cycle-Gas Turbine Systems. For gas turbine-steam 
generator combined cycle systems, determine the emissions from the steam 
generating unit or the percent reduction in potential SO<INF>2</INF> 
emissions as follows:
    12.2.8.1 Compute the emission rate from the steam generating unit 
using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.330

    12.2.8.1.1 Use the test methods and procedures section of 40 CFR 
Part 60, Subpart GG to obtain E<INF>co</INF> and E<INF>g</INF>. Do not 
use F<INF>w</INF> factors for determining E<INF>g</INF> or 
E<INF>co</INF>. If an SO<INF>2</INF> control device is used, measure 
E<INF>co</INF> after the control device.
    12.2.8.1.2 Suitable methods shall be used to determine the heat 
input rates to the steam generating units (H<INF>b</INF>) and the gas 
turbine (H<INF>g</INF>).
    12.2.8.2 If a control device is used, compute the percent of 
potential SO<INF>2</INF> emissions (P<INF>s</INF>) using the following 
equations:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.332

    Note: Use the test methods and procedures section of Subpart GG to 
obtain E<INF>ci</INF> and E<INF>g</INF>. Do not use F<INF>w</INF> 
factors for determining E<INF>g</INF> or E<INF>ci</INF>.

    12.3 F Factors. Use an average F factor according to Section 12.3.1 
or determine an applicable F factor according to Section 12.3.2. If 
combined fuels are fired, prorate the applicable F factors using the 
procedure in Section 12.3.3.
    12.3.1 Average F Factors. Average F factors (F<INF>d</INF>, 
F<INF>w</INF>, or F<INF>c</INF>) from Table 19-2 in Section 17.0 may be 
used.
    12.3.2 Determined F Factors. If the fuel burned is not listed in 
Table 19-2 or if the owner or operator chooses to determine an F factor 
rather than use the values in Table 19-2, use the procedure below:

[[Page 461]]

    12.3.2.1 Equations. Use the equations below, as appropriate, to 
compute the F factors:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.335

    Note: Omit the %H<INF>2</INF>O term in the equations for 
F<INF>w</INF> if %H and %O include the unavailable hydrogen and oxygen 
in the form of H<INF>2</INF>O.)

    12.3.2.2 Use applicable sampling procedures in Section 12.5.2.1 or 
12.5.2.2 to obtain samples for analyses.
    12.3.2.3 Use ASTM D 3176-74 or 89 (all cited ASTM standards are 
incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17) for ultimate analysis of the 
fuel.
    12.3.2.4 Use applicable methods in Section 12.5.2.1 or 12.5.2.2 to 
determine the heat content of solid or liquid fuels. For gaseous fuels, 
use ASTM D 1826-77 or 94 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17) to 
determine the heat content.
    12.3.3 F Factors for Combination of Fuels. If combinations of fuels 
are burned, use the following equations, as applicable unless otherwise 
specified in an applicable subpart:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.338

    12.4 Determination of Average Pollutant Rates.
    12.4.1 Average Pollutant Rates from Hourly Values. When hourly 
average pollutant rates (E<INF>h</INF>), inlet or outlet, are obtained 
(e.g., CEMS values), compute the average pollutant rate (E<INF>a</INF>) 
for the performance test period (e.g., 30 days) specified in the 
applicable regulation using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.339

    12.4.2 Average Pollutant Rates from Other than Hourly Averages. When 
pollutant rates are determined from measured values representing longer 
than 1-hour periods (e.g., daily fuel sampling and analyses or Method 6B 
values), or when pollutant rates are determined from combinations of 1-
hour and longer than 1-hour periods (e.g., CEMS and Method 6B values), 
compute the average pollutant rate (E<INF>a</INF>) for the performance 
test period (e.g., 30 days) specified in the applicable regulation using 
the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.340

    12.4.3 Daily Geometric Average Pollutant Rates from Hourly Values. 
The geometric average pollutant rate (E<INF>ga</INF>) is computed using 
the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.341

    12.5 Determination of Overall Reduction in Potential Sulfur Dioxide 
Emission.
    12.5.1 Overall Percent Reduction. Compute the overall percent 
SO<INF>2</INF> reduction (%R<INF>o</INF>) using the following equation:

[[Page 462]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.342

    12.5.2 Pretreatment Removal Efficiency (Optional). Compute the 
SO<INF>2</INF> removal efficiency from fuel pretreatment 
(%R<INF>f</INF>) for the averaging period (e.g., 90 days) as specified 
in the applicable regulation using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.343

    Note: In calculating %R<INF>f</INF>, include %S and GCV values for 
all fuel lots that are not pretreated and are used during the averaging 
period.

    12.5.2.1 Solid Fossil (Including Waste) Fuel/Sampling and Analysis.

    Note: For the purposes of this method, raw fuel (coal or oil) is the 
fuel delivered to the desulfurization (pretreatment) facility. For oil, 
the input oil to the oil desulfurization process (e.g., hydrotreatment) 
is considered to be the raw fuel.

    12.5.2.1.1 Sample Increment Collection. Use ASTM D 2234-76, 96, 97a, 
or 98 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17), Type I, Conditions 
A, B, or C, and systematic spacing. As used in this method, systematic 
spacing is intended to include evenly spaced increments in time or 
increments based on equal weights of coal passing the collection area. 
As a minimum, determine the number and weight of increments required per 
gross sample representing each coal lot according to Table 2 or 
Paragraph 7.1.5.2 of ASTM D 2234. Collect one gross sample for each lot 
of raw coal and one gross sample for each lot of product coal.
    12.5.2.1.2 ASTM Lot Size. For the purpose of Section 12.5.2 (fuel 
pretreatment), the lot size of product coal is the weight of product 
coal from one type of raw coal. The lot size of raw coal is the weight 
of raw coal used to produce one lot of product coal. Typically, the lot 
size is the weight of coal processed in a 1-day (24-hour) period. If 
more than one type of coal is treated and produced in 1 day, then gross 
samples must be collected and analyzed for each type of coal. A coal lot 
size equaling the 90-day quarterly fuel quantity for a steam generating 
unit may be used if representative sampling can be conducted for each 
raw coal and product coal.

    Note: Alternative definitions of lot sizes may be used, subject to 
prior approval of the Administrator.

    12.5.2.1.3 Gross Sample Analysis. Use ASTM D 2013-72 or 86 to 
prepare the sample, ASTM D 3177-75 or 89 or ASTM D 4239-85, 94, or 97 to 
determine sulfur content (%S), ASTM D 3173-73 or 87 to determine 
moisture content, and ASTM D 2015-77 (Reapproved 1978) or 96, D 3286-85 
or 96, or D 5865-98 to determine gross calorific value (GCV) (all 
standards cited are incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17 for 
acceptable versions of the standards) on a dry basis for each gross 
sample.
    12.5.2.2 Liquid Fossil Fuel-Sampling and Analysis. See Note under 
Section 12.5.2.1.
    12.5.2.2.1 Sample Collection. Follow the procedures for continuous 
sampling in ASTM D 270 or D 4177-95 (incorporated by reference--see 
Sec. 60.17) for each gross sample from each fuel lot.
    12.5.2.2.2 Lot Size. For the purpose of Section 12.5.2 (fuel 
pretreatment), the lot size of a product oil is the weight of product 
oil from one pretreatment facility and intended as one shipment (ship 
load, barge load, etc.). The lot size of raw oil is the weight of each 
crude liquid fuel type used to produce a lot of product oil.

    Note: Alternative definitions of lot sizes may be used, subject to 
prior approval of the Administrator.

    12.5.2.2.3 Sample Analysis. Use ASTM D 129-64, 78, or 95, ASTM D 
1552-83 or 95, or ASTM D 4057-81 or 95 to determine the sulfur content 
(%S) and ASTM D 240-76 or 92 (all standards cited are incorporated by 
reference--see Sec. 60.17) to determine the GCV of

[[Page 463]]

each gross sample. These values may be assumed to be on a dry basis. The 
owner or operator of an affected facility may elect to determine the GCV 
by sampling the oil combusted on the first steam generating unit 
operating day of each calendar month and then using the lowest GCV value 
of the three GCV values per quarter for the GCV of all oil combusted in 
that calendar quarter.
    12.5.2.3 Use appropriate procedures, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator, to determine the fraction of total mass input derived 
from each type of fuel.
    12.5.3 Control Device Removal Efficiency. Compute the percent 
removal efficiency (%R<INF>g</INF>) of the control device using the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.344

    12.5.3.1 Use continuous emission monitoring systems or test methods, 
as appropriate, to determine the outlet SO<INF>2</INF> rates and, if 
appropriate, the inlet SO<INF>2</INF> rates. The rates may be determined 
as hourly (E<INF>h</INF>) or other sampling period averages 
(E<INF>d</INF>). Then, compute the average pollutant rates for the 
performance test period (E<INF>ao</INF> and E<INF>ai</INF>) using the 
procedures in Section 12.4.
    12.5.3.2 As an alternative, as-fired fuel sampling and analysis may 
be used to determine inlet SO<INF>2</INF> rates as follows:
    12.5.3.2.1 Compute the average inlet SO<INF>2</INF> rate 
(E<INF>di</INF>) for each sampling period using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.345

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.346

After calculating E<INF>di</INF>, use the procedures in Section 12.4 to 
determine the average inlet SO<INF>2</INF> rate for the performance test 
period (E<INF>ai</INF>).
    12.5.3.2.2 Collect the fuel samples from a location in the fuel 
handling system that provides a sample representative of the fuel 
bunkered or consumed during a steam generating unit operating day. For 
the purpose of as-fired fuel sampling under Section 12.5.3.2 or Section 
12.6, the lot size for coal is the weight of coal bunkered or consumed 
during each steam generating unit operating day. The lot size for oil is 
the weight of oil supplied to the ``day'' tank or consumed during each 
steam generating unit operating day. For reporting and calculation 
purposes, the gross sample shall be identified with the calendar day on 
which sampling began. For steam generating unit operating days when a 
coal-fired steam generating unit is operated without coal being added to 
the bunkers, the coal analysis from the previous ``as bunkered'' coal 
sample shall be used until coal is bunkered again. For steam generating 
unit operating days when an oil-fired steam generating unit is operated 
without oil being added to the oil ``day'' tank, the oil analysis from 
the previous day shall be used until the ``day'' tank is filled again. 
Alternative definitions of fuel lot size may be used, subject to prior 
approval of the Administrator.
    12.5.3.2.3 Use ASTM procedures specified in Section 12.5.2.1 or 
12.5.2.2 to determine %S and GCV.
    12.5.4 Daily Geometric Average Percent Reduction from Hourly Values. 
The geometric average percent reduction (%R<INF>ga</INF>) is computed 
using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.347

    Note: The calculation includes only paired data sets (hourly 
average) for the inlet and outlet pollutant measurements.

    12.6 Sulfur Retention Credit for Compliance Fuel. If fuel sampling 
and analysis procedures in Section 12.5.2.1 are being used to determine 
average SO<INF>2</INF> emission rates (E<INF>as</INF>) to the atmosphere 
from a coal-fired steam generating unit when there is no SO<INF>2</INF> 
control device, the following equation may be used to adjust the 
emission rate for sulfur retention credits (no credits are allowed for 
oil-fired

[[Page 464]]

systems) (E<INF>di</INF>) for each sampling period using the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.348

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.349

    After calculating E<INF>di</INF>, use the procedures in Section 
12.4.2 to determine the average SO<INF>2</INF> emission rate to the 
atmosphere for the performance test period (E<INF>ao</INF>).
    12.7 Determination of Compliance When Minimum Data Requirement Is 
Not Met.
    12.7.1 Adjusted Emission Rates and Control Device Removal 
Efficiency. When the minimum data requirement is not met, the 
Administrator may use the following adjusted emission rates or control 
device removal efficiencies to determine compliance with the applicable 
standards.
    12.7.1.1 Emission Rate. Compliance with the emission rate standard 
may be determined by using the lower confidence limit of the emission 
rate (E<INF>ao</INF>*) as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.350

    12.7.1.2 Control Device Removal Efficiency. Compliance with the 
overall emission reduction (%R<INF>o</INF>) may be determined by using 
the lower confidence limit of the emission rate (E<INF>ao</INF>*) and 
the upper confidence limit of the inlet pollutant rate (E<INF>ai</INF>*) 
in calculating the control device removal efficiency (%R<INF>g</INF>) as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.352

    12.7.2 Standard Deviation of Hourly Average Pollutant Rates. Compute 
the standard deviation (S<INF>e</INF>) of the hourly average pollutant 
rates using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.353

    Equation 19-19 through 19-31 may be used to compute the standard 
deviation for both the outlet (S<INF>o</INF>) and, if applicable, inlet 
(S<INF>i</INF>) pollutant rates.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 References [Reserved]

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

                                Table 19-1--Conversion Factors for Concentration
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  From                                   To                             Multiply by
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
g/scm...................................  ng/scm.........................  10\9\
mg/scm..................................  ng/scm.........................  10\6\
lb/scf..................................  ng/scm.........................  1.602 x 10\13\
ppm SO2.................................  ng/scm.........................  2.66 x 10\6\
ppm NOX.................................  ng/scm.........................  1.912 x 10\6\
ppm SO2.................................  lb/scf.........................  1.660 x 10-7
ppm NOX.................................  lb/scf.........................  1.194 x 10-7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 465]]


                                                       Table 19-2--F Factors for Various Fuels\1\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Fd                              Fw                              Fc
                        Fuel Type                        -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              dscm/J      dscf/10\6\ Btu      wscm/J      wscf/10\6\ Btu       scm/J       scf/10\6\ Btu
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coal:
    Anthracite 2........................................       2.71x10-7          10,100       2.83x10-7          10,540      0.530x10-7           1,970
    Bituminus 2.........................................       2.63x10-7           9,780       2.86x10-7          10,640      0.484x10-7           1,800
    Lignite.............................................       2.65x10-7           9,860       3.21x10-7          11,950      0.513x10-7           1,910
    Oil \3\.............................................       2.47x10-7           9,190       2.77x10-7          10,320      0.383x10-7           1,420
Gas:....................................................
    Natural.............................................       2.34x10-7           8,710       2.85x10-7          10,610      0.287x10-7           1,040
    Propane.............................................       2.34x10-7           8,710       2.74x10-7          10,200      0.321x10-7           1,190
    Butane..............................................       2.34x10-7           8,710       2.79x10-7          10,390      0.337x10-7           1,250
Wood....................................................       2.48x10-7           9,240  ..............  ..............      0.492x10-7           1,830
Wood Bark...............................................       2.58x10-7           9,600  ..............  ..............      0.516x10-7           1,920
Municipal...............................................       2.57x10-7           9,570  ..............  ..............      0.488x10-7           1,820
Solid Waste.............................................  ..............  ..............  ..............  ..............  ..............  ..............
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Determined at standard conditions: 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) and 760 mm Hg (29.92 in Hg)
\2\ As classified according to ASTM D 388.
\3\ Crude, residual, or distillate.


                                          Table 19-3--Values for T0.95*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       n\1\                            t0.95       n\1\        t0.95        n\1\         t0.95
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.................................................        6.31           8        1.89         22-26        1.71
3.................................................        2.42           9        1.86         27-31        1.70
4.................................................        2.35          10        1.83         32-51        1.68
5.................................................        2.13          11        1.81         52-91        1.67
6.................................................        2.02       12-16        1.77        92-151        1.66
7.................................................        1.94       17-21        1.73   152 or more       1.65
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\The values of this table are corrected for n-1 degrees of freedom. Use n equal to the number (H) of hourly
  average data points.

Method 20--Determination of Nitrogen Oxides, Sulfur Dioxide, and Diluent 
                 Emissions from Stationary Gas Turbines

1. Principle and Applicability

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of nitrogen oxides (NO<INF>X</INF>), sulfur dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>), 
and a diluent gas, either oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) or carbon dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>), emissions from stationary gas turbines. For the 
NO<INF>X</INF> and diluent concentration determinations, this method 
includes: (1) Measurement system design criteria; (2) Analyzer 
performance specifications and performance test procedures; and (3) 
Procedures for emission testing.

    1.2 Principle. A gas sample is continuously extracted from the 
exhaust stream of a stationary gas turbine; a portion of the sample 
stream is conveyed to instrumental analyzers for determination of 
NO<INF>X</INF> and diluent content. During each NO<INF>X</INF> and 
diluent determination, a separate measurement of SO<INF>2</INF> 
emissions is made, using Method 6, or its equivalent. The diluent 
determination is used to adjust the NO<INF>X</INF> and SO<INF>2</INF> 
concentrations to a reference condition.

2. Definitions

    2.1 Measurement System. The total equipment required for the 
determination of a gas concentration or a gas emission rate. The system 
consists of the following major subsystems:
    2.1.1 Sample Interface. That portion of a system that is used for 
one or more of the following: sample acquisition, sample transportation, 
sample conditioning, or protection of the analyzers from the effects of 
the stack effluent.
    2.1.2 NO<INF>X</INF> Analyzer. That portion of the system that 
senses NO<INF>X</INF> and generates an output proportional to the gas 
concentration.
    2.1.3 O<INF>2</INF> Analyzer. That portion of the system that senses 
O<INF>2</INF> and generates an output proportional to the gas 
concentration.
    2.1.4 CO<INF>2</INF> Analyzer. That portion of the system that 
senses CO<INF>2</INF> and generates an output proportional to the gas 
concentration.
    2.1.5 Data Recorder. That portion of the measurement system that 
provides a permanent record of the analyzer(s) output. The data recorder 
may include automatic data reduction capabilities.
    2.2 Span Value. The upper limit of a gas concentration measurement 
range that is specified for affected source categories in the applicable 
part of the regulations.
    2.3 Calibration Gas. A known concentration of a gas in an 
appropriate diluent gas.
    2.4 Calibration Error. The difference between the gas concentration 
indicated by the measurement system and the known concentration of the 
calibration gas.

[[Page 466]]

    2.5 Zero Drift. The difference in the measurement system output 
readings from zero after a stated period of operation during which no 
unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment took place and the input 
concentration at the time of the measurements was zero.
    2.6 Calibration Drift. The difference in the measurement system 
output readings from the known concentration of the calibration gas 
after a stated period of operation during which no unscheduled 
maintenance, repair, or adjustment took place and the input at the time 
of the measurements was a high-level value.
    2.7 Response Time. The amount of time required for the measurement 
system to display on the data output 95 percent of a step change in 
pollutant concentration.
    2.8 Interference Response. The output response of the measurement 
system to a component in the sample gas, other than the gas component 
being measured.

3. Measurement System Performance Specifications

    3.1 NO<INF>2</INF> to NO Converter. Greater than 90 percent 
conversion efficiency of NO<INF>2</INF> to NO.
    3.2 Interference Response. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent 
of the span value.
    3.3 Response Time. No greater than 30 seconds.
    3.4 Zero Drift. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the 
span value over the period of each test run.
    3.5 Calibration Drift. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of 
the span value over the period of each test run.

4. Apparatus and Reagents

    4.1 Measurement System. Use any measurement system for 
NO<INF>X</INF> and diluent that is expected to meet the specifications 
in this method. A schematic of an acceptable measurement system is shown 
in Figure 20-1. The essential components of the measurement system are 
described below:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.246


[[Page 467]]


    4.1.1 Sample Probe. Heated stainless steel, or equivalent, open-
ended, straight tube of sufficient length to traverse the sample points.
    4.1.2 Sample Line. Heated (<ls-thn-eq>95 [deg]C) stainless steel or 
Teflon tubing to transport the sample gas to the sample conditioners and 
analyzers.
    4.1.3 Calibration Valve Assembly. A three-way valve assembly to 
direct the zero and calibration gases to the sample conditioners and to 
the analyzers. The calibration valve assembly shall be capable of 
blocking the sample gas flow and of introducing calibration gases to the 
measurement system when in the calibration mode.
    4.1.4 NO<INF>2</INF> to NO Converter. That portion of the system 
that converts the nitrogen dioxide (NO<INF>2</INF>) in the sample gas to 
nitrogen oxide (NO). Some analyzers are designed to measure 
NO<INF>X</INF> as NO<INF>2</INF> on a wet basis and can be used without 
an NO<INF>2</INF> to NO converter or a moisture removal trap provided 
the sample line to the analyzer is heated (<ls-thn-eq>95 [deg]C) to the 
inlet of the analyzer. In addition, an NO<INF>2</INF> to NO converter is 
not necessary if the NO<INF>2</INF> portion of the exhaust gas is less 
than 5 percent of the total NO<INF>X</INF> concentration. As a 
guideline, an NO<INF>2</INF> to NO converter is not necessary if the gas 
turbine is operated at 90 percent or more of peak load capacity. A 
converter is necessary under lower load conditions.
    4.1.5 Moisture Removal Trap. A refrigerator-type condenser or other 
type device designed to continuously remove condensate from the sample 
gas while maintaining minimal contact between any condensate and the 
sample gas. The moisture removal trap is not necessary for analyzers 
that can measure NO<INF>X</INF> concentrations on a wet basis; for these 
analyzers, (a) heat the sample line up to the inlet of the analyzers, 
(b) determine the moisture content using methods subject to the approval 
of the Administrator, and (c) correct the NO<INF>X</INF> and diluent 
concentrations to a dry basis.
    4.1.6 Particulate Filter. An in-stack or an out-of-stack glass fiber 
filter, of the type specified in EPA Method 5; however, an out-of-stack 
filter is recommended when the stack gas temperature exceeds 250 to 300 
[deg]C.
    4.1.7 Sample Pump. A nonreactive leak-free sample pump to pull the 
sample gas through the system at a flow rate sufficient to minimize 
transport delay. The pump shall be made from stainless steel or coated 
with Teflon or equivalent.
    4.1.8 Sample Gas Manifold. A sample gas manifold to divert portions 
of the sample gas stream to the analyzers. The manifold may be 
constructed of glass, Teflon, stainless steel, or equivalent.
    4.1.9 Diluent Gas Analyzer. An analyzer to determine the percent 
O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> concentration of the sample gas.
    4.1.10 Nitrogen Oxides Analyzer. An analyzer to determine the ppm 
NO<INF>X</INF> concentration in the sample gas stream.
    4.1.11 Data Recorder. A strip-chart recorder, analog computer, or 
digital recorder for recording measurement data.
    4.2 Sulfur Dioxide Analysis. EPA Method 6 apparatus and reagents.
    4.3 NO<INF>X</INF> Calibration Gases. The calibration gases for the 
NO<INF>X</INF> analyzer shall be NO in N<INF>2</INF>. Use four 
calibration gas mixtures as specified below:
    4.3.1 High-level Gas. A gas concentration that is equivalent to 80 
to 90 percent of the span value.
    4.3.2 Mid-level Gas. A gas concentration that is equivalent to 45 to 
55 percent of the span value.
    4.3.3 Low-level Gas. A gas concentration that is equivalent to 20 to 
30 percent of the span value.
    4.3.4 Zero Gas. A gas concentration of less than 0.25 percent of the 
span value. Ambient air may be used for the NO<INF>X</INF> zero gas.
    4.4 Diluent Calibration Gases.
    4.4.1 For O<INF>2</INF> calibration gases, use purified air at 20.9 
percent O<INF>2</INF> as the high-level O<INF>2</INF> gas. Use a gas 
concentration between 11 and 15 percent O<INF>2</INF> in nitrogen for 
the mid-level gas, and use purified nitrogen for the zero gas.
    4.4.2 For CO<INF>2</INF> calibration gases, use a gas concentration 
between 8 and 12 percent CO<INF>2</INF> in air for the high-level 
calibration gas. Use a gas concentration between 2 and 5 percent 
CO<INF>2</INF> in air for the mid-level calibration gas, and use 
purified air (<100 ppm CO<INF>2</INF>) as the zero level calibration 
gas.

5. Measurement System Performance Test Procedures

    Perform the following procedures prior to measurement of emissions 
(Section 6) and only once for each test program, i.e., the series of all 
test runs for a given gas turbine engine.
    5.1 Calibration Gas Checks. There are two alternatives for checking 
the concentrations of the calibration gases. (a) The first is to use 
calibration gases that are documented traceable to National Bureau of 
Standards Reference Materials. Use Traceability Protocol for 
Establishing True Concentrations of Gases Used for Calibrations and 
Audits of Continuous Source Emission Monitors (Protocol Number 1) that 
is available from the Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory, 
Quality Assurance Branch, Mail Drop 77, Environmental Protection Agency, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. Obtain a certification from the gas 
manufacturer that the protocol was followed. These calibration gases are 
not to be analyzed with the Reference Methods. (b) The second 
alternative is to use calibration gases not prepared according to the 
protocol. If this alternative is chosen, within 1 month prior to the 
emission test, analyze

[[Page 468]]

each of the calibration gas mixtures in triplicate using Method 7 or the 
procedure outlined in Citation 1 for NO<INF>X</INF> and use Method 3 for 
O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF>. Record the results on a data sheet 
(example is shown in Figure 20-2). For the low-level, mid-level, or 
high-level gas mixtures, each of the individual NO<INF>X</INF> 
analytical results must be within 10 percent (or 10 ppm, whichever is 
greater) of the triplicate set average (O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> 
test results must be within 0.5 percent O<INF>2</INF> or 
CO<INF>2</INF>); otherwise, discard the entire set and repeat the 
triplicate analyses. If the average of the triplicate reference method 
test results is within 5 percent for NO<INF>X</INF> gas or 0.5 percent 
O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> for the O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> 
gas of the calibration gas manufacturer's tag value, use the tag value; 
otherwise, conduct at least three additional reference method test 
analyses until the results of six individual NO<INF>X</INF> runs (the 
three original plus three additional) agree within 10 percent (or 10 
ppm, whichever is greater) of the average (O<INF>2</INF> or 
CO<INF>2</INF> test results must be within 0.5 percent O<INF>2</INF> or 
CO<INF>2</INF>). Then use this average for the cylinder value.
    5.2 Measurement System Preparation. Prior to the emission test, 
assemble the measurement system following the manufacturer's written 
instructions in preparing and operating the NO<INF>2</INF> to NO 
converter, the NO<INF>X</INF> analyzer, the diluent analyzer, and other 
components.

               Figure 20-2--Analysis of Calibration Gases

Date ---------- (Must be within 1 month prior to the test period)
Reference method used___________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Gas concentration, ppm
              Sample run              --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Low level \a\            Mid level \b\            High level \c\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
--------------------------------------
2
--------------------------------------
3
--------------------------------------
Average
--------------------------------------
Maximum % deviation \d\..............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ Average must be 20 to 30% of span value.
\b\ Average must be 45 to 55% of span value.
\c\ Average must be 80 to 90% of span value.
\d\ Must be <=<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10% of applicable average or 10 ppm, whichever is greater.

    5.3 Calibration Check. Conduct the calibration checks for both the 
NO<INF>X</INF> and the diluent analyzers as follows:
    5.3.1 After the measurement system has been prepared for use 
(Section 5.2), introduce zero gases and the mid-level calibration gases; 
set the analyzer output responses to the appropriate levels. Then 
introduce each of the remainder of the calibration gases described in 
Sections 4.3 or 4.4, one at a time, to the measurement system. Record 
the responses on a form similar to Figure 20-3.
    5.3.2 If the linear curve determined from the zero and mid-level 
calibration gas responses does not predict the actual response of the 
low-level (not applicable for the diluent analyzer) and high-level gases 
within 2 percent of the span value, the calibration shall be considered 
invalid. Take corrective measures on the measurement system before 
proceeding with the test.
    5.4 Interference Response. Introduce the gaseous components listed 
in Table 20-1 into the measurement system separately, or as gas 
mixtures. Determine the total interference output response of the system 
to these components in concentration units; record the values on a form 
similar to Figure 20-4. If the sum of the interference responses of the 
test gases for either the NO<INF>X</INF> or diluent analyzers is greater 
than 2 percent of the applicable span value, take corrective measure on 
the measurement system.

                 Figure 20-3--Zero and Calibration Data
Turbine type.........................   Identification number.......
Date.................................   Test number.................
Analyzer type........................   Identification number.......
 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Cylinder value, ppm    Initial analyzer       Final analyzer     Difference: initial-
                                   or %           response, ppm or %    responses, ppm or %    final, ppm or %
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zero gas.................
--------------------------
 
Low-level gas............
--------------------------
 
Mid-level gas............
--------------------------
 
High-level gas...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 469]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.209


                                 Table 20-1--Interference Test Gas Concentration
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CO...................................  500<plus-minus<ls-thn-   CO2....................  10<plus-minus<ls-thn-
                                        eq>50 ppm.                                        eq>1 percent.
SO2..................................  200<plus-minus<ls-thn-   O2.....................  20.9<plus-minus<ls-thn-
                                        eq>20 ppm.                                        eq>1 percent.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   Figure 20-4--Interference Response

Date of test ----------
Analyzer type___________________________________________________________
Serial No.______________________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Analyzer output
            Test gas type                 Concentration, ppm            response                % of span
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.210

    Conduct an interference response test of each analyzer prior to its 
initial use in the field. Thereafter, recheck the measurement system if 
changes are made in the instrumentation that could alter the 
interference response, e.g., changes in the type of gas detector.
    In lieu of conducting the interference response test, instrument 
vendor data, which demonstrate that for the test gases of Table 20-1 the 
interference performance specification is not exceeded, are acceptable.
    5.5 Response Time. To determine response time, first introduce zero 
gas into the system at the calibration valve until all readings are 
stable; then, switch to monitor the stack effluent until a stable 
reading can be obtained. Record the upscale response time. Next, 
introduce high-level calibration gas into the system. Once the system 
has stabilized at the high-level concentration, switch to monitor the 
stack effluent and wait until a stable value is reached. Record the 
downscale response time. Repeat the procedure three times. A stable 
value is equivalent to a change of less than 1 percent of span value for 
30 seconds or less than 5 percent of the measured average concentration 
for 2 minutes. Record the response time data on a form similar to Figure 
20-5, the readings of the upscale or downscale reponse time, and report 
the greater time as the ``response time'' for the analyzer. Conduct a 
response time test prior to the initial field use of the measurement 
system, and repeat if changes are made in the measurement system.

                       Figure 20-5--Response Time

Date of test ----------

Analyzer type___________________________________________________________

S/N_____________________________________________________________________

Span gas concentration: -------- ppm.
Analyzer span setting: -------- ppm.
Upscale:
    1 -------- seconds.
    2 -------- seconds.
    3 -------- seconds.
     Average upscale response ---- seconds.

Downscale:
    1 -------- seconds.
    2 -------- seconds.
    3 -------- seconds.
     Average downscale response ---- seconds.

System response time=
slower average time=
-------- seconds.

    5.6 NO<INF>2</INF> to NO Conversion Efficiency.
    5.6.1 Add gas from the mid-level NO in N<INF>2</INF> calibration gas 
cylinder to a clean, evacuated, leak-tight Tedlar bag. Dilute this gas 
approximately 1:1 with 20.9 percent O<INF>2</INF>, purified air. 
Immediately attach the bag outlet to the calibration valve assembly and 
begin operation of the sampling system. Operate the sampling system, 
recording the NO<INF>X</INF> response, for at least 30 minutes. If the 
NO<INF>2</INF> to NO conversion is 100 percent, the instrument response 
will be stable at the highest peak value observed. If the response at 
the end of 30 minutes decreases more than 2.0 percent of the highest 
peak value, the system is not acceptable and corrections must be made 
before repeating the check.
    5.6.2 Alternatively, the NO<INF>2</INF> to NO converter check 
described in Title 40, Part 86: Certification and Test Procedures for 
Heavy-duty Engines for 1979 and Later Model Years may be used. Other 
alternative procedures may be used with approval of the Administrator.

6. Emission Measurement Test Procedure

    6.1 Preliminaries.
    6.1.1 Selection of a Sampling Site. Select a sampling site as close 
as practical to the exhaust of the turbine. Turbine geometry, stack 
configuration, internal baffling, and point of introduction of dilution 
air will vary for different turbine designs. Thus, each of these factors 
must be given special consideration in order to obtain a representative 
sample. Whenever possible, the sampling site shall be located upstream 
of the point of introduction of dilution air into the duct. Sample ports 
may be located before or after

[[Page 470]]

the upturn elbow, in order to accommodate the configuration of the 
turning vanes and baffles and to permit a complete, unobstructed 
traverse of the stack. The sample ports shall not be located within 5 
feet or 2 diameters (whichever is less) of the gas discharge to 
atmosphere. For supplementary-fired, combined-cycle plants, the sampling 
site shall be located between the gas turbine and the boiler. The 
diameter of the sample ports shall be sufficient to allow entry of the 
sample probe.
    6.1.2 A preliminary O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> traverse is made 
for the purpose of selecting sampling points of low O<INF>2</INF> or 
high CO<INF>2</INF> concentrations, as appropriate for the measurement 
system. Conduct this test at the turbine operating condition that is the 
lowest percentage of peak load operation included in the test program. 
Follow the procedure below, or use an alternative procedure subject to 
the approval of the Administrator.
    6.1.2.1 Minimum Number of Points. Select a minimum number of points 
as follows: (1) Eight, for stacks having cross-sectional areas less than 
1.5 m\2\ (16.1 ft\2\); (2) eight plus one additional sample point for 
each 0.2 m\2\ (2.2 ft\2\ of areas, for stacks of 1.5 m\2\ to 10.0 m\2\ 
(16.1-107.6 ft\2\) in cross-sectional area; and (3) 49 sample points (48 
for circular stacks) for stacks greater than 10.0 m \2\ (107.6 ft \2\) 
in cross-sectional area. Note that for circular ducts, the number of 
sample points must be a multiple of 4, and for rectangular ducts, the 
number of points must be one of those listed in Table 20-2; therefore, 
round off the number of points (upward), when appropriate.
    6.1.2.2 Cross-sectional Layout and Location of Traverse Points. 
After the number of traverse points for the preliminary diluent sampling 
has been determined, use Method 1 to located the traverse points.
    6.1.2.3 Preliminary Diluent Measurement. While the gas turbine is 
operating at the lowest percent of peak load, conduct a preliminary 
diluent measurement as follows: Position the probe at the first traverse 
point and begin sampling. The minimum sampling time at each point shall 
be 1 minute plus the average system response time. Determine the average 
steady-state concentration of diluent at each point and record the data 
on Figure 20-6.
    6.1.2.4 Selection of Emission Test Sampling Points. Select the eight 
sampling points at which the lowest O<INF>2</INF> concentrations or 
highest CO<INF>2</INF> concentrations were obtained. Sample at each of 
these selected points during each run at the different turbine load 
conditions. More than eight points may be used, if desired, providing 
that the points selected as described above are included.

        Table 20-2--Cross-sectional Layout for Rectangular Stacks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Matrix
                                                                layout
------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. of traverse points:
  9.........................................................         3x3
  12........................................................         4x3
  16........................................................         4x4
  20........................................................         5x4
  25........................................................         5x5
  30........................................................         6x5
  36........................................................         6x6
  42........................................................         7x6
  49........................................................         7x7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                Figure 20-6--Preliminary Diluent Traverse

Date ----------

Location:
Plant___________________________________________________________________
City, State_____________________________________________________________

Turbine identification:
Manufacturer____________________________________________________________
Model, serial number____________________________________________________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Sample point                  Diluent concentration, ppm
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    6.2 NO<INF>X</INF> and Diluent Measurement. This test is to be 
conducted at each of the specified load conditions. Three test runs at 
each load condition constitute a complete test.
    6.2.1 At the beginning of each NO<INF>X</INF> test run and, as 
applicable, during the run, record turbine data as indicated in Figure 
20-7. Also, record the location and number of the traverse points on a 
diagram.
    6.2.2 Position the probe at the first point determined in the 
preceding section and begin sampling. The minimum sampling time at each 
point shall be at least 1 minute plus the average system response time. 
Determine the average steady-state concentration of diluent and 
NO<INF>X</INF> at each point and record the data on Figure 20-8.

                Figure 20-7--Stationary Gas Turbine Data

                        Turbine Operation Record

Test operator -------------------- Date_________________________________

Turbine identification:
Type____________________________________________________________________
Serial No.______________________________________________________________

Location:
Plant___________________________________________________________________
City____________________________________________________________________

Ambient temperature_____________________________________________________
Ambient humidity________________________________________________________
Test time start_________________________________________________________
Test time finish________________________________________________________
Fuel flow rate \a\______________________________________________________
Water or steam flow rate \a\____________________________________________
Ambient pressure________________________________________________________
Ultimate fuel analysis:

[[Page 471]]

C_______________________________________________________________________
H_______________________________________________________________________
O_______________________________________________________________________
N_______________________________________________________________________
S_______________________________________________________________________
Ash_____________________________________________________________________
H<INF>2</INF>0__________________________________________________________

Trace metals:
Na______________________________________________________________________
Va______________________________________________________________________
K_______________________________________________________________________
etc \b\_________________________________________________________________

Operating load__________________________________________________________
    \a\Describe measurement method, i.e., continuous flow meter, start 
finish volumes, etc.
    \b\i.e., additional elements added for smoke suppression.

         Figure 20-8--Stationary Gas Turbine Sample Point Record

Turbine identification:
Manufacturer____________________________________________________________
Model, serial No._______________________________________________________

Location:
Plant___________________________________________________________________
City, State_____________________________________________________________

Ambient temperature_____________________________________________________
Ambient pressure________________________________________________________
Date ----------
Test time: start________________________________________________________
Test time: finish_______________________________________________________
Test operator name______________________________________________________

Diluent instrument type_________________________________________________
Serial No_______________________________________________________________

NO<INF>X</INF> instrument type__________________________________________
Serial No.______________________________________________________________

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Sample point                     Time, min              Diluent\a\, %              NOX a, ppm
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
--------------------------------------
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 \a\Average steady-state value from recorder or instrument readout.

    6.2.3 After sampling the last point, conclude the test run by 
recording the final turbine operating parameters and by determining the 
zero and calibration drift, as follows:
    Immediately following the test run at each load condition, or if 
adjustments are necessary for the measurement system during the tests, 
reintroduce the zero and mid-level calibration gases as described in 
Sections 4.3 and 4.4, one at a time, to the measurement system at the 
calibration valve assembly. (Make no adjustments to the measurement 
system until after the drift checks are made). Record the analyzers' 
responses on a form similar to Figure 20-3. If the drift values exceed 
the specified limits, the test run preceding the check is considered 
invalid and will be repeated following corrections to the measurement 
system. Alternatively, recalibrate the measurement system and 
recalculate the measurement data. Report the test results based on both 
the initial calibration and the recalibration data.
    6.3 SO<INF>2</INF> Measurement. This test is conducted only at the 
100 percent peak load condition. Determine SO<INF>2</INF> using Method 
6, or equivalent, during the test. Select a minimum of six total points 
from those required for the NO<INF>X</INF> measurements; use two points 
for each sample run. The sample time at each point shall be at least 10 
minutes. Average the diluent readings taken during the NO<INF>X</INF> 
test runs at sample points corresponding to the SO<INF>2</INF> traverse 
points (see Section 6.2.2) and use this average diluent concentration to 
correct the integrated SO<INF>2</INF> concentration obtained by Method 6 
to 15 percent diluent (see Equation 20-1).
    If the applicable regulation allows fuel sampling and analysis for 
fuel sulfur content to demonstrate compliance with sulfur emission unit, 
emission sampling with Method 6 is not required, provided the fuel 
sulfur content meets the limits of the regulation.

7. Emission Calculations
    7.1 Moisture Correction. Measurement data used in most of these 
calculations must be on a dry basis. If measurements must be corrected 
to dry conditions, use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.211

where:

C<INF>d</INF>=Pollutant or diluent concentration adjusted to dry 
conditions, ppm or percent.
C<INF>w</INF>=Pollutant or diluent concentration measured under moist 
sample conditions, ppm or percent.
B<INF>ws</INF>=Moisture content of sample gas as measured with Method 4, 
reference method, or other approved method, percent/100.

    7.2 CO<INF>2</INF> Correction Factor. If pollutant concentrations 
are to be corrected to 15 percent O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration is measured in lieu of O<INF>2</INF> concentration 
measurement, a CO<INF>2</INF> correction factor is needed. Calculate the 
CO<INF>2</INF> correction factor as follows:
    7.2.1 Calculate the fuel-specific F<INF>0</INF> value for the fuel 
burned during the test using values obtained from Method 19, Section 
5.2, and the following equation.

[[Page 472]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.212

where:

F<INF>O</INF>=Fuel factor based on the ratio of oxygen volume to the 
ultimate CO<INF>2</INF> volume produced by the fuel at zero percent 
excess air, dimensionless.
0.209=Fraction of air that is oxygen, percent/100.
F<INF>d</INF>=Ratio of the volume of dry effluent gas to the gross 
calorific value of the fuel from Method 19, dsm\3\/J (dscf/10\6\ Btu).
F<INF>c</INF>=Ratio of the volume of carbon dioxide produced to the 
gross calorific value of the fuel from Method 19, dsm\3\/J (dscf\6\ 
Btu).

    7.2.2. Calculate the CO<INF>2</INF> correction factor for correcting 
measurement data to 15 percent oxygen, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.213

where:

X<INF>CO2</INF>=CO<INF>2</INF> Correction factor, percent.
5.9=20.9 percent O<INF>2</INF>-15 percent O<INF>2</INF>, the defined 
O<INF>2</INF> correction value, percent.

    7.3 Correction of Pollutant Concentrations to 15 percent 
O<INF>2</INF>. Calculate the NO<INF>X</INF> and SO<INF>2</INF> gas 
concentrations adjusted to 15 percent O<INF>2</INF> using Equation 20-4 
or 20-5, as appropriate. The correction to 15 percent O<INF>2</INF> is 
very sensitive to the accuracy of the O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration measurement. At the level of the analyzer drift specified 
in Section 3, the O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> correction can exceed 
5 percent at the concentration levels expected in gas turbine exhaust 
gases. Therefore, O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> analyzer stability and 
careful calibration are necessary.
    7.3.1 Correction of Pollutant Concentration Using O<INF>2</INF> 
Concentration. Calculate the O<INF>2</INF> corrected pollutant 
concentration, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.214

where:

C<INF>adj</INF>=Pollutant concentration corrected to 15 percent 
O<INF>2</INF> ppm.
C<INF>d</INF>=Pollutant concentration measured, dry basis, ppm.
%O<INF>2</INF>=Measured O<INF>2</INF> concentration dry basis, percent.

    7.3.2 Correction of Pollutant Concentration Using CO<INF>2</INF> 
Concentration. Calculate the CO<INF>2</INF> corrected pollutant 
concentration, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.215

where:

%CO<INF>2</INF>=Measured CO<INF>2</INF> concentration measured, dry 
basis, percent.

    7.4 Average Adjusted NO<INF>X</INF> Concentration. Calculate the 
average adjusted NO<INF>X</INF> concentration by summing the adjusted 
values for each sample point and dividing by the number of points for 
each run.
    7.5 NO<INF>X</INF> and SO<INF>2</INF> Emission Rate Calculations. 
The emission rates for NO<INF>X</INF> and SO<INF>2</INF> in units of 
pollutant mass per quantity of heat input can be calculated using the 
pollutant and diluent concentrations and fuel-specific F-factors based 
on the fuel combustion characteristics. The measured concentrations of 
pollutant in units of parts per million by volume (ppm) must be 
converted to mass per unit volume concentration units for these 
calculations. Use the following table for such conversions:

                  Conversion Factors for Concentration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              From                        To              Multiply by
------------------------------------------------------------------------
g/sm\3\.........................  ng/sm\3\..........  10\9\
mg/sm\3\........................  ng/sm\3\..........  10\6\
lb/scf..........................  ng/sm\3\..........  1.602x10\1\\3\
ppm (SO2).......................  ng/sm\3\..........  2.660x10\6\
ppm (NOX).......................  ng/sm\3\..........  1.912x10\6\
ppm (SO2).......................  lb/scf............  1.660x10-\7\
ppm (NOX).......................  lb/scf............  1.194x10-\7\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    7.5.1 Calculation of Emission Rate Using Oxygen Correction. Both the 
O<INF>2</INF> concentration and the pollutant concentration must be on a 
dry basis. Calculate the pollutant emission rate, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.216

where:

E=Mass emission rate of pollutant, ng/J (lb/10\6\ Btu).

    7.5.2 Calculation of Emission Rate Using Carbon Dioxide Correction. 
The CO<INF>2</INF> concentration and the pollutant concentration may be 
on either a dry basis or a wet basis, but both concentrations must be on 
the same basis for the calculations. Calculate the pollutant emission 
rate using Equation 20-7 or 20-8:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.218

where:

C<INF>w</INF>=Pollutant concentration measured on a moist sample basis, 
ng/sm\3\ (lb/scf).
%CO<INF>2w</INF>=Measured CO<INF>2</INF> concentration measured on a 
moist sample basis, percent.


[[Page 473]]


8. Bibliography

    1. Curtis, F. A Method for Analyzing NO<INF>X</INF> Cylinder Gases-
Specific Ion Electrode Procedure, Monograph available from Emission 
Measurement Laboratory, ESED, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, October 
1978.
    2. Sigsby, John E., F. M. Black, T. A. Bellar, and D. L. Klosterman. 
Chem iluminescent Method for Analysis of Nitrogen Compounds in Mobile 
Source Emissions (NO, NO<INF>2</INF>, and NH<INF>3</INF> ). 
``Environmental Science and Technology,'' 7:51-54. January 1973.
    3. Shigehara, R.T., R.M. Neulicht, and W.S. Smith. Validating Orsat 
Analysis Data from Fossil Fuel-Fired Units. Emission Measurement Branch, 
Emission Standards and Engineering Division, Office of Air Quality 
Planning and Standards, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27711. June 1975.

       Method 21--Determination of Volatile Organic Compound Leaks

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC)..........  No CAS number assigned.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Scope. This method is applicable for the determination of VOC 
leaks from process equipment. These sources include, but are not limited 
to, valves, flanges and other connections, pumps and compressors, 
pressure relief devices, process drains, open-ended valves, pump and 
compressor seal system degassing vents, accumulator vessel vents, 
agitator seals, and access door seals.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A portable instrument is used to detect VOC leaks from 
individual sources. The instrument detector type is not specified, but 
it must meet the specifications and performance criteria contained in 
Section 6.0. A leak definition concentration based on a reference 
compound is specified in each applicable regulation. This method is 
intended to locate and classify leaks only, and is not to be used as a 
direct measure of mass emission rate from individual sources.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Calibration gas means the VOC compound used to adjust the 
instrument meter reading to a known value. The calibration gas is 
usually the reference compound at a known concentration approximately 
equal to the leak definition concentration.
    3.2 Calibration precision means the degree of agreement between 
measurements of the same known value, expressed as the relative 
percentage of the average difference between the meter readings and the 
known concentration to the known concentration.
    3.3 Leak definition concentration means the local VOC concentration 
at the surface of a leak source that indicates that a VOC emission 
(leak) is present. The leak definition is an instrument meter reading 
based on a reference compound.
    3.4 No detectable emission means a local VOC concentration at the 
surface of a leak source, adjusted for local VOC ambient concentration, 
that is less than 2.5 percent of the specified leak definition 
concentration. that indicates that a VOC emission (leak) is not present.
    3.5 Reference compound means the VOC species selected as the 
instrument calibration basis for specification of the leak definition 
concentration. (For example, if a leak definition concentration is 
10,000 ppm as methane, then any source emission that results in a local 
concentration that yields a meter reading of 10,000 on an instrument 
meter calibrated with methane would be classified as a leak. In this 
example, the leak definition concentration is 10,000 ppm and the 
reference compound is methane.)
    3.6 Response factor means the ratio of the known concentration of a 
VOC compound to the observed meter reading when measured using an 
instrument calibrated with the reference compound specified in the 
applicable regulation.
    3.7 Response time means the time interval from a step change in VOC 
concentration at the input of the sampling system to the time at which 
90 percent of the corresponding final value is reached as displayed on 
the instrument readout meter.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Hazardous Pollutants. Several of the compounds, leaks of which 
may be determined by this method, may be irritating or corrosive to 
tissues (e.g., heptane) or may be toxic (e.g., benzene, methyl alcohol). 
Nearly all are fire hazards. Compounds in emissions should be determined 
through familiarity with the source. Appropriate precautions can be 
found in reference documents, such as reference No. 4 in Section 16.0.

[[Page 474]]

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    A VOC monitoring instrument meeting the following specifications is 
required:
    6.1 The VOC instrument detector shall respond to the compounds being 
processed. Detector types that may meet this requirement include, but 
are not limited to, catalytic oxidation, flame ionization, infrared 
absorption, and photoionization.
    6.2 The instrument shall be capable of measuring the leak definition 
concentration specified in the regulation.
    6.3 The scale of the instrument meter shall be readable to <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 percent of the specified leak definition 
concentration.
    6.4 The instrument shall be equipped with an electrically driven 
pump to ensure that a sample is provided to the detector at a constant 
flow rate. The nominal sample flow rate, as measured at the sample probe 
tip, shall be 0.10 to 3.0 l/min (0.004 to 0.1 ft\3\/min) when the probe 
is fitted with a glass wool plug or filter that may be used to prevent 
plugging of the instrument.
    6.5 The instrument shall be equipped with a probe or probe extension 
or sampling not to exceed 6.4 mm (\1/4\ in) in outside diameter, with a 
single end opening for admission of sample.
    6.6 The instrument shall be intrinsically safe for operation in 
explosive atmospheres as defined by the National Electrical Code by the 
National Fire Prevention Association or other applicable regulatory code 
for operation in any explosive atmospheres that may be encountered in 
its use. The instrument shall, at a minimum, be intrinsically safe for 
Class 1, Division 1 conditions, and/or Class 2, Division 1 conditions, 
as appropriate, as defined by the example code. The instrument shall not 
be operated with any safety device, such as an exhaust flame arrestor, 
removed.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Two gas mixtures are required for instrument calibration and 
performance evaluation:
    7.1.1 Zero Gas. Air, less than 10 parts per million by volume (ppmv) 
VOC.
    7.1.2 Calibration Gas. For each organic species that is to be 
measured during individual source surveys, obtain or prepare a known 
standard in air at a concentration approximately equal to the applicable 
leak definition specified in the regulation.
    7.2 Cylinder Gases. If cylinder calibration gas mixtures are used, 
they must be analyzed and certified by the manufacturer to be within 2 
percent accuracy, and a shelf life must be specified. Cylinder standards 
must be either reanalyzed or replaced at the end of the specified shelf 
life.
    7.3 Prepared Gases. Calibration gases may be prepared by the user 
according to any accepted gaseous preparation procedure that will yield 
a mixture accurate to within 2 percent. Prepared standards must be 
replaced each day of use unless it is demonstrated that degradation does 
not occur during storage.
    7.4 Mixtures with non-Reference Compound Gases. Calibrations may be 
performed using a compound other than the reference compound. In this 
case, a conversion factor must be determined for the alternative 
compound such that the resulting meter readings during source surveys 
can be converted to reference compound results.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Instrument Performance Evaluation. Assemble and start up the 
instrument according to the manufacturer's instructions for recommended 
warmup period and preliminary adjustments.
    8.1.1 Response Factor. A response factor must be determined for each 
compound that is to be measured, either by testing or from reference 
sources. The response factor tests are required before placing the 
analyzer into service, but do not have to be repeated at subsequent 
intervals.
    8.1.1.1 Calibrate the instrument with the reference compound as 
specified in the applicable regulation. Introduce the calibration gas 
mixture to the analyzer and record the observed meter reading. Introduce 
zero gas until a stable reading is obtained. Make a total of three 
measurements by alternating between the calibration gas and zero gas. 
Calculate the response factor for each repetition and the average 
response factor.
    8.1.1.2 The instrument response factors for each of the individual 
VOC to be measured shall be less than 10 unless otherwise specified in 
the applicable regulation. When no instrument is available that meets 
this specification when calibrated with the reference VOC specified in 
the applicable regulation, the available instrument may be calibrated 
with one of the VOC to be measured, or any other VOC, so long as the 
instrument then has a response factor of less than 10 for each of the 
individual VOC to be measured.
    8.1.1.3 Alternatively, if response factors have been published for 
the compounds of interest for the instrument or detector type, the 
response factor determination is not required, and existing results may 
be referenced. Examples of published response factors for flame 
ionization and catalytic oxidation detectors are included in References 
1-3 of Section 17.0.
    8.1.2 Calibration Precision. The calibration precision test must be 
completed prior to placing the analyzer into service and at subsequent 
3-month intervals or at the next use, whichever is later.
    8.1.2.1 Make a total of three measurements by alternately using zero 
gas and the specified calibration gas. Record the meter

[[Page 475]]

readings. Calculate the average algebraic difference between the meter 
readings and the known value. Divide this average difference by the 
known calibration value and multiply by 100 to express the resulting 
calibration precision as a percentage.
    8.1.2.2 The calibration precision shall be equal to or less than 10 
percent of the calibration gas value.
    8.1.3 Response Time. The response time test is required before 
placing the instrument into service. If a modification to the sample 
pumping system or flow configuration is made that would change the 
response time, a new test is required before further use.
    8.1.3.1 Introduce zero gas into the instrument sample probe. When 
the meter reading has stabilized, switch quickly to the specified 
calibration gas. After switching, measure the time required to attain 90 
percent of the final stable reading. Perform this test sequence three 
times and record the results. Calculate the average response time.
    8.1.3.2 The instrument response time shall be equal to or less than 
30 seconds. The instrument pump, dilution probe (if any), sample probe, 
and probe filter that will be used during testing shall all be in place 
during the response time determination.
    8.2 Instrument Calibration. Calibrate the VOC monitoring instrument 
according to Section 10.0.
    8.3 Individual Source Surveys.
    8.3.1 Type I--Leak Definition Based on Concentration. Place the 
probe inlet at the surface of the component interface where leakage 
could occur. Move the probe along the interface periphery while 
observing the instrument readout. If an increased meter reading is 
observed, slowly sample the interface where leakage is indicated until 
the maximum meter reading is obtained. Leave the probe inlet at this 
maximum reading location for approximately two times the instrument 
response time. If the maximum observed meter reading is greater than the 
leak definition in the applicable regulation, record and report the 
results as specified in the regulation reporting requirements. Examples 
of the application of this general technique to specific equipment types 
are:
    8.3.1.1 Valves. The most common source of leaks from valves is the 
seal between the stem and housing. Place the probe at the interface 
where the stem exits the packing gland and sample the stem 
circumference. Also, place the probe at the interface of the packing 
gland take-up flange seat and sample the periphery. In addition, survey 
valve housings of multipart assembly at the surface of all interfaces 
where a leak could occur.
    8.3.1.2 Flanges and Other Connections. For welded flanges, place the 
probe at the outer edge of the flange-gasket interface and sample the 
circumference of the flange. Sample other types of nonpermanent joints 
(such as threaded connections) with a similar traverse.
    8.3.1.3 Pumps and Compressors. Conduct a circumferential traverse at 
the outer surface of the pump or compressor shaft and seal interface. If 
the source is a rotating shaft, position the probe inlet within 1 cm of 
the shaft-seal interface for the survey. If the housing configuration 
prevents a complete traverse of the shaft periphery, sample all 
accessible portions. Sample all other joints on the pump or compressor 
housing where leakage could occur.
    8.3.1.4 Pressure Relief Devices. The configuration of most pressure 
relief devices prevents sampling at the sealing seat interface. For 
those devices equipped with an enclosed extension, or horn, place the 
probe inlet at approximately the center of the exhaust area to the 
atmosphere.
    8.3.1.5 Process Drains. For open drains, place the probe inlet at 
approximately the center of the area open to the atmosphere. For covered 
drains, place the probe at the surface of the cover interface and 
conduct a peripheral traverse.
    8.3.1.6 Open-ended Lines or Valves. Place the probe inlet at 
approximately the center of the opening to the atmosphere.
    8.3.1.7 Seal System Degassing Vents and Accumulator Vents. Place the 
probe inlet at approximately the center of the opening to the 
atmosphere.
    8.3.1.8 Access door seals. Place the probe inlet at the surface of 
the door seal interface and conduct a peripheral traverse.
    8.3.2 Type II--``No Detectable Emission''. Determine the local 
ambient VOC concentration around the source by moving the probe randomly 
upwind and downwind at a distance of one to two meters from the source. 
If an interference exists with this determination due to a nearby 
emission or leak, the local ambient concentration may be determined at 
distances closer to the source, but in no case shall the distance be 
less than 25 centimeters. Then move the probe inlet to the surface of 
the source and determine the concentration as outlined in Section 8.3.1. 
The difference between these concentrations determines whether there are 
no detectable emissions. Record and report the results as specified by 
the regulation. For those cases where the regulation requires a specific 
device installation, or that specified vents be ducted or piped to a 
control device, the existence of these conditions shall be visually 
confirmed. When the regulation also requires that no detectable 
emissions exist, visual observations and sampling surveys are required. 
Examples of this technique are:
    8.3.2.1 Pump or Compressor Seals. If applicable, determine the type 
of shaft seal. Perform a survey of the local area ambient VOC 
concentration and determine if detectable emissions exist as described 
in Section 8.3.2.

[[Page 476]]

    8.3.2.2 Seal System Degassing Vents, Accumulator Vessel Vents, 
Pressure Relief Devices. If applicable, observe whether or not the 
applicable ducting or piping exists. Also, determine if any sources 
exist in the ducting or piping where emissions could occur upstream of 
the control device. If the required ducting or piping exists and there 
are no sources where the emissions could be vented to the atmosphere 
upstream of the control device, then it is presumed that no detectable 
emissions are present. If there are sources in the ducting or piping 
where emissions could be vented or sources where leaks could occur, the 
sampling surveys described in Section 8.3.2 shall be used to determine 
if detectable emissions exist.
    8.3.3 Alternative Screening Procedure.
    8.3.3.1 A screening procedure based on the formation of bubbles in a 
soap solution that is sprayed on a potential leak source may be used for 
those sources that do not have continuously moving parts, that do not 
have surface temperatures greater than the boiling point or less than 
the freezing point of the soap solution, that do not have open areas to 
the atmosphere that the soap solution cannot bridge, or that do not 
exhibit evidence of liquid leakage. Sources that have these conditions 
present must be surveyed using the instrument technique of Section 8.3.1 
or 8.3.2.
    8.3.3.2 Spray a soap solution over all potential leak sources. The 
soap solution may be a commercially available leak detection solution or 
may be prepared using concentrated detergent and water. A pressure 
sprayer or squeeze bottle may be used to dispense the solution. Observe 
the potential leak sites to determine if any bubbles are formed. If no 
bubbles are observed, the source is presumed to have no detectable 
emissions or leaks as applicable. If any bubbles are observed, the 
instrument techniques of Section 8.3.1 or 8.3.2 shall be used to 
determine if a leak exists, or if the source has detectable emissions, 
as applicable.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.1.2.........................  Instrument         Ensure precision and
                                 calibration        accuracy,
                                 precision check.   respectively, of
                                                    instrument response
                                                    to standard.
10.0..........................  Instrument
                                 calibration.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Calibrate the VOC monitoring instrument as follows. After the 
appropriate warmup period and zero internal calibration procedure, 
introduce the calibration gas into the instrument sample probe. Adjust 
the instrument meter readout to correspond to the calibration gas value.

    Note: If the meter readout cannot be adjusted to the proper value, a 
malfunction of the analyzer is indicated and corrective actions are 
necessary before use.

                  11.0 Analytical Procedures [Reserved]

             12.0 Data Analyses and Calculations [Reserved]

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Dubose, D.A., and G.E. Harris. Response Factors of VOC Analyzers 
at a Meter Reading of 10,000 ppmv for Selected Organic Compounds. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication 
No. EPA 600/2-81051. September 1981.
    2. Brown, G.E., et al. Response Factors of VOC Analyzers Calibrated 
with Methane for Selected Organic Compounds. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication No. EPA 600/
2-81-022. May 1981.
    3. DuBose, D.A. et al. Response of Portable VOC Analyzers to 
Chemical Mixtures. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research 
Triangle Park, NC. Publication No. EPA 600/2-81-110. September 1981.
    4. Handbook of Hazardous Materials: Fire, Safety, Health. Alliance 
of American Insurers. Schaumberg, IL. 1983.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 22--Visual Determination of Fugitive Emissions From Material 
                 Sources and Smoke Emissions From Flares

    Note: This method is not inclusive with respect to observer 
certification. Some material is incorporated by reference from Method 9.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    This method is applicable for the determination of the frequency of 
fugitive emissions from stationary sources, only as specified in an 
applicable subpart of the regulations. This method also is applicable 
for the determination of the frequency of visible smoke emissions from 
flares.

[[Page 477]]

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Fugitive emissions produced during material processing, 
handling, and transfer operations or smoke emissions from flares are 
visually determined by an observer without the aid of instruments.
    2.2 This method is used also to determine visible smoke emissions 
from flares used for combustion of waste process materials.
    2.3 This method determines the amount of time that visible emissions 
occur during the observation period (i.e., the accumulated emission 
time). This method does not require that the opacity of emissions be 
determined. Since this procedure requires only the determination of 
whether visible emissions occur and does not require the determination 
of opacity levels, observer certification according to the procedures of 
Method 9 is not required. However, it is necessary that the observer is 
knowledgeable with respect to the general procedures for determining the 
presence of visible emissions. At a minimum, the observer must be 
trained and knowledgeable regarding the effects of background contrast, 
ambient lighting, observer position relative to lighting, wind, and the 
presence of uncombined water (condensing water vapor) on the visibility 
of emissions. This training is to be obtained from written materials 
found in References 1 and 2 or from the lecture portion of the Method 9 
certification course.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Emission frequency means the percentage of time that emissions 
are visible during the observation period.
    3.2 Emission time means the accumulated amount of time that 
emissions are visible during the observation period.
    3.3 Fugitive emissions means emissions generated by an affected 
facility which is not collected by a capture system and is released to 
the atmosphere. This includes emissions that (1) escape capture by 
process equipment exhaust hoods; (2) are emitted during material 
transfer; (3) are emitted from buildings housing material processing or 
handling equipment; or (4) are emitted directly from process equipment.
    3.4 Observation period means the accumulated time period during 
which observations are conducted, not to be less than the period 
specified in the applicable regulation.
    3.5 Smoke emissions means a pollutant generated by combustion in a 
flare and occurring immediately downstream of the flame. Smoke occurring 
within the flame, but not downstream of the flame, is not considered a 
smoke emission.

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Occasionally, fugitive emissions from sources other than the 
affected facility (e.g., road dust) may prevent a clear view of the 
affected facility. This may particularly be a problem during periods of 
high wind. If the view of the potential emission points is obscured to 
such a degree that the observer questions the validity of continuing 
observations, then the observations shall be terminated, and the 
observer shall clearly note this fact on the data form.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                              6.0 Equipment

    6.1 Stopwatches (two). Accumulative type with unit divisions of at 
least 0.5 seconds.
    6.2 Light Meter. Light meter capable of measuring illuminance in the 
50 to 200 lux range, required for indoor observations only.

                  7.0 Reagents and Supplies [Reserved]

  8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transfer [Reserved]

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Selection of Observation Location. Survey the affected 
facility, or the building or structure housing the process to be 
observed, and determine the locations of potential emissions. If the 
affected facility is located inside a building, determine an observation 
location that is consistent with the requirements of the applicable 
regulation (i.e., outside observation of emissions escaping the 
building/structure or inside observation of emissions directly emitted 
from the affected facility process unit). Then select a position that 
enables a clear view of the potential emission point(s) of the affected 
facility or of the building or structure housing the affected facility, 
as appropriate for the applicable subpart. A position at least 4.6 m (15 
feet), but not more than 400 m (0.25 miles), from the emission source is 
recommended. For outdoor locations, select a position where the sunlight 
is not shining directly in the observer's eyes.
    11.2 Field Records.
    11.2.1 Outdoor Location. Record the following information on the 
field data sheet (Figure 22-1): Company name, industry, process unit, 
observer's name, observer's affiliation, and date. Record also the 
estimated

[[Page 478]]

wind speed, wind direction, and sky condition. Sketch the process unit 
being observed, and note the observer location relative to the source 
and the sun. Indicate the potential and actual emission points on the 
sketch.
    11.2.2 Indoor Location. Record the following information on the 
field data sheet (Figure 22-2): Company name, industry, process unit, 
observer's name, observer's affiliation, and date. Record as appropriate 
the type, location, and intensity of lighting on the data sheet. Sketch 
the process unit being observed, and note the observer location relative 
to the source. Indicate the potential and actual fugitive emission 
points on the sketch.
    11.3 Indoor Lighting Requirements. For indoor locations, use a light 
meter to measure the level of illumination at a location as close to the 
emission source(s) as is feasible. An illumination of greater than 100 
lux (10 foot candles) is considered necessary for proper application of 
this method.
    11.4 Observations.
    11.4.1 Procedure. Record the clock time when observations begin. Use 
one stopwatch to monitor the duration of the observation period. Start 
this stopwatch when the observation period begins. If the observation 
period is divided into two or more segments by process shutdowns or 
observer rest breaks (see Section 11.4.3), stop the stopwatch when a 
break begins and restart the stopwatch without resetting it when the 
break ends. Stop the stopwatch at the end of the observation period. The 
accumulated time indicated by this stopwatch is the duration of 
observation period. When the observation period is completed, record the 
clock time. During the observation period, continuously watch the 
emission source. Upon observing an emission (condensed water vapor is 
not considered an emission), start the second accumulative stopwatch; 
stop the watch when the emission stops. Continue this procedure for the 
entire observation period. The accumulated elapsed time on this 
stopwatch is the total time emissions were visible during the 
observation period (i.e., the emission time.)
    11.4.2 Observation Period. Choose an observation period of 
sufficient length to meet the requirements for determining compliance 
with the emission standard in the applicable subpart of the regulations. 
When the length of the observation period is specifically stated in the 
applicable subpart, it may not be necessary to observe the source for 
this entire period if the emission time required to indicate 
noncompliance (based on the specified observation period) is observed in 
a shorter time period. In other words, if the regulation prohibits 
emissions for more than 6 minutes in any hour, then observations may 
(optional) be stopped after an emission time of 6 minutes is exceeded. 
Similarly, when the regulation is expressed as an emission frequency and 
the regulation prohibits emissions for greater than 10 percent of the 
time in any hour, then observations may (optional) be terminated after 6 
minutes of emission are observed since 6 minutes is 10 percent of an 
hour. In any case, the observation period shall not be less than 6 
minutes in duration. In some cases, the process operation may be 
intermittent or cyclic. In such cases, it may be convenient for the 
observation period to coincide with the length of the process cycle.
    11.4.3 Observer Rest Breaks. Do not observe emissions continuously 
for a period of more than 15 to 20 minutes without taking a rest break. 
For sources requiring observation periods of greater than 20 minutes, 
the observer shall take a break of not less than 5 minutes and not more 
than 10 minutes after every 15 to 20 minutes of observation. If 
continuous observations are desired for extended time periods, two 
observers can alternate between making observations and taking breaks.
    11.5 Recording Observations. Record the accumulated time of the 
observation period on the data sheet as the observation period duration. 
Record the accumulated time emissions were observed on the data sheet as 
the emission time. Record the clock time the observation period began 
and ended, as well as the clock time any observer breaks began and 
ended.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    If the applicable subpart requires that the emission rate be 
expressed as an emission frequency (in percent), determine this value as 
follows: Divide the accumulated emission time (in seconds) by the 
duration of the observation period (in seconds) or by any minimum 
observation period required in the applicable subpart, if the actual 
observation period is less than the required period, and multiply this 
quotient by 100.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Missan, R., and A. Stein. Guidelines for Evaluation of Visible 
Emissions Certification, Field Procedures, Legal Aspects, and Background 
Material. EPA Publication No. EPA-340/1-75-007. April 1975.
    2. Wohlschlegel, P., and D.E. Wagoner. Guideline for Development of 
a Quality Assurance Program: Volume IX-- Visual Determination of Opacity 
Emissions from Stationary Sources. EPA Publication No. EPA-650/4-74-
005i. November 1975.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 479]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.354


[[Page 480]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.355

   Method 23--Determination of Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-Dioxins and 
          Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans From Stationary Sources

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable to the determination of 
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD's) and poly chlor inated 
dibenzofurans (PCDF's) from stationary sources.
    1.2 Principle. A sample is withdrawn from the gas stream 
isokinetically and collected in the sample probe, on a glass fiber 
filter, and on a packed column of adsorbent material. The sample cannot 
be separated into a particle vapor fraction. The PCDD's and

[[Page 481]]

PCDF's are extracted from the sample, separated by high resolution gas 
chromatography, and measured by high resolution mass spectrometry.

                              2. Apparatus

    2.1 Sampling. A schematic of the sampling train used in this method 
is shown in Figure 23-1. Sealing greases may not be used in assembling 
the train. The train is identical to that described in section 2.1 of 
Method 5 of this appendix with the following additions:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.249


[[Page 482]]


    2.1.1 Nozzle. The nozzle shall be made of nickel, nickel-plated 
stainless steel, quartz, or borosilicate glass.
    2.1.2 Sample Transfer Lines. The sample transfer lines, if needed, 
shall be heat traced, heavy walled TFE (\1/2\ in. OD with \1/8\ in. 
wall) with connecting fittings that are capable of forming leak-free, 
vacuum-tight connections without using sealing greases. The line shall 
be as short as possible and must be maintained at 120 [deg]C.
    2.1.1 Filter Support. Teflon or Teflon-coated wire.
    2.1.2 Condenser. Glass, coil type with compatible fittings. A 
schematic diagram is shown in Figure 23-2.
    2.1.3 Water Bath. Thermostatically controlled to maintain the gas 
temperature exiting the condenser at <20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F).
    2.1.4 Adsorbent Module. Glass container to hold the solid adsorbent. 
A shematic diagram is shown in Figure 23-2. Other physical 
configurations of the resin trap/condenser assembly are acceptable. The 
connecting fittings shall form leak-free, vacuum tight seals. No sealant 
greases shall be used in the sampling train. A coarse glass frit is 
included to retain the adsorbent.
    2.2 Sample Recovery.
    2.2.1 Fitting Caps. Ground glass, Teflon tape, or aluminum foil 
(Section 2.2.6) to cap off the sample exposed sections of the train.
    2.2.2 Wash Bottles. Teflon, 500-ml.
    2.2.3 Probe-Liner Probe-Nozzle, and Filter-Holder Brushes. Inert 
bristle brushes with precleaned stainless steel or Teflon handles. The 
probe brush shall have extensions of stainless steel or Teflon, at least 
as long as the probe. The brushes shall be properly sized and shaped to 
brush out the nozzle, probe liner, and transfer line, if used.

[[Page 483]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.250

    2.2.4 Filter Storage Container. Sealed filter holder, wide-mouth 
amber glass jar with Teflon-lined cap, or glass petri dish.
    2.2.5 Balance. Triple beam.
    2.2.6 Aluminum Foil. Heavy duty, hexane-rinsed.
    2.2.7 Metal Storage Container. Air tight container to store silica 
gel.

[[Page 484]]

    2.2.8 Graduated Cylinder. Glass, 250-ml with 2-ml graduation.
    2.2.9 Glass Sample Storage Container. Amber glass bottle for sample 
glassware washes, 500- or 1000-ml, with leak free Teflon-lined caps.
    2.3 Analysis.
    2.3.1 Sample Container. 125- and 250-ml flint glass bottles with 
Teflon-lined caps.
    2.3.2 Test Tube. Glass.
    2.3.3 Soxhlet Extraction Apparatus. Capable of holding 43x123 mm 
extraction thimbles.
    2.3.4 Extraction Thimble. Glass, pre cleaned cellulosic, or glass 
fiber.
    2.3.5 Pasteur Pipettes. For preparing liquid chromatographic 
columns.
    2.3.6 Reacti-vials. Amber glass, 2-ml, silanized prior to use.
    2.3.7 Rotary Evaporator. Buchi/Brinkman RF-121 or equivalent.
    2.3.8 Nitrogen Evaporative Concentrator. N-Evap Analytical 
Evaporator Model III or equivalent.
    2.3.9 Separatory Funnels. Glass, 2-liter.
    2.3.10 Gas Chromatograph. Consisting of the following components:
    2.3.10.1 Oven. Capable of maintaining the separation column at the 
proper operating temperature <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>[deg]C and performing 
programmed increases in temperature at rates of at least 40 [deg]C/min.
    2.3.10.2 Temperature Gauge. To monitor column oven, detector, and 
exhaust temperatures <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C.
    2.3.10.3 Flow System. Gas metering system to measure sample, fuel, 
combustion gas, and carrier gas flows.
    2.3.10.4 Capillary Columns. A fused silica column, 60 x 0.25 mm 
inside diameter (ID), coated with DB-5 and a fused silica column, 30 m x 
0.25 mm ID coated with DB-225. Other column systems may be used provided 
that the user is able to demonstrate using calibration and performance 
checks that the column system is able to meet the specifications of 
section 6.1.2.2.
    2.3.11 Mass Spectrometer. Capable of routine operation at a 
resolution of 1:10000 with a stability of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ppm.
    2.3.12 Data System. Compatible with the mass spectrometer and 
capable of monitoring at least five groups of 25 ions.
    2.3.13 Analytical Balance. To measure within 0.1 mg.

                               3. Reagents

    3.1 Sampling.
    3.1.1 Filters. Glass fiber filters, without organic binder, 
exhibiting at least 99.95 percent efficiency (<0.05 percent penetration) 
on 0.3-micron dioctyl phthalate smoke particles. The filter efficiency 
test shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM Standard Method D 2986-
71 (Reapproved 1978) (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).
    3.1.1.1 Precleaning. All filters shall be cleaned before their 
initial use. Place a glass extraction thimble and 1 g of silica gel and 
a plug of glass wool into a Soxhlet apparatus, charge the apparatus with 
toluene, and reflux for a minimum of 3 hours. Remove the toluene and 
discard it, but retain the silica gel. Place no more than 50 filters in 
the thimble onto the silica gel bed and top with the cleaned glass wool. 
Charge the Soxhlet with toluene and reflux for 16 hours. After 
extraction, allow the Soxhlet to cool, remove the filters, and dry them 
under a clean N<INF>2</INF> stream. Store the filters in a glass petri 
dish sealed with Teflon tape.
    3.1.2 Adsorbent Resin. Amberlite XAD-2 resin. Thoroughly cleaned 
before initial use.
    3.1.2.1 Cleaning Procedure. This procedure may be carried out in a 
giant Soxhlet extractor. An all-glass filter thimble containing an 
extra-course frit is used for extraction of XAD-2. The frit is recessed 
10-15 mm above a crenelated ring at the bottom of the thimble to 
facilitate drainage. The resin must be carefully retained in the 
extractor cup with a glass wool plug and a stainless steel ring because 
it floats on methylene chloride. This process involves sequential 
extraction in the following order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Solvent                             Procedure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Water.....................................  Initial rinse: Place resin
                                             in a beaker, rinse once
                                             with water, and discard.
                                             Fill with water a second
                                             time, let stand overnight,
                                             and discard.
Water.....................................  Extract with water for 8
                                             hours.
Methanol..................................  Extract for 22 hours.
Methylene Chloride........................  Extract for 22 hours.
Toluene...................................  Extract for 22 hours.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    3.1.2.2 Drying.
    3.1.2.2.1 Drying Column. Pyrex pipe, 10.2 cm ID by 0.6 m long, with 
suitable retainers.
    3.1.2.2.2 Procedure. The adsorbent must be dried with clean inert 
gas. Liquid nitrogen from a standard commercial liquid nitrogen cylinder 
has proven to be a reliable source of large volumes of gas free from 
organic contaminants. Connect the liquid nitrogen cylinder to the column 
by a length of cleaned copper tubing, 0.95 cm ID, coiled to pass through 
a heat source. A convenient heat source is a water-bath heated from a 
steam line. The final nitrogen temperature should only be warm to the 
touch and not over 40 [deg]C. Continue flowing nitrogen through the 
adsorbent until all the residual solvent is removed. The flow rate 
should be sufficient to gently agitate the particles but not so 
excessive as the cause the particles to fracture.
    3.1.2.3 Quality Control Check. The adsorbent must be checked for 
residual toluene.
    3.1.2.3.1 Extraction. Weigh 1.0 g sample of dried resin into a small 
vial, add 3 ml of toluene, cap the vial, and shake it well.

[[Page 485]]

    3.1.2.3.2 Analysis. Inject a 2 [micro]l sample of the extract into a 
gas chromatograph operated under the following conditions:

    Column: 6 ft x \1/8\ in stainless steel containing 10 percent OV-101 
on 100/120 Supelcoport.
    Carrier Gas: Helium at a rate of 30 ml/min.
    Detector: Flame ionization detector operated at a sensitivity of 4 x 
10-<SUP>11</SUP> A/mV.
    Injection Port Temperature: 250 [deg]C.
    Detector Temperature: 305 [deg]C.
    Oven Temperature: 30 [deg]C for 4 min; programmed to rise at 40 
[deg]C/min until it reaches 250 [deg]C; return to 30 [deg]C after 17 
minutes.

    Compare the results of the analysis to the results from the 
reference solution. Prepare the reference solution by injection 2.5 
[micro]l of methylene chloride into 100 ml of toluene. This corresponds 
to 100 [micro]g of methylene chloride per g of adsorbent. The maximum 
acceptable concentration is 1000 [micro]g/g of adsorbent. If the 
adsorbent exceeds this level, drying must be continued until the excess 
methylene chloride is removed.
    3.1.2.4 Storage. The adsorbent must be used within 4 weeks of 
cleaning. After cleaning, it may be stored in a wide mouth amber glass 
container with a Teflon-lined cap or placed in one of the glass 
adsorbent modules tightly sealed with glass stoppers. If precleaned 
adsorbent is purchased in sealed containers, it must be used within 4 
weeks after the seal is broken.
    3.1.3 Glass Wool. Cleaned by sequential immersion in three aliquots 
of methylene chloride, dried in a 110 [deg]C oven, and stored in a 
methylene chloride-washed glass jar with a Teflon-lined screw cap.
    3.1.4 Water. Deionized distilled and stored in a methylene chloride-
rinsed glass container with a Teflon-lined screw cap.
    3.1.5 Silica Gel. Indicating type, 6 to 16 mesh. If previously used, 
dry at 175 [deg]C (350 [deg]F) for two hours. New silica gel may be used 
as received. Alternately other types of desiccants (equivalent or 
better) may be used, subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    3.1.6 Chromic Acid Cleaning Solution. Dissolve 20 g of sodium 
dichromate in 15 ml of water, and then carefully add 400 ml of 
concentrated sulfuric acid.
    3.2 Sample Recovery.
    3.2.2 Acetone. Pesticide quality.
    3.2.2 Methylene Chloride. Pesticide qualtity.
    3.2.3 Toluene. Pesticide quality.
    3.3 Analysis.
    3.3.1 Potassium Hydroxide. ACS grade, 2-percent (weight/volume) in 
water.
    3.3.2 Sodium Sulfate. Granulated, reagent grade. Purify prior to use 
by rinsing with methylene chloride and oven drying. Store the cleaned 
material in a glass container with a Teflon-lined screw cap.
    3.3.3 Sulfuric Acid. Reagent grade.
    3.3.4 Sodium Hydroxide. 1.0 N. Weigh 40 g of sodium hydroxide into a 
1-liter volumetric flask. Dilute to 1 liter with water.
    3.3.5 Hexane. Pesticide grade.
    3.3.6 Methylene Chloride. Pesticide grade.
    3.3.7 Benzene. Pesticide Grade.
    3.3.8 Ethyl Acetate.
    3.3.9 Methanol. Pesticide Grade.
    3.3.10 Toluene. Pesticide Grade.
    3.3.11 Nonane. Pesticide Grade.
    3.3.12 Cyclohexane. Pesticide Grade.
    3.3.13 Basic Alumina. Activity grade 1, 100-200 mesh. Prior to use, 
activate the alumina by heating for 16 hours at 130 [deg]C before use. 
Store in a desiccator. Pre-activated alumina may be purchased from a 
supplier and may be used as received.
    3.3.14 Silica Gel. Bio-Sil A, 100-200 mesh. Prior to use, activate 
the silica gel by heating for at least 30 minutes at 180 [deg]C. After 
cooling, rinse the silica gel sequentially with methanol and methylene 
chloride. Heat the rinsed silica gel at 50 [deg]C for 10 minutes, then 
increase the temperature gradually to 180 [deg]C over 25 minutes and 
maintain it at this temperature for 90 minutes. Cool at room temperature 
and store in a glass container with a Teflon-lined screw cap.
    3.3.15 Silica Gel Impregnated with Sulfuric Acid. Combine 100 g of 
silica gel with 44 g of concentrated sulfuric acid in a screw capped 
glass bottle and agitate thoroughly. Disperse the solids with a stirring 
rod until a uniform mixture is obtained. Store the mixture in a glass 
container with a Teflon-lined screw cap.
    3.3.16 Silica Gel Impregnated with Sodium Hydroxide. Combine 39 g of 
1 N sodium hydroxide with 100 g of silica gel in a screw capped glass 
bottle and agitate thoroughly. Disperse solids with a stirring rod until 
a uniform mixture is obtained. Store the mixture in glass container with 
a Teflon-lined screw cap.
    3.3.17 Carbon/Celite. Combine 10.7 g of AX-21 carbon with 124 g of 
Celite 545 in a 250-ml glass bottle with a Teflon-lined screw cap. 
Agitate the mixture thoroughly until a uniform mixture is obtained. 
Store in the glass container.
    3.3.18 Nitrogen. Ultra high purity.
    3.3.19 Hydrogen. Ultra high purity.
    3.3.20 Internal Standard Solution. Prepare a stock standard solution 
containing the isotopically labelled PCDD's and PCDF's at the 
concentrations shown in Table 1 under the heading ``Internal Standards'' 
in 10 ml of nonane.
    3.3.21 Surrogate Standard Solution. Prepare a stock standard 
solution containing the isotopically labelled PCDD's and PCDF's at the 
concentrations shown in Table 1 under the heading ``Surrogate 
Standards'' in 10 ml of nonane.
    3.3.22 Recovery Standard Solution. Prepare a stock standard solution 
containing

[[Page 486]]

the isotopically labelled PCDD's and PCDF's at the concentrations shown 
in Table 1 under the heading ``Recovery Standards'' in 10 ml of nonane.

                              4. Procedure

    4.1 Sampling. The complexity of this method is such that, in order 
to obtain reliable results, testers should be trained and experienced 
with the test procedures.
    4.1.1 Pretest Preparation.
    4.1.1.1 Cleaning Glassware. All glass components of the train 
upstream of and including the adsorbent module, shall be cleaned as 
described in section 3A of the ``Manual of Analytical Methods for the 
Analysis of Pesticides in Human and Environmental Samples.'' Special 
care shall be devoted to the removal of residual silicone grease 
sealants on ground glass connections of used glassware. Any residue 
shall be removed by soaking the glassware for several hours in a chromic 
acid cleaning solution prior to cleaning as described above.
    4.1.1.2 Adsorbent Trap. The traps must be loaded in a clean area to 
avoid contamination. They may not be loaded in the field. Fill a trap 
with 20 to 40 g of XAD-2. Follow the XAD-2 with glass wool and tightly 
cap both ends of the trap. Add 100 [micro]l of the surrogate standard 
solution (section 3.3.21) to each trap.
    4.1.1.3 Sample Train. It is suggested that all components be 
maintained according to the procedure described in APTD-0576.
    4.1.1.4 Silica Gel. Weigh several 200 to 300 g portions of silica 
gel in an air tight container to the nearest 0.5 g. Record the total 
weight of the silica gel plus container, on each container. As an 
alternative, the silica gel may be weighed directly in its impinger or 
sampling holder just prior to sampling.
    4.1.1.5 Filter. Check each filter against light for irregularities 
and flaws or pinhole leaks. Pack the filters flat in a clean glass 
container.
    4.1.2 Preliminary Determinations. Same as section 4.1.2 of Method 5.
    4.1.3 Preparation of Collection Train.
    4.1.3.1 During preparation and assembly of the sampling train, keep 
all train openings where contamination can enter, sealed until just 
prior to assembly or until sampling is about to begin.

    Note: Do not use sealant grease in assembling the train.

    4.1.3.2 Place approximately 100 ml of water in the second and third 
impingers, leave the first and fourth impingers empty, and transfer 
approximately 200 to 300 g of preweighed silica gel from its container 
to the fifth impinger.
    4.1.3.3 Place the silica gel container in a clean place for later 
use in the sample recovery. Alternatively, the weight of the silica gel 
plus impinger may be determined to the nearest 0.5 g and recorded.
    4.1.3.4 Assemble the train as shown in Figure 23-1.
    4.1.3.5 Turn on the adsorbent module and condenser coil 
recirculating pump and begin monitoring the adsorbent module gas entry 
temperature. Ensure proper sorbent temperature gas entry temperature 
before proceeding and before sampling is initiated. It is extremely 
important that the XAD-2 adsorbent resin temperature never exceed 50 
[deg]C because thermal decomposition will occur. During testing, the 
XAD-2 temperature must not exceed 20 [deg]C for efficient capture of the 
PCDD's and PCDF's.
    4.1.4 Leak-Check Procedure. Same as Method 5, section 4.1.4.
    4.1.5 Sample Train Operation. Same as Method 5, section 4.1.5.
    4.2 Sample Recovery. Proper cleanup procedure begins as soon as the 
probe is removed from the stack at the end of the sampling period. Seal 
the nozzle end of the sampling probe with Teflon tape or aluminum foil.
    When the probe can be safely handled, wipe off all external 
particulate matter near the tip of the probe. Remove the probe from the 
train and close off both ends with aluminum foil. Seal off the inlet to 
the train with Teflon tape, a ground glass cap, or aluminum foil.
    Transfer the probe and impinger assembly to the cleanup area. This 
area shall be clean and enclosed so that the chances of losing or 
contaminating the sample are minimized. Smoking, which could contaminate 
the sample, shall not be allowed in the cleanup area.
    Inspect the train prior to and during disassembly and note any 
abnormal conditions, e.g., broken filters, colored impinger liquid, etc. 
Treat the samples as follows:
    4.2.1 Container No. 1. Either seal the filter holder or carefully 
remove the filter from the filter holder and place it in its identified 
container. Use a pair of cleaned tweezers to handle the filter. If it is 
necessary to fold the filter, do so such that the particulate cake is 
inside the fold. Carefully transfer to the container any particulate 
matter and filter fibers which adhere to the filter holder gasket, by 
using a dry inert bristle brush and a sharp-edged blade. Seal the 
container.
    4.2.2 Adsorbent Module. Remove the module from the train, tightly 
cap both ends, label it, cover with aluminum foil, and store it on ice 
for transport to the laboratory.
    4.2.3 Container No. 2. Quantitatively recover material deposited in 
the nozzle, probe transfer lines, the front half of the filter holder, 
and the cyclone, if used, first, by brushing while rinsing three times 
each with acetone and then, by rinsing the probe three times with 
methylene chloride. Collect all the rinses in Container No. 2.

[[Page 487]]

    Rinse the back half of the filter holder three times with acetone. 
Rinse the connecting line between the filter and the condenser three 
times with acetone. Soak the connecting line with three separate 
portions of methylene chloride for 5 minutes each. If using a separate 
condenser and adsorbent trap, rinse the condenser in the same manner as 
the connecting line. Collect all the rinses in Container No. 2 and mark 
the level of the liquid on the container.
    4.2.4 Container No. 3. Repeat the methylene chloride-rinsing 
described in Section 4.2.3 using toluene as the rinse solvent. Collect 
the rinses in Container No. 3 and mark the level of the liquid on the 
container.
    4.2.5 Impinger Water. Measure the liquid in the first three 
impingers to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml by using a graduated 
cylinder or by weighing it to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g by 
using a balance. Record the volume or weight of liquid present. This 
information is required to calculate the moisture content of the 
effluent gas.
    Discard the liquid after measuring and recording the volume or 
weight.
    4.2.7 Silica Gel. Note the color of the indicating silica gel to 
determine if it has been completely spent and make a mention of its 
condition. Transfer the silica gel from the fifth impinger to its 
original container and seal.

                               5. Analysis

    All glassware shall be cleaned as described in section 3A of the 
``Manual of Analytical Methods for the Analysis of Pesticides in Human 
and Environmental Samples.'' All samples must be extracted within 30 
days of collection and analyzed within 45 days of extraction.
    5.1 Sample Extraction.
    5.1.1 Extraction System. Place an extraction thimble (section 
2.3.4), 1 g of silica gel, and a plug of glass wool into the Soxhlet 
apparatus, charge the apparatus with toluene, and reflux for a minimum 
of 3 hours. Remove the toluene and discard it, but retain the silica 
gel. Remove the extraction thimble from the extraction system and place 
it in a glass beaker to catch the solvent rinses.
    5.1.2 Container No. 1 (Filter). Transfer the contents directly to 
the glass thimble of the extraction system and extract them 
simultaneously with the XAD-2 resin.
    5.1.3 Adsorbent Cartridge. Suspend the adsorbent module directly 
over the extraction thimble in the beaker (See section 5.1.1). The glass 
frit of the module should be in the up position. Using a Teflon squeeze 
bottle containing toluene, flush the XAD-2 into the thimble onto the bed 
of cleaned silica gel. Thoroughly rinse the glass module catching the 
rinsings in the beaker containing the thimble. If the resin is wet, 
effective extraction can be accomplished by loosely packing the resin in 
the thimble. Add the XAD-2 glass wool plug into the thimble.
    5.1.4 Container No. 2 (Acetone and Methylene Chloride). Concentrate 
the sample to a volume of about 1-5 ml using the rotary evaporator 
apparatus, at a temperature of less than 37 [deg]C. Rinse the sample 
container three times with small portions of methylene chloride and add 
these to the concentrated solution and concentrate further to near 
dryness. This residue contains particulate matter removed in the rinse 
of the train probe and nozzle. Add the concentrate to the filter and the 
XAD-2 resin in the Soxhlet apparatus described in section 5.1.1.
    5.1.5 Extraction. Add 100 [micro]l of the internal standard solution 
(Section 3.3.20) to the extraction thimble containing the contents of 
the adsorbent cartridge, the contents of Container No. 1, and the 
concentrate from section 5.1.4. Cover the contents of the extraction 
thimble with the cleaned glass wool plug to prevent the XAD-2 resin from 
floating into the solvent reservoir of the extractor. Place the thimble 
in the extractor, and add the toluene contained in the beaker to the 
solvent reservoir. Pour additional toluene to fill the reservoir 
approximately 2/3 full. Add Teflon boiling chips and assemble the 
apparatus. Adjust the heat source to cause the extractor to cycle three 
times per hour. Extract the sample for 16 hours. After extraction, allow 
the Soxhlet to cool. Transfer the toluene extract and three 10-ml rinses 
to the rotary evaporator. Concentrate the extract to approximately 10 
ml. At this point the analyst may choose to split the sample in half. If 
so, split the sample, store one half for future use, and analyze the 
other according to the procedures in sections 5.2 and 5.3. In either 
case, use a nitrogen evaporative concentrator to reduce the volume of 
the sample being analyzed to near dryness. Dissolve the residue in 5 ml 
of hexane.
    5.1.6 Container No. 3 (Toluene Rinse). Add 100 [micro]l of the 
Internal Standard solution (section 3.3.2) to the contents of the 
container. Concentrate the sample to a volume of about 1-5 ml using the 
rotary evaporator apparatus at a temperature of less than 37 [deg]C. 
Rinse the sample container apparatus at a temperature of less than 37 
[deg]C. Rinse the sample container three times with small portions of 
toluene and add these to the concentrated solution and concentrate 
further to near dryness. Analyze the extract separately according to the 
procedures in sections 5.2 and 5.3, but concentrate the solution in a 
rotary evaporator apparatus rather than a nitrogen evaporative 
concentrator.
    5.2 Sample Cleanup and Fractionation.
    5.2.1 Silica Gel Column. Pack one end of a glass column, 20 mmx230 
mm, with glass wool. Add in sequence, 1 g silica gel, 2 g of sodium 
hydroxide impregnated silica gel, 1 g silica gel, 4 g of acid-modified 
silica gel, and 1 g of silica gel. Wash the column with 30 ml

[[Page 488]]

of hexane and discard it. Add the sample extract, dissolved in 5 ml of 
hexane to the column with two additional 5-ml rinses. Elute the column 
with an additional 90 ml of hexane and retain the entire eluate. 
Concentrate this solution to a volume of about 1 ml using the nitrogen 
evaporative concentrator (section 2.3.7).
    5.2.2 Basic Alumina Column. Shorten a 25-ml disposable Pasteur 
pipette to about 16 ml. Pack the lower section with glass wool and 12 g 
of basic alumina. Transfer the concentrated extract from the silica gel 
column to the top of the basic alumina column and elute the column 
sequentially with 120 ml of 0.5 percent methylene chloride in hexane 
followed by 120 ml of 35 percent methylene chloride in hexane. Discard 
the first 120 ml of eluate. Collect the second 120 ml of eluate and 
concentrate it to about 0.5 ml using the nitrogen evaporative 
concentrator.
    5.2.3 AX-21 Carbon/Celite 545 Column. Remove the botton 0.5 in. from 
the tip of a 9-ml disposable Pasteur pipette. Insert a glass fiber 
filter disk in the top of the pipette 2.5 cm from the constriction. Add 
sufficient carbon/celite mixture to form a 2 cm column. Top with a glass 
wool plug. In some cases AX-21 carbon fines may wash through the glass 
wool plug and enter the sample. This may be prevented by adding a celite 
plug to the exit end of the column. Rinse the column in sequence with 2 
ml of 50 percent benzene in ethyl acetate, 1 ml of 50 percent methylene 
chloride in cyclohexane, and 2 ml of hexane. Discard these rinses. 
Transfer the concentrate in 1 ml of hexane from the basic alumina column 
to the carbon/celite column along with 1 ml of hexane rinse. Elute the 
column sequentially with 2 ml of 50 percent methylene chloride in hexane 
and 2 ml of 50 percent benzene in ethyl acetate and discard these 
eluates. Invert the column and elute in the reverse direction with 13 ml 
of toluene. Collect this eluate. Concentrate the eluate in a rotary 
evaporator at 50 [deg]C to about 1 ml. Transfer the concentrate to a 
Reacti-vial using a toluene rinse and concentrate to a volume of 200 
[micro]l using a stream of N<INF>2</INF>. Store extracts at room 
temperature, shielded from light, until the analysis is performed.
    5.3 Analysis. Analyze the sample with a gas chromatograph coupled to 
a mass spectrometer (GC/MS) using the instrumental parameters in 
sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. Immediately prior to analysis, add a 20 
[micro]l aliquot of the Recovery Standard solution from Table 1 to each 
sample. A 2 [micro]l aliquot of the extract is injected into the GC. 
Sample extracts are first analyzed using the DB-5 capillary column to 
determine the concentration of each isomer of PCDD's and PCDF's (tetra-
through octa-). If tetra-chlorinated dibenzofurans are detected in this 
analysis, then analyze another aliquot of the sample in a separate run, 
using the DB-225 column to measure the 2,3,7,8 tetra-chloro dibenzofuran 
isomer. Other column systems may be used, provided that the user is able 
to demonstrate using calibration and performance checks that the column 
system is able to meet the specifications of section 6.1.2.2.
    5.3.1 Gas Chromatograph Operating Conditions.
    5.3.1.1 Injector. Configured for capillary column, splitless, 250 
[deg]C.
    5.3.1.2 Carrier Gas. Helium, 1-2 ml/min.
    5.3.1.3 Oven. Initially at 150 [deg]C. Raise by at least 40 [deg]C/
min to 190 [deg]C and then at 3 [deg]C/min up to 300 [deg]C.
    5.3.2 High Resolution Mass Spectrometer.
    5.3.2.1 Resolution. 10000 m/e.
    5.3.2.2 Ionization Mode. Electron impact.
    5.3.2.3 Source Temperature 250 [deg]C.
    5.3.2.4 Monitoring Mode. Selected ion monitoring. A list of the 
various ions to be monitored is summarized in Table 3.
    5.3.2.5 Identification Criteria. The following identification 
criteria shall be used for the characterization of polychlorinated 
dibenzodioxins and dibenzofurans.
    1. The integrated ion-abundance ratio (M/M+2 or M+2/M+4) shall be 
within 15 percent of the theoretical value. The acceptable ion-abundance 
ratio ranges for the identification of chlorine-containing compounds are 
given in Table 4.
    2. The retention time for the analytes must be within 3 seconds of 
the corresponding \1\\3\ C-labeled internal standard, surrogate or 
alternate standard.
    3. The monitored ions, shown in Table 3 for a given analyte, shall 
reach their maximum within 2 seconds of each other.
    4. The identification of specific isomers that do not have 
corresponding \1\\3\ C-labeled standards is done by comparison of the 
relative retention time (RRT) of the analyte to the nearest internal 
standard retention time with reference (i.e., within 0.005 RRT units) to 
the comparable RRT's found in the continuing calibration.
    5. The signal to noise ratio for all monitored ions must be greater 
than 2.5.
    6. The confirmation of 2, 3, 7, 8-TCDD and 2, 3, 7, 8-TCDF shall 
satisfy all of the above identification criteria.
    7. For the identification of PCDF's, no signal may be found in the 
corresponding PCDPE channels.
    5.3.2.6 Quantification. The peak areas for the two ions monitored 
for each analyte are summed to yield the total response for each 
analyte. Each internal standard is used to quantify the indigenous 
PCDD's or PCDF's in its homologous series. For example, the \1\\3\ C 
<INF>12</INF>-2,3,7,8-tetra chlorinated dibenzodioxin is used to 
calculate the concentrations of all other tetra chlorinated isomers. 
Recoveries of the tetra- and penta- internal standards are calculated 
using the \1\\3\ C <INF>12</INF>-1,2,3,4-TCDD. Recoveries of the hexa- 
through octa- internal standards are calculated using \1\\3\ C 
<INF>12</INF>-

[[Page 489]]

1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDD. Recoveries of the surrogate standards are calculated 
using the corresponding homolog from the internal standard.

                             6. Calibration

    Same as Method 5 with the following additions.
    6.1 GC/MS System.
    6.1.1 Initial Calibration. Calibrate the GC/MS system using the set 
of five standards shown in Table 2. The relative standard deviation for 
the mean response factor from each of the unlabeled analytes (Table 2) 
and of the internal, surrogate, and alternate standards shall be less 
than or equal to the values in Table 5. The signal to noise ratio for 
the GC signal present in every selected ion current profile shall be 
greater than or equal to 2.5. The ion abundance ratios shall be within 
the control limits in Table 4.
    6.1.2 Daily Performance Check.
    6.1.2.1 Calibration Check. Inject on [micro]l of solution Number 3 
from Table 2. Calculate the relative response factor (RRF) for each 
compound and compare each RRF to the corresponding mean RRF obtained 
during the initial calibration. The analyzer performance is acceptable 
if the measured RRF's for the labeled and unlabeled compounds for the 
daily run are within the limits of the mean values shown in Table 5. In 
addition, the ion-abundance ratios shall be within the allowable control 
limits shown in Table 4.
    6.1.2.2 Column Separation Check. Inject a solution of a mixture of 
PCDD's and PCDF's that documents resolution between 2,3,7,8-TCDD and 
other TCDD isomers. Resolution is defined as a valley between peaks that 
is less than 25 percent of the lower of the two peaks. Identify and 
record the retention time windows for each homologous series.
    Perform a similar resolution check on the confirmation column to 
document the resolution between 2,3,7,8 TCDF and other TCDF isomers.
    6.2 Lock Channels. Set mass spectrometer lock channels as specified 
in Table 3. Monitor the quality control check channels specified in 
Table 3 to verify instrument stability during the analysis.

                           7. Quality Control

    7.1 Sampling Train Collection Efficiency Check. Add 100 [micro]l of 
the surrogate standards in Table 1 to the absorbent cartridge of each 
train before collecting the field samples.
    7.2 Internal Standard Percent Recoveries. A group of nine carbon 
labeled PCDD's and PCDF's representing, the tetra-through 
octachlorinated homologues, is added to every sample prior to 
extraction. The role of the internal standards is to quantify the native 
PCDD's and PCDF's present in the sample as well as to determine the 
overall method efficiency. Recoveries of the internal standards must be 
between 40 to 130 percent for the tetra-through hexachlorinated 
compounds while the range is 25 to 130 percent for the higher hepta- and 
octachlorinated homologues.
    7.3 Surrogate Recoveries. The five surrogate compounds in Table 2 
are added to the resin in the adsorbent sampling cartridge before the 
sample is collected. The surrogate recoveries are measured relative to 
the internal standards and are a measure of collection efficiency. They 
are not used to measure native PCDD's and PCDF's. All recoveries shall 
be between 70 and 130 percent. Poor recoveries for all the surrogates 
may be an indication of breakthrough in the sampling train. If the 
recovery of all standards is below 70 percent, the sampling runs must be 
repeated. As an alternative, the sampling runs do not have to be 
repeated if the final results are divided by the fraction of surrogate 
recovery. Poor recoveries of isolated surrogate compounds should not be 
grounds for rejecting an entire set of the samples.
    7.4 Toluene QA Rinse. Report the results of the toluene QA rinse 
separately from the total sample catch. Do not add it to the total 
sample.

                          8. Quality Assurance

    8.1 Applicability. When the method is used to analyze samples to 
demonstrate compliance with a source emission regulation, an audit 
sample must be analyzed, subject to availability.
    8.2 Audit Procedure. Analyze an audit sample with each set of 
compliance samples. The audit sample contains tetra through octa isomers 
of PCDD and PCDF. Concurrently, analyze the audit sample and a set of 
compliance samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the 
analyst and the standards preparation. The same analyst, analytical 
reagents, and analytical system shall be used both for the compliance 
samples and the EPA audit sample.
    8.3 Audit Sample Availability. Audit samples will be supplied only 
to enforcement agencies for compliance tests. The availability of audit 
samples may be obtained by writing: Source Test Audit Coordinator (MD-
77B), Quality Assurance Division, Atmospheric Research and Exposure 
Assessment Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27711, or by calling the Source Test Audit Coordinator 
(STAC) at (919) 541-7834. The request for the audit sample must be made 
at least 30 days prior to the scheduled compliance sample analysis.
    8.4 Audit Results. Calculate the audit sample concentration 
according to the calculation procedure described in the audit 
instructions included with the audit sample. Fill in the audit sample 
concentration and the analyst's name on the audit response form included 
with the audit instructions.

[[Page 490]]

Send one copy to the EPA Regional Office or the appropriate enforcement 
agency and a second copy to the STAC. The EPA Regional office or the 
appropriate enforcement agency will report the results of the audit to 
the laboratory being audited. Include this response with the results of 
the compliance samples in relevant reports to the EPA Regional Office or 
the appropriate enforcement agency.

                             9. Calculations

    Same as Method 5, section 6 with the following additions.
    9.1 Nomenclature.

A<INF>ai</INF>=Integrated ion current of the noise at the retention time 
of the analyte.
A*<INF>ci</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
the internal standard i in the calibration standard.
A<INF>cij</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
compound i in the jth calibration standard.
A*<INF>cij</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic 
of the internal standard i in the jth calibration standard.
A<INF>csi</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
surrogate compound i in the calibration standard.
A<INF>i</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
compound i in the sample.
A*<INF>i</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
internal standard i in the sample.
A<INF>rs</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
the recovery standard.
A<INF>si</INF>=Integrated ion current of the two ions characteristic of 
surrogate compound i in the sample.
C<INF>i</INF>=Concentration of PCDD or PCDF i in the sample, pg/M \3\.
C<INF>T</INF>=Total concentration of PCDD's or PCDF's in the sample, pg/
M \3\.
m<INF>ci</INF>=Mass of compound i in the calibration standard injected 
into the analyzer, pg.
m<INF>rs</INF>=Mass of recovery standard in the calibration standard 
injected into the analyzer, pg.
m<INF>si</INF>=Mass of surrogate compound in the calibration standard, 
pg.
RRF<INF>i</INF>=Relative response factor.
RRF<INF>rs</INF>=Recovery standard response factor.
RRF<INF>s</INF>=Surrogate compound response factor.
    9.2 Average Relative Response Factor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.219
    
    9.3 Concentration of the PCDD's and PCDF's.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.220
    
    9.4 Recovery Standard Response Factor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.221
    
    9.5 Recovery of Internal Standards (R*).
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.222
    
    9.6 Surrogate Compound Response Factor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.223
    
    9.7 Recovery of Surrogate Compounds (R<INF>s</INF>).
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.224
    
    9.8 Minimum Detectable Limit (MDL).
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.225
    
    9.9 Total Concentration of PCDD's and PCDF's in the Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.226
    
    Any PCDD's or PCDF's that are reported as nondetected (below the 
MDL) shall be counted as zero for the purpose of calculating the total 
concentration of PCDD's and PCDF's in the sample.

                            10. Bibliography

    1. American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Sampling for the 
Determination of Chlorinated Organic Compounds in Stack Emissions. 
Prepared for U.S. Department of Energy and U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. Washington DC. December 1984. 25 p.
    2. American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Analytical Procedures 
to Assay Stack Effluent Samples and Residual Combustion Products for 
Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-Dioxins (PCDD) and Polychlorinated Di ben 
zofurans (PCDF). Prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy and U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Washington, DC. December 1984. 23 p.
    3. Thompson, J. R. (ed.). Analysis of Pesticide Residues in Human 
and Environmental Samples. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Research Triangle Park, NC. 1974.
    4. Triangle Laboratories. Case Study: Analysis of Samples for the 
Presence of Tetra Through Octachloro-p-Dibenzodioxins and Dibenzofurans. 
Research Triangle Park, NC. 1988. 26 p.

[[Page 491]]

    5. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Method 8290--The Analysis 
of Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-dioxin and Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans by 
High-Resolution Gas Chromotography/High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry. 
In: Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste. Washington, DC. SW-846.

 Table 1--Composition of the Sample Fortification and Recovery Standards
                                Solutions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Concentration
                         Analyte                           (pg/[micro]l)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Internal Standards:
  13 C12-2,3,7,8-TCDD....................................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,7,8-PeCDD.................................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDD...............................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDD.............................           100
  13 C12-OCDD............................................           100
  13 C12-2,3,7,8-TCDF....................................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,7,8-PeCDF.................................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDF...............................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDF.............................           100
Surrogate Standards:
  37 Cl4-2,3,7,8-TCDD....................................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,4,7,8-HxCDD...............................           100
  13 C12-2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF.................................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,4,7,8-HxCDF...............................           100
  13 C12-1,2,3,4,7,8,9-HpCDF.............................           100
Recovery Standards:
  13 C12-1,2,3,4-TCDD....................................           500
  13 C12-1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDD...............................           500
------------------------------------------------------------------------


        Table 2--Composition of the Initial Calibration Solutions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Concentrations (pg/[micro]L)
                                      ----------------------------------
               Compound                           Solution No.
                                      ----------------------------------
                                         1      2      3      4      5
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alternate Standard:
  13 C12-1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDF...........    2.5      5     25    250    500
Recovery Standards:
  13 C12-1,2,3,4-TCDD................    100    100    100    100    100
  13 C12-1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDD...........    100    100    100    100    100
------------------------------------------------------------------------


 Table 3--Elemental Compositions and Exact Masses of the Ions Monitored by High Resolution Mass Spectrometry for
                                                PCDD's and PCDF's
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Descriptor
    No.      Accurate mass         Ion type               Elemental composition                  Analyte
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         2        292.9825  LOCK                   C7F11                                PFK
                  303.9016  M                      C12H435Cl4O                          TCDF
                  305.8987  M+2                    C12H435Cl37O                         TCDF
                  315.9419  M                      13C12H435Cl4O                        TCDF (S)
                  317.9389  M+2                    13C12H435Cl337ClO                    TCDF (S)
                  319.8965  M                      C12H435ClO2                          TCDD
                  321.8936  M+2                    C12H435Cl337ClO2                     TCDD
                  327.8847  M                      C12H437Cl4O2                         TCDD (S)
                  330.9792  QC                     C7F13                                PFK
                  331.9368  M                      13C12H435Cl4O2                       TCDD (S)
                  333.9339  M+2                    13C12H435Cl37ClO2                    TCDD (S)
                  339.8597  M+2                    C12H335Cl437ClO                      PECDF
                  341.8567  M+4                    C12H335Cl337Cl2O                     PeCDF
                  351.9000  M+2                    13C12H335Cl437ClO                    PeCDF (S)
                  353.8970  M+4                    13C12H335Cl3537Cl2O                  PeCDF (S)
                  355.8546  M+2                    C12H335Cl337ClO2                     PeCDD
                  357.8516  M+4                    C12H335Cl337Cl2O2                    PeCDD
                  367.8949  M+2                    13C12H335Cl437ClO2                   PeCDD (S)
                  369.8919  M+4                    13C12H335Cl337 Cl2O2                 PeCDD (S)
                  375.8364  M+2                    C12H435Cl537ClO                      HxCDPE
                  409.7974  M+2                    C12H335Cl637ClO                      HpCPDE
         3        373.8208  M+2                    C12H235Cl537ClO                      HxCDF
                  375.8178  M+4                    C12H235Cl437Cl2O                     HxCDF
                  383.8639  M                      13C12H235Cl6O                        HxCDF (S)
                  385.8610  M+2                    13C12H235Cl537ClO                    HxCDF (S)
                  389.8157  M+2                    C12H235Cl537ClO2                     HxCDD
                  391.8127  M+4                    C12H235Cl437Cl2O2                    HxCDD
                  392.9760  LOCK                   C9F15                                PFK
                  401.8559  M+2                    13C12H235Cl537ClO2                   HxCDD (S)
                  403.8529  M+4                    13C12H235Cl437Cl2O                   HxCDD (S)
                  445.7555  M+4                    C12H235Cl637Cl2O                     OCDPE
                  430.9729  QC                     C9F17                                PFK
         4        407.7818  M+2                    C12H35Cl637ClO                       HpCDF
                  409.7789  M+4                    C12H35Cl537Cl2O                      HpCDF
                  417.8253  M                      13C12H35Cl7O                         HpCDF (S)
                  419.8220  M+2                    13C12H35Cl637ClO                     HpCDF (S)
                  423.7766  M+2                    C12H35Cl637ClO2                      HpCDD
                  425.7737  M+4                    C12H35Cl537Cl2O2                     HpCDD

[[Page 492]]

 
                  435.8169  M+2                    13C12H35Cl637ClO2                    HpCDD (S)
                  437.8140  M+4                    13C12H35Cl537Cl2O2                   HpCDD (S)
                  479.7165  M+4                    C12H35Cl737Cl2O                      NCPDE
                  430.9729  LOCK                   C9F17                                PFK
                  441.7428  M+2                    C1235Cl737ClO                        OCDF
                  443.7399  M+4                    C1235Cl637Cl2O                       OCDF
                  457.7377  M+2                    C1235Cl737ClO2                       OCDD
                  459.7348  M+4                    C1235Cl637Cl2O2                      OCDD
                  469.7779  M+2                    13C1235Cl737ClO2                     OCDD (S)
                  471.7750  M+4                    13C1235Cl637Cl2O2                    OCDD (S)
                  513.6775  M+4                    C1235Cl837Cl2O2                      DCDPE
                  442.9728  QC                     C10F17                               PFK
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) The following nuclidic masses were used:
H=1.007825
C=12.000000
13C=13.003355
F=18.9984
O=15.994915
35Cl=34.968853
37Cl=36.965903
S=Labeled Standard
QC=Ion selected for monitoring instrument stability during the GC/MS analysis.


Table 4--Acceptable Ranges for Ion-Abundance Ratios of PCDD's and PCDF's
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No. of                                                 Control limits
 chlorine             Ion type             Theoretical -----------------
  atoms                                       ratio      Lower    Upper
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        4  M/M+2                                0.77       0.65     0.89
        5  M+2/M+4                              1.55       1.32     1.78
        6  M+2/M+4                              1.24       1.05     1.43
      6 a  M/M+2                                0.51       0.43     0.59
      7 b  M/M+2                                0.44       0.37     0.51
        7  M+2/M+4                              1.04       0.88     1.20
        8  M+2/M+4                              0.89       0.76     1.02
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a Used only for \13\C-HxCDF.
b Used only for \13\C-HpCDF.


Table 5--Minimum Requirements for Initial and Daily Calibration Response
                                 Factors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Relative response factors
                                         -------------------------------
                Compound                      Initial          Daily
                                            calibration    calibration %
                                                RSD         difference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unlabeled
 Analytes:
  2,3,7,8-TCDD..........................              25              25
  2,3,7,8-TCDF..........................              25              25
  1,2,3,7,8-PeCDD.......................              25              25
  1,2,3,7,8-PeCDF.......................              25              25
  2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF.......................              25              25
  1,2,4,5,7,8-HxCDD.....................              25              25
  1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDD.....................              25              25
  1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDD.....................              25              25
  1,2,3,4,7,8-HxCDF.....................              25              25
  1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDF.....................              25              25
  1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDF.....................              25              25
  2,3,4,6,7,8-HxCDF.....................              25              25
  1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDD...................              25              25
  1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDF...................              25              25
  OCDD..................................              25              25
  OCDF..................................              30              30
Internal
 Standards:
  \13\C12-2,3,7,8-TCDD..................              25              25
  \13\C12-1,2,3,7,8-PeCDD...............              30              30
  \13\C12-1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDD.............              25              25
  \13\C12-1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDD...........              30              30
  \13\C12-OCDD..........................              30              30
  \13\C12-2,3,7,8-TCDF..................              30              30
  \13\C12-1,2,3,7,8-PeCDF...............              30              30
  \13\C12-1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDF.............              30              30
  \13\C12-1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDF...........              30              30
Surrogate
 Standards:
  \37\Cl4-2,3,7,8-TCDD..................              25              25
  \13\C12-2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF...............              25              25
  \13\C12-1,2,3,4,7,8-HxCDD.............              25              25
  \13\C12-1,2,3,4,7,8-HxCDF.............              25              25
  \13\C12-1,2,3,4,7,8,9-HpCDF...........              25              25
Alternate
 Standard:
  \13\C12-1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDF.............              25              25
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Method 24--Determination of Volatile Matter Content, Water Content, 
      Density, Volume Solids, and Weight Solids of Surface Coatings

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Volatile organic compounds Water..........  No CAS Number assigned 7732-
                                             18-5
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 493]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of volatile matter content, water content, density, volume solids, and 
weight solids of paint, varnish, lacquer, or other related surface 
coatings.
    1.3 Precision and Bias. Intra-and inter-laboratory analytical 
precision statements are presented in Section 13.1. No bias has been 
identified.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Standard methods are used to determine the volatile matter 
content, water content, density, volume solids, and weight solids of 
paint, varnish, lacquer, or other related surface coatings.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Waterborne coating means any coating which contains more than 5 
percent water by weight in its volatile fraction.
    3.2 Multicomponent coatings are coatings that are packaged in two or 
more parts, which are combined before application. Upon combination a 
coreactant from one part of the coating chemically reacts, at ambient 
conditions, with a coreactant from another part of the coating.
    3.3 Ultraviolet (UV) radiation-cured coatings are coatings which 
contain unreacted monomers that are polymerized by exposure to 
ultraviolet light.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Hazardous Components. Several of the compounds that may be 
contained in the coatings analyzed by this method may be irritating or 
corrosive to tissues (e.g., heptane) or may be toxic (e.g., benzene, 
methyl alcohol). Nearly all are fire hazards. Appropriate precautions 
can be found in reference documents, such as Reference 3 of Section 
16.0.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    The equipment and supplies specified in the ASTM methods listed in 
Sections 6.1 through 6.6 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17 for 
acceptable versions of the methods) are required:
    6.1 ASTM D 1475-60, 80, or 90, Standard Test Method for Density of 
Paint, Varnish, Lacquer, and Related Products.
    6.2 ASTM D 2369-81, 87, 90, 92, 93, or 95, Standard Test Method for 
Volatile Content of Coatings.
    6.3 ASTM D 3792-79 or 91, Standard Test Method for Water Content of 
Water Reducible Paints by Direct Injection into a Gas Chromatograph.
    6.4 ASTM D 4017-81, 90, or 96a, Standard Test Method for Water in 
Paints and Paint Materials by the Karl Fischer Titration Method.
    6.5 ASTM 4457-85 91, Standard Test Method for Determination of 
Dichloromethane and 1,1,1-Trichloroethane in Paints and Coatings by 
Direct Injection into a Gas Chromatograph.
    6.6 ASTM D 5403-93, Standard Test Methods for Volatile Content of 
Radiation Curable Materials.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 The reagents and standards specified in the ASTM methods listed 
in Sections 6.1 through 6.6 are required.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Follow the sample collection, preservation, storage, and 
transport procedures described in Reference 1 of Section 16.0.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Reproducibility

    Note: Not applicable to UV radiation-cured coatings). The variety of 
coatings that may be subject to analysis makes it necessary to verify 
the ability of the analyst and the analytical procedures to obtain 
reproducible results for the coatings tested. Verification is 
accomplished by running duplicate analyses on each sample tested 
(Sections 11.2 through 11.4) and comparing the results with the intra-
laboratory precision statements (Section 13.1) for each parameter.

    9.2 Confidence Limits for Waterborne Coatings. Because of the 
inherent increased imprecision in the determination of the VOC content 
of waterborne coatings as the weight percent of water increases, 
measured parameters for waterborne coatings are replaced with 
appropriate confidence limits (Section 12.6). These confidence limits 
are based on measured parameters and inter-laboratory precision 
statements.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Perform the calibration and standardization procedures 
specified in the ASTM methods listed in Sections 6.1 through 6.6.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Additional guidance can be found in Reference 2 of Section 16.0.
    11.1 Non Thin-film Ultraviolet Radiation-cured (UV radiation-cured) 
Coatings.

[[Page 494]]

    11.1.1 Volatile Content. Use the procedure in ASTM D 5403 to 
determine the volatile matter content of the coating except the curing 
test described in NOTE 2 of ASTM D 5403 is required.
    11.1.2 Water Content. To determine water content, follow Section 
11.3.2.
    11.1.3 Coating Density. To determine coating density, follow Section 
11.3.3.
    11.1.4 Solids Content. To determine solids content, follow Section 
11.3.4.
    11.1.5 To determine if a coating or ink can be classified as a thin-
film UV cured coating or ink, use the equation in Section 12.2. If C is 
less than 0.2 g and A is greater than or equal to 225 cm\2\ (35 in\2\) 
then the coating or ink is considered a thin-film UV radiation-cured 
coating and ASTM D 5403 is not applicable.

    Note: As noted in Section 1.4 of ASTM D 5403, this method may not be 
applicable to radiation curable materials wherein the volatile material 
is water.

    11.2 Multi-component Coatings.
    11.2.1 Sample Preparation.
    11.2.1.1 Prepare about 100 ml of sample by mixing the components in 
a storage container, such as a glass jar with a screw top or a metal can 
with a cap. The storage container should be just large enough to hold 
the mixture. Combine the components (by weight or volume) in the ratio 
recommended by the manufacturer. Tightly close the container between 
additions and during mixing to prevent loss of volatile materials. 
However, most manufacturers mixing instructions are by volume. Because 
of possible error caused by expansion of the liquid when measuring the 
volume, it is recommended that the components be combined by weight. 
When weight is used to combine the components and the manufacturer's 
recommended ratio is by volume, the density must be determined by 
Section 11.3.3.
    11.2.1.2 Immediately after mixing, take aliquots from this 100 ml 
sample for determination of the total volatile content, water content, 
and density.
    11.2.2 Volatile Content. To determine total volatile content, use 
the apparatus and reagents described in ASTM D2369 Sections 3 and 4 
(incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17 for the approved versions of 
the standard), respectively, and use the following procedures:
    11.2.2.1 Weigh and record the weight of an aluminum foil weighing 
dish. Add 3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml of suitable solvent as specified 
in ASTM D2369 to the weighing dish. Using a syringe as specified in ASTM 
D2369, weigh to 1 mg, by difference, a sample of coating into the 
weighing dish. For coatings believed to have a volatile content less 
than 40 weight percent, a suitable size is 0.3 + 0.10 g, but for 
coatings believed to have a volatile content greater than 40 weight 
percent, a suitable size is 0.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 g.

    Note: If the volatile content determined pursuant to Section 12.4 is 
not in the range corresponding to the sample size chosen repeat the test 
with the appropriate sample size. Add the specimen dropwise, shaking 
(swirling) the dish to disperse the specimen completely in the solvent. 
If the material forms a lump that cannot be dispersed, discard the 
specimen and prepare a new one. Similarly, prepare a duplicate. The 
sample shall stand for a minimum of 1 hour, but no more than 24 hours 
prior to being oven cured at 110 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (230 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F) for 1 hour.

    11.2.2.2 Heat the aluminum foil dishes containing the dispersed 
specimens in the forced draft oven for 60 min at 110 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (230 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F). Caution--
provide adequate ventilation, consistent with accepted laboratory 
practice, to prevent solvent vapors from accumulating to a dangerous 
level.
    11.2.2.3 Remove the dishes from the oven, place immediately in a 
desiccator, cool to ambient temperature, and weigh to within 1 mg.
    11.2.2.4 Run analyses in pairs (duplicate sets) for each coating 
mixture until the criterion in Section 11.4 is met. Calculate 
W<INF>V</INF> following Equation 24-2 and record the arithmetic average.
    11.2.3 Water Content. To determine water content, follow Section 
11.3.2.
    11.2.4 Coating Density. To determine coating density, follow Section 
11.3.3.
    11.2.5 Solids Content. To determine solids content, follow Section 
11.3.4.
    11.2.6 Exempt Solvent Content. To determine the exempt solvent 
content, follow Section 11.3.5.

    Note: For all other coatings (i.e., water-or solvent-borne coatings) 
not covered by multicomponent or UV radiation-cured coatings, analyze as 
shown below:

    11.3 Water-or Solvent-borne coatings.
    11.3.1 Volatile Content. Use the procedure in ASTM D 2369 to 
determine the volatile matter content (may include water) of the 
coating.
    11.3.1.1 Record the following information:

W<INF>1</INF>=weight of dish and sample before heating, g
W<INF>2</INF>=weight of dish and sample after heating, g
W<INF>3</INF>=sample weight, g.

    11.3.1.2 Calculate the weight fraction of the volatile matter 
(W<INF>v</INF>) for each analysis as shown in Section 12.3.
    11.3.1.3 Run duplicate analyses until the difference between the two 
values in a set is less than or equal to the intra-laboratory precision 
statement in Section 13.1.
    11.3.1.4 Record the arithmetic average (W<INF>v</INF>).

[[Page 495]]

    11.3.2 Water Content. For waterborne coatings only, determine the 
weight fraction of water (W<INF>w</INF>) using either ASTM D 3792 or 
ASTM D 4017.
    11.3.2.1 Run duplicate analyses until the difference between the two 
values in a set is less than or equal to the intra-laboratory precision 
statement in Section 13.1.
    11.3.2.2 Record the arithmetic average (w<INF>w</INF>).
    11.3.3 Coating Density. Determine the density (Dc, kg/l) of the 
surface coating using the procedure in ASTM D 1475.
    11.3.3.1 Run duplicate analyses until each value in a set deviates 
from the mean of the set by no more than the intra-laboratory precision 
statement in Section 13.1.
    11.3.3.2 Record the arithmetic average (D<INF>c</INF>).
    11.3.4 Solids Content. Determine the volume fraction (V<INF>s</INF>) 
solids of the coating by calculation using the manufacturer's 
formulation.
    11.3.5 Exempt Solvent Content. Determine the weight fraction of 
exempt solvents (W<INF>E</INF>) by using ASTM Method D4457. Run a 
duplicate set of determinations and record the arithmetic average 
(W<INF>E</INF>).
    11.4 Sample Analysis Criteria. For W<INF>v</INF> and W<INF>w</INF>, 
run duplicate analyses until the difference between the two values in a 
set is less than or equal to the intra-laboratory precision statement 
for that parameter. For D<INF>c</INF>, run duplicate analyses until each 
value in a set deviates from the mean of the set by no more than the 
intra-laboratory precision statement. If, after several attempts, it is 
concluded that the ASTM procedures cannot be used for the specific 
coating with the established intra-laboratory precision (excluding UV 
radiation-cured coatings), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) will assume responsibility for providing the necessary procedures 
for revising the method or precision statements upon written request to: 
Director, Emissions, Monitoring, and Analysis Division, MD-14, Office of 
Air Quality Planning and Standards, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 Nomenclature.

A=Area of substrate, cm<SUP>2</SUP>, (in<SUP>2</SUP>).
C=Amount of coating or ink added to the substrate, g.
D<INF>c</INF>=Density of coating or ink, g/cm\3\ (g/in\3\).
F=Manufacturer's recommended film thickness, cm (in).
W<INF>o</INF>=Weight fraction of nonaqueous volatile matter, g/g.
W<INF>s</INF>=Weight fraction of solids, g/g.
W<INF>v</INF>=Weight fraction of the volatile matter, g/g.
W<INF>w</INF>=Weight fraction of the water, g/g.

    12.2 To determine if a coating or ink can be classified as a thin-
film UV cured coating or ink, use the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.356

    12.3 Calculate W<INF>v</INF> for each analysis as shown below:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.357
    
    12.4 Nonaqueous Volatile Matter.
    12.4.1 Solvent-borne Coatings.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.358
    
    12.4.2 Waterborne Coatings.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.359
    
    12.4.3 Coatings Containing Exempt Solvents.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.360
    
    12.5 Weight Fraction Solids.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.361
    
    12.6 Confidence Limit Calculations for Waterborne Coatings. To 
calculate the lower confidence limit, subtract the appropriate inter-
laboratory precision value from the measured mean value for that 
parameter. To calculate the upper confidence limit, add the appropriate 
inter-laboratory precision value to the measured mean value for that 
parameter. For W<INF>v</INF> and D<INF>c</INF>, use the lower confidence 
limits; for W<INF>w</INF>, use the upper confidence limit. Because 
W<INF>s</INF> is calculated, there is no adjustment for this parameter.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Analytical Precision Statements. The intra-and inter-laboratory 
precision statements are given in Table 24-1 in Section 17.0.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as specified in Section 6.0, with the addition of the 
following:
    1. Standard Procedure for Collection of Coating and Ink Samples for 
Analysis by Reference Methods 24 and 24A. EPA-340/1-91-010. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Stationary Source Compliance Division, 
Washington, D.C. September 1991.
    2. Standard Operating Procedure for Analysis of Coating and Ink 
Samples by Reference Methods 24 and 24A.
    EPA-340/1-91-011. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Stationary 
Source Compliance Division, Washington, D.C. September 1991.

[[Page 496]]

    3. Handbook of Hazardous Materials: Fire, Safety, Health. Alliance 
of American Insurers. Schaumberg, IL. 1983.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

                                   Table 24-1--Analytical Precision Statements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Intra-laboratory                    Inter-laboratory
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Volatile matter content, Wv............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.015 Wv....  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.047 W8v
Water content, Ww......................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.029 W8w...  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.075 Ww
Density, Dc............................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.001 kg/l..  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.002 kg/l
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Method 24A--Determination of Volatile Matter Content and Density of 
    Publication Rotogravure Inks and Related Publication Rotogravure 
                                Coatings

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Volatile organic compounds (VOC)..........  No CAS number assigned.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of the VOC content and density of solvent-borne (solvent-reducible) 
publication rotogravure inks and related publication rotogravure 
coatings.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Separate procedures are used to determine the VOC weight 
fraction and density of the ink or related coating and the density of 
the solvent in the ink or related coating. The VOC weight fraction is 
determined by measuring the weight loss of a known sample quantity which 
has been heated for a specified length of time at a specified 
temperature. The density of both the ink or related coating and solvent 
are measured by a standard procedure. From this information, the VOC 
volume fraction is calculated.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method does not purport to address 
all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user of this test method to establish appropriate 
safety and health practices and to determine the applicability of 
regulatory limitations prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Hazardous Components. Some of the compounds that may be 
contained in the inks or related coatings analyzed by this method may be 
irritating or corrosive to tissues or may be toxic. Nearly all are fire 
hazards. Appropriate precautions can be found in reference documents, 
such as Reference 6 of Section 16.0.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    The following equipment and supplies are required for sample 
analysis:
    6.1 Weighing Dishes. Aluminum foil, 58 mm (2.3 in.) in diameter by 
18 mm (0.7 in.) high, with a flat bottom. There must be at least three 
weighing dishes per sample.
    6.2 Disposable Syringe. 5 ml.
    6.3 Analytical Balance. To measure to within 0.1 mg.
    6.4 Oven. Vacuum oven capable of maintaining a temperature of 120 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 [deg]F) and 
an absolute pressure of 510 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>51 mm Hg (20 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 in. Hg) for 4 hours. Alternatively, a forced draft 
oven capable of maintaining a temperature of 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
[deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 [deg]F) for 24 hours.
    6.5 The equipment and supplies specified in ASTM D 1475-60, 80, or 
90 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 The reagents and standards specified in ASTM D 1475-60, 80, or 
90 are required.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Follow the sample collection, preservation, storage, and 
transport procedures described in Reference 4 of Section 16.0.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Additional guidance can be found in Reference 5 of Section 16.0.
    11.1 VOC Weight Fraction. Shake or mix the ink or related coating 
sample thoroughly to assure that all the solids are completely 
suspended. Label and weigh to the nearest 0.1 mg a weighing dish and 
record this weight (M<INF>x1</INF>). Using a 5 ml syringe, without a 
needle, extract an aliquot from the ink or related coating sample. Weigh 
the syringe and aliquot to the nearest 0.1 mg and record this weight 
(M<INF>cy1</INF>). Transfer 1 to 3 g of the aliquot to the tared 
weighing dish. Reweigh the syringe and remaining aliquot to the nearest 
0.1 mg and record this weight (M<INF>cy2</INF>). Heat the

[[Page 497]]

weighing dish with the transferred aliquot in a vacuum oven at an 
absolute pressure of 510 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>51 mm Hg (20 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 in. Hg) and a temperature of 120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 [deg]F) for 4 
hours. Alternatively, heat the weighing dish with the transferred 
aliquot in a forced draft oven at a temperature of 120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C for 24 hours. After the weighing dish has 
cooled, reweigh it to the nearest 0.1 mg and record the weight 
(M<INF>x2</INF>). Repeat this procedure two times for each ink or 
related coating sample, for a total of three samples.
    11.2 Ink or Related Coating Density. Determine the density of the 
ink or related coating (D<INF>c</INF>) according to the procedure 
outlined in ASTM D 1475. Make a total of three determinations for each 
ink or related coating sample. Report the ink or related coating density 
as the arithmetic average (D<INF>c</INF>) of the three determinations.
    11.3 Solvent Density. Determine the density of the solvent 
(D<INF>o</INF>) according to the procedure outlined in ASTM D 1475. Make 
a total of three determinations for each ink or related coating sample. 
Report the solvent density as the arithmetic average (D<INF>o</INF>) of 
the three determinations.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 VOC Weight Fraction. For each determination, calculate the 
volatile organic content weight fraction (W<INF>o</INF>) using the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.362

Make a total of three determinations. Report the VOC weight fraction as 
the arithmetic average (W<INF>o</INF>) of the three determinations.
    12.2 VOC Volume Fraction. Calculate the volume fraction volatile 
organic content (V<INF>o</INF>) using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.363

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Standard Test Method for Density of Paint, Varnish, Lacquer, and 
Related Products. ASTM Designation D 1475.
    2. Teleconversation. Wright, Chuck, Inmont Corporation with Reich, 
R., A., Radian Corporation. September 25, 1979, Gravure Ink Analysis.
    3. Teleconversation. Oppenheimer, Robert, Gravure Research Institute 
with Burt, Rick, Radian Corporation, November 5, 1979, Gravure Ink 
Analysis.
    4. Standard Procedure for Collection of Coating and Ink Samples for 
Analysis by Reference Methods 24 and 24A. EPA-340/1-91-010. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Stationary Source Compliance Division, 
Washington, D.C. September 1991.
    5. Standard Operating Procedure for Analysis of Coating and Ink 
Samples by Reference Methods 24 and 24A. EPA-340/1-91-011. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Stationary Source Compliance Division, 
Washington, D.C. September 1991.
    6. Handbook of Hazardous Materials: Fire, Safety, Health. Alliance 
of American Insurers. Schaumberg, IL. 1983.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

 Method 25--Determination of Total Gaseous Nonmethane Organic Emissions 
                                as Carbon

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total gaseous nonmethane organic               N/A  Dependent upon
 compounds (TGNMO).                                  analytical
                                                     equipment.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 498]]

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This method is applicable for the determination of volatile 
organic compounds (VOC) (measured as total gaseous nonmethane organics 
(TGNMO) and reported as carbon) in stationary source emissions. This 
method is not applicable for the determination of organic particulate 
matter.
    1.2.2 This method is not the only method that applies to the 
measurement of VOC. Costs, logistics, and other practicalities of source 
testing may make other test methods more desirable for measuring VOC 
contents of certain effluent streams. Proper judgment is required in 
determining the most applicable VOC test method. For example, depending 
upon the molecular composition of the organics in the effluent stream, a 
totally automated semicontinuous nonmethane organics (NMO) analyzer 
interfaced directly to the source may yield accurate results. This 
approach has the advantage of providing emission data semicontinuously 
over an extended time period.
    1.2.3 Direct measurement of an effluent with a flame ionization 
detector (FID) analyzer may be appropriate with prior characterization 
of the gas stream and knowledge that the detector responds predictably 
to the organic compounds in the stream. If present, methane 
(CH<INF>4</INF>) will, of course, also be measured. The FID can be used 
under any of the following limited conditions: (1) Where only one 
compound is known to exist; (2) when the organic compounds consist of 
only hydrogen and carbon; (3) where the relative percentages of the 
compounds are known or can be determined, and the FID responses to the 
compounds are known; (4) where a consistent mixture of the compounds 
exists before and after emission control and only the relative 
concentrations are to be assessed; or (5) where the FID can be 
calibrated against mass standards of the compounds emitted (solvent 
emissions, for example).
    1.2.4 Another example of the use of a direct FID is as a screening 
method. If there is enough information available to provide a rough 
estimate of the analyzer accuracy, the FID analyzer can be used to 
determine the VOC content of an uncharacterized gas stream. With a 
sufficient buffer to account for possible inaccuracies, the direct FID 
can be a useful tool to obtain the desired results without costly exact 
determination.
    1.2.5 In situations where a qualitative/quantitative analysis of an 
effluent stream is desired or required, a gas chromatographic FID system 
may apply. However, for sources emitting numerous organics, the time and 
expense of this approach will be formidable.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 An emission sample is withdrawn from the stack at a constant 
rate through a heated filter and a chilled condensate trap by means of 
an evacuated sample tank. After sampling is completed, the TGNMO are 
determined by independently analyzing the condensate trap and sample 
tank fractions and combining the analytical results. The organic content 
of the condensate trap fraction is determined by oxidizing the NMO to 
carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) and quantitatively collecting in the 
effluent in an evacuated vessel; then a portion of the CO<INF>2</INF> is 
reduced to CH<INF>4</INF> and measured by an FID. The organic content of 
the sample tank fraction is measured by injecting a portion of the 
sample into a gas chromatographic column to separate the NMO from carbon 
monoxide (CO), CO<INF>2</INF>, and CH<INF>4</INF>; the NMO are oxidized 
to CO<INF>2</INF>, reduced to CH<INF>4</INF>, and measured by an FID. In 
this manner, the variable response of the FID associated with different 
types of organics is eliminated.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Carbon Dioxide and Water Vapor. When carbon dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>) and water vapor are present together in the stack, they 
can produce a positive bias in the sample. The magnitude of the bias 
depends on the concentrations of CO<INF>2</INF> and water vapor. As a 
guideline, multiply the CO<INF>2</INF> concentration, expressed as 
volume percent, times the water vapor concentration. If this product 
does not exceed 100, the bias can be considered insignificant. For 
example, the bias is not significant for a source having 10 percent 
CO<INF>2</INF> and 10 percent water vapor, but it might be significant 
for a source having 10 percent CO<INF>2</INF> and 20 percent water 
vapor.
    4.2. Particulate Matter. Collection of organic particulate matter in 
the condensate trap would produce a positive bias. A filter is included 
in the sampling equipment to minimize this bias.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Collection. The sampling system consists of a heated 
probe, heated filter, condensate trap, flow control system, and sample 
tank (see Figure 25-1). The TGNMO sampling equipment can be constructed 
from commercially available components and components fabricated in a 
machine shop. The following equipment is required:
    6.1.1 Heated Probe. 6.4-mm (\1/4\-in.) OD stainless steel tubing 
with a heating system

[[Page 499]]

capable of maintaining a gas temperature at the exit end of at least 129 
[deg]C (265 [deg]F). The probe shall be equipped with a temperature 
sensor at the exit end to monitor the gas temperature. A suitable probe 
is shown in Figure 25-1. The nozzle is an elbow fitting attached to the 
front end of the probe while the temperature sensor is inserted in the 
side arm of a tee fitting attached to the rear of the probe. The probe 
is wrapped with a suitable length of high temperature heating tape, and 
then covered with two layers of glass cloth insulation and one layer of 
aluminum foil or an equivalent wrapping.

    Note: If it is not possible to use a heating system for safety 
reasons, an unheated system with an in-stack filter is a suitable 
alternative.

    6.1.2 Filter Holder. 25-mm (\15/16\-in.) ID Gelman filter holder 
with 303 stainless steel body and 316 stainless steel support screen 
with the Viton O-ring replaced by a Teflon O-ring.
    6.1.3 Filter Heating System.
    6.1.3.1 A metal box consisting of an inner and an outer shell 
separated by insulating material with a heating element in the inner 
shell capable of maintaining a gas temperature at the filter of 121 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (250 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F). The 
heating box shall include temperature sensors to monitor the gas 
temperature immediately upstream and immediately downstream of the 
filter.
    6.1.3.2 A suitable heating box is shown in Figure 25-2. The outer 
shell is a metal box that measures 102 mmx280 mmx292 mm (4 in.x11 
in.x11\1/2\ in.), while the inner shell is a metal box measuring 76 
mmx229 mmx241 mm (3 in.x9 in.x9\1/2\ in.). The inner box is supported by 
13-mm (\1/2\-in.) phenolic rods. The void space between the boxes is 
filled with ceramic fiber insulation which is sealed in place by means 
of a silicon rubber bead around the upper sides of the box. A removable 
lid made in a similar manner, with a 25-mm (1-in.) gap between the parts 
is used to cover the heating chamber. The inner box is heated with a 
250-watt cartridge heater, shielded by a stainless steel shroud. The 
heater is regulated by a thermostatic temperature controller which is 
set to maintain a gas temperature of 121 [deg]C (250 [deg]F) as measured 
by the temperature sensor upstream of the filter.

    Note: If it is not possible to use a heating system for safety 
reasons, an unheated system with an in-stack filter is a suitable 
alternative.

    6.1.4 Condensate Trap. 9.5-mm (\3/8\-in.) OD 316 stainless steel 
tubing bent into a U-shape. Exact dimensions are shown in Figure 25-3. 
The tubing shall be packed with coarse quartz wool, to a density of 
approximately 0.11 g/cm\3\ before bending. While the condensate trap is 
packed with dry ice in the Dewar, an ice bridge may form between the 
arms of the condensate trap making it difficult to remove the condensate 
trap. This problem can be prevented by attaching a steel plate between 
the arms of the condensate trap in the same plane as the arms to 
completely fill the intervening space.
    6.1.5 Valve. Stainless steel control valve for starting and stopping 
sample flow.
    6.1.6 Metering Valve. Stainless steel valve for regulating the 
sample flow rate through the sample train.
    6.1.7 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, capable of measuring 
sample flow in the range of 60 to 100 cm\3\/min (0.13 to 0.21 ft\3\/hr).
    6.1.8 Sample Tank. Stainless steel or aluminum tank with a minimum 
volume of 4 liters (0.14 ft\3\).

    Note: Sample volumes greater than 4 liters may be required for 
sources with low organic concentrations.

    6.1.9 Mercury Manometer. U-tube manometer or absolute pressure gauge 
capable of measuring pressure to within 1 mm Hg in the range of 0 to 900 
mm.
    6.1.10 Vacuum Pump. Capable of evacuating to an absolute pressure of 
10 mm Hg.
    6.2 Condensate Recovery. The system for the recovery of the organics 
captured in the condensate trap consists of a heat source, an oxidation 
catalyst, a nondispersive infrared (NDIR) analyzer, and an intermediate 
collection vessel (ICV). Figure 25-4 is a schematic of a typical system. 
The system shall be capable of proper oxidation and recovery, as 
specified in Section 10.1.1. The following major components are 
required:
    6.2.1 Heat Source. Sufficient to heat the condensate trap (including 
probe) to a temperature of 200 [deg]C (390 [deg]F). A system using both 
a heat gun and an electric tube furnace is recommended.
    6.2.2 Heat Tape. Sufficient to heat the connecting tubing between 
the water trap and the oxidation catalyst to 100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    6.2.3 Oxidation Catalyst. A suitable length of 9.5 mm (\3/8\-in.) OD 
Inconel 600 tubing packed with 15 cm (6 in.) of 3.2 mm (\3/8\-in.) 
diameter 19 percent chromia on alumina pellets. The catalyst material is 
packed in the center of the catalyst tube with quartz wool packed on 
either end to hold it in place.
    6.2.4 Water Trap. Leak-proof, capable of removing moisture from the 
gas stream.
    6.2.5 Syringe Port. A 6.4-mm (\1/4\-in.) OD stainless steel tee 
fitting with a rubber septum placed in the side arm.
    6.2.6 NDIR Detector. Capable of indicating CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration in the range of zero to 5 percent, to monitor the progress 
of combustion of the organic compounds from the condensate trap.
    6.2.7 Flow-Control Valve. Stainless steel, to maintain the trap 
conditioning system near atmospheric pressure.

[[Page 500]]

    6.2.8 Intermediate Collection Vessel. Stainless steel or aluminum, 
equipped with a female quick connect. Tanks with nominal volumes of at 
least 6 liters (0.2 ft\3\) are recommended.
    6.2.9 Mercury Manometer. Same as described in Section 6.1.9.
    6.2.10 Syringe. 10-ml gas-tight glass syringe equipped with an 
appropriate needle.
    6.2.11 Syringes. 10-[micro]l and 50-[micro]l liquid injection 
syringes.
    6.2.12 Liquid Sample Injection Unit. 316 Stainless steel U-tube 
fitted with an injection septum (see Figure 25-7).
    6.3 Analysis.
    6.3.1 NMO Analyzer. The NMO analyzer is a gas chromatograph (GC) 
with backflush capability for NMO analysis and is equipped with an 
oxidation catalyst, reduction catalyst, and FID. Figures 25-5 and 25-6 
are schematics of a typical NMO analyzer. This semicontinuous GC/FID 
analyzer shall be capable of: (1) Separating CO, CO<INF>2</INF>, and 
CH<INF>4</INF> from NMO, (2) reducing the CO<INF>2</INF> to 
CH<INF>4</INF> and quantifying as CH<INF>4</INF>, and (3) oxidizing the 
NMO to CO<INF>2</INF>, reducing the CO<INF>2</INF> to CH<INF>4</INF> and 
quantifying as CH<INF>4</INF>, according to Section 10.1.2. The analyzer 
consists of the following major components:
    6.3.1.1 Oxidation Catalyst. A suitable length of 9.5-mm (\3/8\-in.) 
OD Inconel 600 tubing packed with 5.1 cm (2 in.) of 19 percent chromia 
on 3.2-mm (\1/8\-in.) alumina pellets. The catalyst material is packed 
in the center of the tube supported on either side by quartz wool. The 
catalyst tube must be mounted vertically in a 650 [deg]C (1200 [deg]F) 
furnace. Longer catalysts mounted horizontally may be used, provided 
they can meet the specifications of Section 10.1.2.1.
    6.3.1.2 Reduction Catalyst. A 7.6-cm (3-in.) length of 6.4-mm (\1/
4\-in.) OD Inconel tubing fully packed with 100-mesh pure nickel powder. 
The catalyst tube must be mounted vertically in a 400 [deg]C (750 
[deg]F) furnace.
    6.3.1.3 Separation Column(s). A 30-cm (1-ft) length of 3.2-mm (\1/
8\-in.) OD stainless steel tubing packed with 60/80 mesh Unibeads 1S 
followed by a 61-cm (2-ft) length of 3.2-mm (\1/8\-in.) OD stainless 
steel tubing packed with 60/80 mesh Carbosieve G. The Carbosieve and 
Unibeads columns must be baked separately at 200 [deg]C (390 [deg]F) 
with carrier gas flowing through them for 24 hours before initial use.
    6.3.1.4 Sample Injection System. A single 10-port GC sample 
injection valve or a group of valves with sufficient ports fitted with a 
sample loop properly sized to interface with the NMO analyzer (1-cc loop 
recommended).
    6.3.1.5 FID. An FID meeting the following specifications is 
required:
    6.3.1.5.1 Linearity. A linear response (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
percent) over the operating range as demonstrated by the procedures 
established in Section 10.1.2.3.
    6.3.1.5.2 Range. A full scale range of 10 to 50,000 ppm 
CH<INF>4</INF>. Signal attenuators shall be available to produce a 
minimum signal response of 10 percent of full scale.
    6.3.1.6 Data Recording System. Analog strip chart recorder or 
digital integration system compatible with the FID for permanently 
recording the analytical results.
    6.3.2 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid, or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 1 mm Hg.
    6.3.3 Temperature Sensor. Capable of measuring the laboratory 
temperature within 1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F).
    6.3.4 Vacuum Pump. Capable of evacuating to an absolute pressure of 
10 mm Hg.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sample Collection. The following reagents are required for 
sample collection:
    7.1.1 Dry Ice. Solid CO2, crushed.
    7.1.2 Coarse Quartz Wool. 8 to 15 um.
    7.1.3 Filters. Glass fiber filters, without organic binder.
    7.2 NMO Analysis. The following gases are required for NMO analysis:
    7.2.1 Carrier Gases. Helium (He) and oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>) 
containing less than 1 ppm CO<INF>2</INF> and less than 0.1 ppm 
hydrocarbon.
    7.2.2 Fuel Gas. Hydrogen (H<INF>2</INF>), at least 99.999 percent 
pure.
    7.2.3 Combustion Gas. Either air (less than 0.1 ppm total 
hydrocarbon content) or O<INF>2</INF> (purity 99.99 percent or greater), 
as required by the detector.
    7.3 Condensate Analysis. The following are required for condensate 
analysis:
    7.3.1 Gases. Containing less than 1 ppm carbon.
    7.3.1.1 Air.
    7.3.1.2 Oxygen.
    7.3.2 Liquids. To conform to the specifications established by the 
Committee on Analytical Reagents of the American Chemical Society.
    7.3.2.1 Hexane.
    7.3.2.2 Decane.
    7.4 Calibration. For all calibration gases, the manufacturer must 
recommend a maximum shelf life for each cylinder (i.e., the length of 
time the gas concentration is not expected to change more than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent from its certified value). The date of gas 
cylinder preparation, certified organic concentration, and recommended 
maximum shelf life must be affixed to each cylinder before shipment from 
the gas manufacturer to the buyer. The following calibration gases are 
required:
    7.4.1 Oxidation Catalyst Efficiency Check Calibration Gas. Gas 
mixture standard with nominal concentration of 1 percent methane in air.
    7.4.2 FID Linearity and NMO Calibration Gases. Three gas mixture 
standards with nominal propane concentrations of 20 ppm, 200 ppm, and 
3000 ppm, in air.

[[Page 501]]

    7.4.3 CO<INF>2</INF> Calibration Gases. Three gas mixture standards 
with nominal CO<INF>2</INF> concentrations of 50 ppm, 500 ppm, and 1 
percent, in air.

    Note: Total NMO less than 1 ppm required for 1 percent mixture.

    7.4.4 NMO Analyzer System Check Calibration Gases. Four calibration 
gases are needed as follows:
    7.4.4.1 Propane Mixture. Gas mixture standard containing (nominal) 
50 ppm CO, 50 ppm CH<INF>4</INF>, 1 percent CO<INF>2</INF>, and 20 ppm 
C<INF>3</INF>H<INF>8</INF>, prepared in air.
    7.4.4.2 Hexane. Gas mixture standard containing (nominal) 50 ppm 
hexane in air.
    7.4.4.3 Toluene. Gas mixture standard containing (nominal) 20 ppm 
toluene in air.
    7.4.4.4 Methanol. Gas mixture standard containing (nominal) 100 ppm 
methanol in air.
    7.5 Quality Assurance Audit Samples.
    7.5.1 It is recommended, but not required, that a performance audit 
sample be analyzed in conjunction with the field samples. The audit 
sample should be in a suitable sample matrix at a concentration similar 
to the actual field samples.
    7.5.2 When making compliance determinations, and upon availability, 
audit samples may be obtained from the appropriate EPA Regional Office 
or from the responsible enforcement authority and analyzed in 
conjunction with the field samples.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Sampling Equipment Preparation.
    8.1.1 Condensate Trap Cleaning. Before its initial use and after 
each use, a condensate trap should be thoroughly cleaned and checked to 
ensure that it is not contaminated. Both cleaning and checking can be 
accomplished by installing the trap in the condensate recovery system 
and treating it as if it were a sample. The trap should be heated as 
described in Section 11.1.3. A trap may be considered clean when the 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration in its effluent gas drops below 10 ppm. 
This check is optional for traps that most recently have been used to 
collect samples which were then recovered according to the procedure in 
Section 11.1.3.
    8.1.2 Sample Tank Evacuation and Leak-Check. Evacuate the sample 
tank to 10 mm Hg absolute pressure or less. Then close the sample tank 
valve, and allow the tank to sit for 60 minutes. The tank is acceptable 
if a change in tank vacuum of less than 1 mm Hg is noted. The evacuation 
and leak-check may be conducted either in the laboratory or the field.
    8.1.3 Sampling Train Assembly. Just before assembly, measure the 
tank vacuum using a mercury manometer. Record this vacuum, the ambient 
temperature, and the barometric pressure at this time. Close the sample 
tank valve and assemble the sampling system as shown in Figure 25-1. 
Immerse the condensate trap body in dry ice at least 30 minutes before 
commencing sampling to improve collection efficiency. The point where 
the inlet tube joins the trap body should be 2.5 to 5 cm (1 to 2 in.) 
above the top of the dry ice.
    8.1.4 Pretest Leak-Check. A pretest leak-check is required. 
Calculate or measure the approximate volume of the sampling train from 
the probe tip to the sample tank valve. After assembling the sampling 
train, plug the probe tip, and make certain that the sample tank valve 
is closed. Turn on the vacuum pump, and evacuate the sampling system 
from the probe tip to the sample tank valve to an absolute pressure of 
10 mm Hg or less. Close the purge valve, turn off the pump, wait a 
minimum period of 10 minutes, and recheck the indicated vacuum. 
Calculate the maximum allowable pressure change based on a leak rate of 
1 percent of the sampling rate using Equation 25-1, Section 12.2. If the 
measured pressure change exceeds the allowable, correct the problem and 
repeat the leak-check before beginning sampling.
    8.2 Sample Collection.
    8.2.1 Unplug the probe tip, and place the probe into the stack such 
that the probe is perpendicular to the duct or stack axis; locate the 
probe tip at a single preselected point of average velocity facing away 
from the direction of gas flow. For stacks having a negative static 
pressure, seal the sample port sufficiently to prevent air in-leakage 
around the probe. Set the probe temperature controller to 129 [deg]C 
(265 [deg]F) and the filter temperature controller to 121 [deg]C (250 
[deg]F). Allow the probe and filter to heat for about 30 minutes before 
purging the sample train.
    8.2.2 Close the sample valve, open the purge valve, and start the 
vacuum pump. Set the flow rate between 60 and 100 cm<SUP>3</SUP>/min 
(0.13 and 0.21 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/hr), and purge the train with stack gas 
for at least 10 minutes.
    8.2.3 When the temperatures at the exit ends of the probe and filter 
are within the corresponding specified ranges, check the dry ice level 
around the condensate trap, and add dry ice if necessary. Record the 
clock time. To begin sampling, close the purge valve and stop the pump. 
Open the sample valve and the sample tank valve. Using the flow control 
valve, set the flow through the sample train to the proper rate. Adjust 
the flow rate as necessary to maintain a constant rate (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent) throughout the duration of the sampling 
period. Record the sample tank vacuum and flowmeter setting at 5-minute 
intervals. (See Figure 25-8.) Select a total sample time greater than or 
equal to

[[Page 502]]

the minimum sampling time specified in the applicable subpart of the 
regulations; end the sampling when this time period is reached or when a 
constant flow rate can no longer be maintained because of reduced sample 
tank vacuum.

    Note: If sampling had to be stopped before obtaining the minimum 
sampling time (specified in the applicable subpart) because a constant 
flow rate could not be maintained, proceed as follows: After closing the 
sample tank valve, remove the used sample tank from the sampling train 
(without disconnecting other portions of the sampling train). Take 
another evacuated and leak-checked sample tank, measure and record the 
tank vacuum, and attach the new tank to the sampling train. After the 
new tank is attached to the sample train, proceed with the sampling 
until the required minimum sampling time has been exceeded.

    8.3 Sample Recovery. After sampling is completed, close the flow 
control valve, and record the final tank vacuum; then record the tank 
temperature and barometric pressure. Close the sample tank valve, and 
disconnect the sample tank from the sample system. Disconnect the 
condensate trap at the inlet to the rate meter, and tightly seal both 
ends of the condensate trap. Do not include the probe from the stack to 
the filter as part of the condensate sample.
    8.4 Sample Storage and Transport. Keep the trap packed in dry ice 
until the samples are returned to the laboratory for analysis. Ensure 
that run numbers are identified on the condensate trap and the sample 
tank(s).

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1.1........................  Initial            Ensure acceptable
                                 performance        condensate recovery
                                 check of           efficiency.
                                 condensate
                                 recovery
                                 apparatus.
10.1.2, 10.2..................  NMO analyzer       Ensure precision of
                                 initial and        analytical results.
                                 daily
                                 performance
                                 checks.
11.3..........................  Audit Sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 Analyses.          technique and
                                                    instrument
                                                    calibration.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a record of performance of each item.

    10.1 Initial Performance Checks.
    10.1.1 Condensate Recovery Apparatus. Perform these tests before the 
system is first placed in operation, after any shutdown of 6 months or 
more, and after any major modification of the system, or at the 
frequency recommended by the manufacturer.
    10.1.1.1 Carrier Gas and Auxiliary O<INF>2</INF> Blank Check. 
Analyze each new tank of carrier gas or auxiliary O<INF>2</INF> with the 
NMO analyzer to check for contamination. Treat the gas cylinders as 
noncondensible gas samples, and analyze according to the procedure in 
Section 11.2.3. Add together any measured CH<INF>4</INF>, CO, 
CO<INF>2</INF>, or NMO. The total concentration must be less than 5 ppm.
    10.1.1.2 Oxidation Catalyst Efficiency Check.
    10.1.1.2.1 With a clean condensate trap installed in the recovery 
system or a \1/8\<gr-thn-eq> stainless steel connector tube, replace the 
carrier gas cylinder with the high level methane standard gas cylinder 
(Section 7.4.1). Set the four-port valve to the recovery position, and 
attach an ICV to the recovery system. With the sample recovery valve in 
vent position and the flow-control and ICV valves fully open, evacuate 
the manometer or gauge, the connecting tubing, and the ICV to 10 mm Hg 
absolute pressure. Close the flow-control and vacuum pump valves.
    10.1.1.2.2 After the NDIR response has stabilized, switch the sample 
recovery valve from vent to collect. When the manometer or pressure 
gauge begins to register a slight positive pressure, open the flow-
control valve. Keep the flow adjusted such that the pressure in the 
system is maintained within 10 percent of atmospheric pressure. Continue 
collecting the sample in a normal manner until the ICV is filled to a 
nominal gauge pressure of 300 mm Hg. Close the ICV valve, and remove the 
ICV from the system. Place the sample recovery valve in the vent 
position, and return the recovery system to its normal carrier gas and 
normal operating conditions. Analyze the ICV for CO<INF>2</INF> using 
the NMO analyzer; the catalyst efficiency is acceptable if the 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration is within 2 percent of the methane standard 
concentration.
    10.1.1.3 System Performance Check. Construct a liquid sample 
injection unit similar in design to the unit shown in Figure 25-7. 
Insert this unit into the condensate recovery and conditioning system in 
place of a condensate trap, and set the carrier gas and auxiliary 
O<INF>2</INF> flow rates to normal operating levels. Attach an evacuated 
ICV to the system, and switch from system vent to collect. With the 
carrier gas routed through the injection unit and the oxidation 
catalyst, inject a liquid sample (see Sections 10.1.1.3.1 to 10.1.1.3.4) 
into the injection port. Operate the trap recovery system as described 
in Section 11.1.3. Measure the final ICV pressure, and then analyze the 
vessel to determine the CO<INF>2</INF>

[[Page 503]]

concentration. For each injection, calculate the percent recovery 
according to Section 12.7. Calculate the relative standard deviation for 
each set of triplicate injections according to Section 12.8. The 
performance test is acceptable if the average percent recovery is 100 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent and the relative standard deviation is 
less than 2 percent for each set of triplicate injections.
    10.1.1.3.1 50 [micro]l hexane.
    10.1.1.3.2 10 [micro]l hexane.
    10.1.1.3.3 50 [micro]l decane.
    10.1.1.3.4 10 [micro]l decane.
    10.1.2 NMO Analyzer. Perform these tests before the system is first 
placed in operation, after any shutdown longer than 6 months, and after 
any major modification of the system.
    10.1.2.1 Oxidation Catalyst Efficiency Check. Turn off or bypass the 
NMO analyzer reduction catalyst. Make triplicate injections of the high 
level methane standard (Section 7.4.1). The oxidation catalyst operation 
is acceptable if the FID response is less than 1 percent of the injected 
methane concentration.
    10.1.2.2 Reduction Catalyst Efficiency Check. With the oxidation 
catalyst unheated or bypassed and the heated reduction catalyst 
bypassed, make triplicate injections of the high level methane standard 
(Section 7.4.1). Repeat this procedure with both catalysts operative. 
The reduction catalyst operation is acceptable if the responses under 
both conditions agree within 5 percent of their average.
    10.1.2.3 NMO Analyzer Linearity Check Calibration. While operating 
both the oxidation and reduction catalysts, conduct a linearity check of 
the analyzer using the propane standards specified in Section 7.4.2. 
Make triplicate injections of each calibration gas. For each gas (i.e., 
each set of triplicate injections), calculate the average response 
factor (area/ppm C) for each gas, as well as and the relative standard 
deviation (according to Section 12.8). Then calculate the overall mean 
of the response factor values. The instrument linearity is acceptable if 
the average response factor of each calibration gas is within 2.5 
percent of the overall mean value and if the relative standard deviation 
gas is less than 2 percent of the overall mean value. Record the overall 
mean of the propane response factor values as the NMO calibration 
response factor (RF<INF>NMO</INF>). Repeat the linearity check using the 
CO<INF>2</INF> standards specified in Section 7.4.3. Make triplicate 
injections of each gas, and then calculate the average response factor 
(area/ppm C) for each gas, as well as the overall mean of the response 
factor values. Record the overall mean of the response factor values as 
the CO<INF>2</INF> calibration response factor (RF<INF>CO2</INF>). The 
RF<INF>CO2</INF> must be within 10 percent of the RF<INF>NMO</INF>.
    10.1.2.4 System Performance Check. Check the column separation and 
overall performance of the analyzer by making triplicate injections of 
the calibration gases listed in Section 7.4.4. The analyzer performance 
is acceptable if the measured NMO value for each gas (average of 
triplicate injections) is within 5 percent of the expected value.
    10.2 NMO Analyzer Daily Calibration. The following calibration 
procedures shall be performed before and immediately after the analysis 
of each set of samples, or on a daily basis, whichever is more 
stringent:
    10.2.1 CO<INF>2</INF> Response Factor. Inject triplicate samples of 
the high level CO<INF>2</INF> calibration gas (Section 7.4.3), and 
calculate the average response factor. The system operation is adequate 
if the calculated response factor is within 5 percent of the 
RF<INF>CO2</INF> calculated during the initial performance test (Section 
10.1.2.3). Use the daily response factor (DRF<INF>CO2</INF>) for 
analyzer calibration and the calculation of measured CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentrations in the ICV samples.
    10.2.2 NMO Response Factors. Inject triplicate samples of the mixed 
propane calibration cylinder gas (Section 7.4.4.1), and calculate the 
average NMO response factor. The system operation is adequate if the 
calculated response factor is within 10 percent of the RF<INF>NMO</INF> 
calculated during the initial performance test (Section 10.1.2.4). Use 
the daily response factor (DRF<INF>NMO</INF>) for analyzer calibration 
and calculation of NMO concentrations in the sample tanks.
    10.3 Sample Tank and ICV Volume. The volume of the gas sampling 
tanks used must be determined. Determine the tank and ICV volumes by 
weighing them empty and then filled with deionized distilled water; 
weigh to the nearest 5 g, and record the results. Alternatively, measure 
the volume of water used to fill them to the nearest 5 ml.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Condensate Recovery. See Figure 25-9. Set the carrier gas flow 
rate, and heat the catalyst to its operating temperature to condition 
the apparatus.
    11.1.1 Daily Performance Checks. Each day before analyzing any 
samples, perform the following tests:
    11.1.1.1 Leak-Check. With the carrier gas inlets and the sample 
recovery valve closed, install a clean condensate trap in the system, 
and evacuate the system to 10 mm Hg absolute pressure or less. Monitor 
the system pressure for 10 minutes. The system is acceptable if the 
pressure change is less than 2 mm Hg.
    11.1.1.2 System Background Test. Adjust the carrier gas and 
auxiliary oxygen flow rate to their normal values of 100 cc/min and 150 
cc/min, respectively, with the sample recovery valve in vent position. 
Using a 10-ml syringe, withdraw a sample from the system effluent 
through the syringe port. Inject this

[[Page 504]]

sample into the NMO analyzer, and measure the CO<INF>2</INF> content. 
The system background is acceptable if the CO<INF>2</INF> concentration 
is less than 10 ppm.
    11.1.1.3 Oxidation Catalyst Efficiency Check. Conduct a catalyst 
efficiency test as specified in Section 10.1.1.2. If the criterion of 
this test cannot be met, make the necessary repairs to the system before 
proceeding.
    11.1.2 Condensate Trap CO<INF>2</INF> Purge and Sample Tank 
Pressurization.
    11.1.2.1 After sampling is completed, the condensate trap will 
contain condensed water and organics and a small volume of sampled gas. 
This gas from the stack may contain a significant amount of 
CO<INF>2</INF> which must be removed from the condensate trap before the 
sample is recovered. This is accomplished by purging the condensate trap 
with zero air and collecting the purged gas in the original sample tank.
    11.1.2.2 Begin with the sample tank and condensate trap from the 
test run to be analyzed. Set the four-port valve of the condensate 
recovery system in the CO<INF>2</INF> purge position as shown in Figure 
25-9. With the sample tank valve closed, attach the sample tank to the 
sample recovery system. With the sample recovery valve in the vent 
position and the flow control valve fully open, evacuate the manometer 
or pressure gauge to the vacuum of the sample tank. Next, close the 
vacuum pump valve, open the sample tank valve, and record the tank 
pressure.
    11.1.2.3 Attach the dry ice-cooled condensate trap to the recovery 
system, and initiate the purge by switching the sample recovery valve 
from vent to collect position. Adjust the flow control valve to maintain 
atmospheric pressure in the recovery system. Continue the purge until 
the CO<INF>2</INF> concentration of the trap effluent is less than 5 
ppm. CO<INF>2</INF> concentration in the trap effluent should be 
measured by extracting syringe samples from the recovery system and 
analyzing the samples with the NMO analyzer. This procedure should be 
used only after the NDIR response has reached a minimum level. Using a 
10-ml syringe, extract a sample from the syringe port prior to the NDIR, 
and inject this sample into the NMO analyzer.
    11.1.2.4 After the completion of the CO<INF>2</INF> purge, use the 
carrier gas bypass valve to pressurize the sample tank to approximately 
1,060 mm Hg absolute pressure with zero air.
    11.1.3 Recovery of the Condensate Trap Sample (See Figure 25-10).
    11.1.3.1 Attach the ICV to the sample recovery system. With the 
sample recovery valve in a closed position, between vent and collect, 
and the flow control and ICV valves fully open, evacuate the manometer 
or gauge, the connecting tubing, and the ICV to 10 mm Hg absolute 
pressure. Close the flow-control and vacuum pump valves.
    11.1.3.2 Begin auxiliary oxygen flow to the oxidation catalyst at a 
rate of 150 cc/min, then switch the four-way valve to the trap recovery 
position and the sample recovery valve to collect position. The system 
should now be set up to operate as indicated in Figure 25-10. After the 
manometer or pressure gauge begins to register a slight positive 
pressure, open the flow control valve. Adjust the flow-control valve to 
maintain atmospheric pressure in the system within 10 percent.
    11.1.3.3 Remove the condensate trap from the dry ice, and allow it 
to warm to ambient temperature while monitoring the NDIR response. If, 
after 5 minutes, the CO<INF>2</INF> concentration of the catalyst 
effluent is below 10,000 ppm, discontinue the auxiliary oxygen flow to 
the oxidation catalyst. Begin heating the trap by placing it in a 
furnace preheated to 200 [deg]C (390 [deg]F). Once heating has begun, 
carefully monitor the NDIR response to ensure that the catalyst effluent 
concentration does not exceed 50,000 ppm. Whenever the CO<INF>2</INF> 
concentration exceeds 50,000 ppm, supply auxiliary oxygen to the 
catalyst at the rate of 150 cc/min. Begin heating the tubing that 
connected the heated sample box to the condensate trap only after the 
CO<INF>2</INF> concentration falls below 10,000 ppm. This tubing may be 
heated in the same oven as the condensate trap or with an auxiliary heat 
source such as a heat gun. Heating temperature must not exceed 200 
[deg]C (390 [deg]F). If a heat gun is used, heat the tubing slowly along 
its entire length from the upstream end to the downstream end, and 
repeat the pattern for a total of three times. Continue the recovery 
until the CO<INF>2</INF> concentration drops to less than 10 ppm as 
determined by syringe injection as described under the condensate trap 
CO<INF>2</INF> purge procedure (Section 11.1.2).
    11.1.3.4 After the sample recovery is completed, use the carrier gas 
bypass valve to pressurize the ICV to approximately 1060 mm Hg absolute 
pressure with zero air.
    11.2 Analysis. Once the initial performance test of the NMO analyzer 
has been successfully completed (see Section 10.1.2) and the daily 
CO<INF>2</INF> and NMO response factors have been determined (see 
Section 10.2), proceed with sample analysis as follows:
    11.2.1 Operating Conditions. The carrier gas flow rate is 29.5 cc/
min He and 2.2 cc/min O<INF>2</INF>. The column oven is heated to 85 
[deg]C (185 [deg]F). The order of elution for the sample from the column 
is CO, CH<INF>4</INF>, CO<INF>2</INF>, and NMO.
    11.2.2 Analysis of Recovered Condensate Sample. Purge the sample 
loop with sample, and then inject the sample. Under the specified 
operating conditions, the CO<INF>2</INF> in the sample will elute in 
approximately 100 seconds. As soon as the detector response returns to 
baseline following the CO<INF>2</INF> peak, switch the carrier gas flow 
to backflush, and raise the column oven temperature to 195 [deg]C (380 
[deg]F) as rapidly as possible. A rate of 30 [deg]C/

[[Page 505]]

min (90 [deg]F) has been shown to be adequate. Record the value obtained 
for the condensible organic material (C<INF>cm</INF>) measured as 
CO<INF>2</INF> and any measured NMO. Return the column oven temperature 
to 85 [deg]C (185 [deg]F) in preparation for the next analysis. Analyze 
each sample in triplicate, and report the average C<INF>cm</INF>.
    11.2.3 Analysis of Sample Tank. Perform the analysis as described in 
Section 11.2.2, but record only the value measured for NMO 
(C<INF>tm</INF>).
    11.3 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.3.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, an audit sample, if 
available, must be analyzed.
    11.3.2 Concurrently analyze the audit sample and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.
    11.3.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
must be used for the compliance samples and the audit sample. If this 
condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance analyses 
for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is waived. An 
audit sample set may not be used to validate different sets of 
compliance samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement 
agencies, unless prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement 
agencies.
    11.4 Audit Sample Results.
    11.4.1 Calculate the audit sample concentrations and submit results 
using the instructions provided with the audit samples.
    11.4.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.4.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst must agree within 20 percent of the actual concentration. If the 
20-percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and audit 
samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test report.
    11.4.4 Failure to meet the 20-percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit 
results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Carry out the calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figures after final 
calculations. All equations are written using absolute pressure; 
absolute pressures are determined by adding the measured barometric 
pressure to the measured gauge or manometer pressure.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

C=TGNMO concentration of the effluent, ppm C equivalent.
C<INF>c</INF>=Calculated condensible organic (condensate trap) 
concentration of the effluent, ppm C equivalent.
C<INF>cm</INF>=Measured concentration (NMO analyzer) for the condensate 
trap ICV, ppm CO<INF>2</INF>.
C<INF>t</INF>=Calculated noncondensible organic concentration (sample 
tank) of the effluent, ppm C equivalent.
C<INF>tm</INF>=Measured concentration (NMO analyzer) for the sample 
tank, ppm NMO.
F=Sampling flow rate, cc/min.
L=Volume of liquid injected, [micro]l.
M=Molecular weight of the liquid injected, g/g-mole.
M<INF>c</INF>=TGNMO mass concentration of the effluent, mg C/dsm\3\.
N=Carbon number of the liquid compound injected (N=12 for decane, N=6 
for hexane).
n=Number of data points.
P<INF>f</INF>=Final pressure of the intermediate collection vessel, mm 
Hg absolute.
P<INF>b</INF>=Barometric pressure, cm Hg.
P<INF>ti</INF>=Gas sample tank pressure before sampling, mm Hg absolute.
P<INF>t</INF>=Gas sample tank pressure after sampling, but before 
pressurizing, mm Hg absolute.
P<INF>tf</INF>=Final gas sample tank pressure after pressurizing, mm Hg 
absolute.
q=Total number of analyzer injections of intermediate collection vessel 
during analysis (where k=injection number, 1 * * * q).
r=Total number of analyzer injections of sample tank during analysis 
(where j=injection number, 1 * * * r).
r=Density of liquid injected, g/cc.
T<INF>f</INF>=Final temperature of intermediate collection vessel, 
[deg]K.
T<INF>ti</INF>=Sample tank temperature before sampling, [deg]K.
T<INF>t</INF>=Sample tank temperature at completion of sampling, [deg]K.
T<INF>tf</INF>=Sample tank temperature after pressurizing, [deg]K.
V=Sample tank volume, m\3\.
V<INF>t</INF>=Sample train volume, cc.
V<INF>v</INF>=Intermediate collection vessel volume, m\3\.
V<INF>s</INF>=Gas volume sampled, dsm\3\.
x<INF>i</INF>=Individual measurements.
x=Mean value.
[Delta]P=Allowable pressure change, cm Hg.
[Theta]=Leak-check period, min.


[[Page 506]]


    12.2 Allowable Pressure Change. For the pretest leak-check, 
calculate the allowable pressure change using Equation 25-1:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.364

    12.3 Sample Volume. For each test run, calculate the gas volume 
sampled using Equation 25-2:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.365

    12.4 Noncondensible Organics. For each sample tank, determine the 
concentration of nonmethane organics (ppm C) using Equation 25-3:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.366

    12.5 Condensible Organics. For each condensate trap determine the 
concentration of organics (ppm C) using Equation 25-4:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.367

    12.6 TGNMO Mass Concentration. Determine the TGNMO mass 
concentration as carbon for each test run, using Equation 25-5:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.368

    12.7 Percent Recovery. Calculate the percent recovery for the liquid 
injections to the condensate recovery and conditioning system using 
Equation 25-6:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.369

where K=1.604 ([deg]K)(g-mole)(%)/(mm Hg)(ml)(m\3\)(ppm).

    12.8 Relative Standard Deviation. Use Equation 25-7 to calculate the 
relative standard deviation (RSD) of percent recovery and analyzer 
linearity.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.370

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. The minimum detectable limit of the method has been 
determined to be 50 parts per million by volume (ppm). No upper limit 
has been established.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Salo, A.E., S. Witz, and R.D. MacPhee. Determination of Solvent 
Vapor Concentrations by Total Combustion Analysis: A Comparison of 
Infrared with Flame Ionization Detectors. Paper No. 75-33.2. (Presented 
at the 68th Annual Meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association. 
Boston, MA. June 15-20, 1975.) 14 p.
    2. Salo, A.E., W.L. Oaks, and R.D. MacPhee. Measuring the Organic 
Carbon Content of Source Emissions for Air Pollution Control. Paper No. 
74-190. (Presented at the 67th Annual Meeting of the Air Pollution

[[Page 507]]

Control Association. Denver, CO. June 9-13, 1974.) 25 p.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.371


[[Page 508]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.372


[[Page 509]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.373


[[Page 510]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.374


[[Page 511]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.375


[[Page 512]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.376


[[Page 513]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.377


[[Page 514]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.378


[[Page 515]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.379


[[Page 516]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.380

Method 25A--Determination of Total Gaseous Organic Concentration Using a 
                        Flame Ionization Analyzer

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Analyte                  CAS No.           Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Organic Compounds........             N/A  < 2% of span.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 517]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of total gaseous organic concentration of vapors consisting primarily of 
alkanes, alkenes, and/or arenes (aromatic hydrocarbons). The 
concentration is expressed in terms of propane (or other appropriate 
organic calibration gas) or in terms of carbon.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from the source through a heated 
sample line and glass fiber filter to a flame ionization analyzer (FIA). 
Results are reported as volume concentration equivalents of the 
calibration gas or as carbon equivalents.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Calibration drift means the difference in the measurement system 
response to a mid-level calibration gas before and after a stated period 
of operation during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or 
adjustment took place.
    3.2 Calibration error means the difference between the gas 
concentration indicated by the measurement system and the know 
concentration of the calibration gas.
    3.3 Calibration gas means a known concentration of a gas in an 
appropriate diluent gas.
    3.4 Measurement system means the total equipment required for the 
determination of the gas concentration. The system consists of the 
following major subsystems:
    3.4.1 Sample interface means that portion of a system used for one 
or more of the following: sample acquisition, sample transportation, 
sample conditioning, or protection of the analyzer(s) from the effects 
of the stack effluent.
    3.4.2 Organic analyzer means that portion of the measurement system 
that senses the gas to be measured and generates an output proportional 
to its concentration.
    3.5 Response time means the time interval from a step change in 
pollutant concentration at the inlet to the emission measurement system 
to the time at which 95 percent of the corresponding final value is 
reached as displayed on the recorder.
    3.6 Span Value means the upper limit of a gas concentration 
measurement range that is specified for affected source categories in 
the applicable part of the regulations. The span value is established in 
the applicable regulation and is usually 1.5 to 2.5 times the applicable 
emission limit. If no span value is provided, use a span value 
equivalent to 1.5 to 2.5 times the expected concentration. For 
convenience, the span value should correspond to 100 percent of the 
recorder scale.
    3.7 Zero drift means the difference in the measurement system 
response to a zero level calibration gas before or after a stated period 
of operation during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or 
adjustment took place.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method. The analyzer users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedure.
    5.2 Explosive Atmosphere. This method is often applied in highly 
explosive areas. Caution and care should be exercised in choice of 
equipment and installation.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Measurement System. Any measurement system for total organic 
concentration that meets the specifications of this method. A schematic 
of an acceptable measurement system is shown in Figure 25A-1. All 
sampling components leading to the analyzer shall be heated <ls-thn-eq>= 
110 [deg]C (220 [deg]F) throughout the sampling period, unless safety 
reasons are cited (Section 5.2) The essential components of the 
measurement system are described below:
    6.1.1 Organic Concentration Analyzer. A flame ionization analyzer 
(FIA) capable of meeting or exceeding the specifications of this method. 
The flame ionization detector block shall be heated <ls-thn-eq>120 
[deg]C (250 [deg]F).
    6.1.2 Sample Probe. Stainless steel, or equivalent, three-hole rake 
type. Sample holes shall be 4 mm (0.16-in.) in diameter or smaller and 
located at 16.7, 50, and 83.3 percent of the equivalent stack diameter. 
Alternatively, a single opening probe may be used so that a gas sample 
is collected from the centrally located 10 percent area of the stack 
cross-section.
    6.1.3 Heated Sample Line. Stainless steel or Teflon'' tubing to 
transport the sample gas to the analyzer. The sample line should be 
heated (<ls-thn-eq>=110 [deg]C) to prevent any condensation.
    6.1.4 Calibration Valve Assembly. A three-way valve assembly to 
direct the zero and calibration gases to the analyzers is recommended. 
Other methods, such as quick-connect lines, to route calibration gas to 
the analyzers are applicable.
    6.1.5 Particulate Filter. An in-stack or an out-of-stack glass fiber 
filter is recommended if exhaust gas particulate loading

[[Page 518]]

is significant. An out-of-stack filter should be heated to prevent any 
condensation.
    6.1.6 Recorder. A strip-chart recorder, analog computer, or digital 
recorder for recording measurement data. The minimum data recording 
requirement is one measurement value per minute.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Calibration Gases. The calibration gases for the gas analyzer 
shall be propane in air or propane in nitrogen. Alternatively, organic 
compounds other than propane can be used; the appropriate corrections 
for response factor must be made. Calibration gases shall be prepared in 
accordance with the procedure listed in Citation 2 of Section 16. 
Additionally, the manufacturer of the cylinder should provide a 
recommended shelf life for each calibration gas cylinder over which the 
concentration does not change more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent 
from the certified value. For calibration gas values not generally 
available (i.e., organics between 1 and 10 percent by volume), 
alternative methods for preparing calibration gas mixtures, such as 
dilution systems (Test Method 205, 40 CFR Part 51, Appendix M), may be 
used with prior approval of the Administrator.
    7.1.1 Fuel. A 40 percent H<INF>2</INF>/60 percent N<INF>2</INF> gas 
mixture is recommended to avoid an oxygen synergism effect that 
reportedly occurs when oxygen concentration varies significantly from a 
mean value.
    7.1.2 Zero Gas. High purity air with less than 0.1 part per million 
by volume (ppmv) of organic material (propane or carbon equivalent) or 
less than 0.1 percent of the span value, whichever is greater.
    7.1.3 Low-level Calibration Gas. An organic calibration gas with a 
concentration equivalent to 25 to 35 percent of the applicable span 
value.
    7.1.4 Mid-level Calibration Gas. An organic calibration gas with a 
concentration equivalent to 45 to 55 percent of the applicable span 
value.
    7.1.5 High-level Calibration Gas. An organic calibration gas with a 
concentration equivalent to 80 to 90 percent of the applicable span 
value.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Selection of Sampling Site. The location of the sampling site is 
generally specified by the applicable regulation or purpose of the test 
(i.e., exhaust stack, inlet line, etc.). The sample port shall be 
located to meet the testing requirements of Method 1.
    8.2 Location of Sample Probe. Install the sample probe so that the 
probe is centrally located in the stack, pipe, or duct and is sealed 
tightly at the stack port connection.
    8.3 Measurement System Preparation. Prior to the emission test, 
assemble the measurement system by following the manufacturer's written 
instructions for preparing sample interface and the organic analyzer. 
Make the system operable (Section 10.1).
    8.4 Calibration Error Test. Immediately prior to the test series 
(within 2 hours of the start of the test), introduce zero gas and high-
level calibration gas at the calibration valve assembly. Adjust the 
analyzer output to the appropriate levels, if necessary. Calculate the 
predicted response for the low-level and mid-level gases based on a 
linear response line between the zero and high-level response. Then 
introduce low-level and mid-level calibration gases successively to the 
measurement system. Record the analyzer responses for low-level and mid-
level calibration gases and determine the differences between the 
measurement system responses and the predicted responses. These 
differences must be less than 5 percent of the respective calibration 
gas value. If not, the measurement system is not acceptable and must be 
replaced or repaired prior to testing. No adjustments to the measurement 
system shall be conducted after the calibration and before the drift 
check (Section 8.6.2). If adjustments are necessary before the 
completion of the test series, perform the drift checks prior to the 
required adjustments and repeat the calibration following the 
adjustments. If multiple electronic ranges are to be used, each 
additional range must be checked with a mid-level calibration gas to 
verify the multiplication factor.
    8.5 Response Time Test. Introduce zero gas into the measurement 
system at the calibration valve assembly. When the system output has 
stabilized, switch quickly to the high-level calibration gas. Record the 
time from the concentration change to the measurement system response 
equivalent to 95 percent of the step change. Repeat the test three times 
and average the results.
    8.6 Emission Measurement Test Procedure.
    8.6.1 Organic Measurement. Begin sampling at the start of the test 
period, recording time and any required process information as 
appropriate. In particulate, note on the recording chart, periods of 
process interruption or cyclic operation.
    8.6.2 Drift Determination. Immediately following the completion of 
the test period and hourly during the test period, reintroduce the zero 
and mid-level calibration gases, one at a time, to the measurement 
system at the calibration valve assembly. (Make no adjustments to the 
measurement system until both the zero and calibration drift checks are 
made.) Record the analyzer response. If the drift values exceed the 
specified limits, invalidate the test results preceding the check and 
repeat the test following corrections to the measurement system. 
Alternatively, recalibrate the test measurement system as in Section 8.4 
and

[[Page 519]]

report the results using both sets of calibration data (i.e., data 
determined prior to the test period and data determined following the 
test period).

    Note: Note on the recording chart periods of process interruption or 
cyclic operation.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
        Method section               measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4...........................  Zero and           Ensures that bias
                                 calibration        introduced by drift
                                 drift tests.       in the measurement
                                                    system output during
                                                    the run is no
                                                    greater than 3
                                                    percent of span.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 FIA equipment can be calibrated for almost any range of total 
organic concentrations. For high concentrations of organics (<ls-thn-eq> 
1.0 percent by volume as propane), modifications to most commonly 
available analyzers are necessary. One accepted method of equipment 
modification is to decrease the size of the sample to the analyzer 
through the use of a smaller diameter sample capillary. Direct and 
continuous measurement of organic concentration is a necessary 
consideration when determining any modification design.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    The sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method 
(see Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 Determine the average organic concentration in terms of ppmv as 
propane or other calibration gas. The average shall be determined by 
integration of the output recording over the period specified in the 
applicable regulation. If results are required in terms of ppmv as 
carbon, adjust measured concentrations using Equation 25A-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.381

Where:

C<INF>c</INF>=Organic concentration as carbon, ppmv.
C<INF>meas</INF>=Organic concentration as measured, ppmv.
K=Carbon equivalent correction factor.
    =2 for ethane.
    =3 for propane.
    =4 for butane.
    =Appropriate response factor for other organic calibration gases.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Measurement System Performance Specifications.
    13.1.1 Zero Drift. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent of the 
span value.
    13.1.2 Calibration Drift. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent 
of span value.
    13.1.3 Calibration Error. Less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent 
of the calibration gas value.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Measurement of Volatile Organic Compounds--Guideline Series. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. Publication 
No. EPA-450/2-78-041. June 1978. p. 46-54.
    2. EPA Traceability Protocol for Assay and Certification of Gaseous 
Calibration Standards. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Quality 
Assurance and Technical Support Division. Research Triangle Park, N.C. 
September 1993.
    3. Gasoline Vapor Emission Laboratory Evaluation--Part 2. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards. Research Triangle Park, NC. EMB Report No. 75-GAS-6. August 
1975.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 520]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.382

Method 25B--Determination of Total Gaseous Organic Concentration Using a 
                     Nondispersive Infrared Analyzer

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling) essential to its 
performance. Some material is incorporated by reference from other 
methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons 
using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the 
following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 6C, and Method 25A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

[[Page 521]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Analyte                   CAS No.          Sensitivity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Organic Compounds...........             N/A  < 2% of span.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of total gaseous organic concentration of vapors consisting primarily of 
alkanes. Other organic materials may be measured using the general 
procedure in this method, the appropriate calibration gas, and an 
analyzer set to the appropriate absorption band.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    A gas sample is extracted from the source through a heated sample 
line, if necessary, and glass fiber filter to a nondispersive infrared 
analyzer (NDIR). Results are reported as volume concentration 
equivalents of the calibration gas or as carbon equivalents.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as Method 25A, Section 3.0.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method. The analyzer users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedure.
    5.2 Explosive Atmosphere. This method is often applied in highly 
explosive areas. Caution and care should be exercised in choice of 
equipment and installation.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Method 25A, Section 6.0, with the exception of the 
following:
    6.1 Organic Concentration Analyzer. A nondispersive infrared 
analyzer designed to measure alkane organics and capable of meeting or 
exceeding the specifications in this method.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Method 25A, Section 7.1. No fuel gas is required for an 
NDIR.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Same as Method 25A, Section 8.0.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    Same as Method 25A, Section 9.0.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Same as Method 25A, Section 10.0.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    The sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this method 
(see Section 8.0).

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Same as Method 25A, Section 12.0.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Method 25A, Section 16.0.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 25C--Determination of Nonmethane Organic Compounds (NMOC) in 
                             Landfill Gases

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of EPA 
Method 25.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nonmethane organic compounds (NMOC).......  No CAS number assigned.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable to the sampling and 
measurement of NMOC as carbon in landfill gases (LFG).
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A sample probe that has been perforated at one end is driven or 
augured to a depth of 0.9 m (3 ft) below the bottom of the landfill 
cover. A sample of the landfill gas is extracted with an evacuated 
cylinder. The NMOC content of the gas is determined by

[[Page 522]]

injecting a portion of the gas into a gas chromatographic column to 
separate the NMOC from carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>), and methane (CH<INF>4</INF>); the NMOC are oxidized to 
CO<INF>2</INF>, reduced to CH<INF>4</INF>, and measured by a flame 
ionization detector (FID). In this manner, the variable response of the 
FID associated with different types of organics is eliminated.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Since this method is complex, only experienced personnel should 
perform this test. LFG contains methane, therefore explosive mixtures 
may exist on or near the landfill. It is advisable to take appropriate 
safety precautions when testing landfills, such as refraining from 
smoking and installing explosion-proof equipment.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sample Probe. Stainless steel, with the bottom third perforated. 
The sample probe must be capped at the bottom and must have a threaded 
cap with a sampling attachment at the top. The sample probe must be long 
enough to go through and extend no less than 0.9 m (3 ft) below the 
landfill cover. If the sample probe is to be driven into the landfill, 
the bottom cap should be designed to facilitate driving the probe into 
the landfill.
    6.2 Sampling Train.
    6.2.1 Rotameter with Flow Control Valve. Capable of measuring a 
sample flow rate of 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 ml/min. The control 
valve must be made of stainless steel.
    6.2.2 Sampling Valve. Stainless steel.
    6.2.3 Pressure Gauge. U-tube mercury manometer, or equivalent, 
capable of measuring pressure to within 1 mm Hg (0.5 in H<INF>2</INF>O) 
in the range of 0 to 1,100 mm Hg (0 to 590 in H<INF>2</INF>O).
    6.2.4 Sample Tank. Stainless steel or aluminum cylinder, equipped 
with a stainless steel sample tank valve.
    6.3 Vacuum Pump. Capable of evacuating to an absolute pressure of 10 
mm Hg (5.4 in H<INF>2</INF>O).
    6.4 Purging Pump. Portable, explosion proof, and suitable for 
sampling NMOC.
    6.5 Pilot Probe Procedure. The following are needed only if the 
tester chooses to use the procedure described in Section 8.2.1.
    6.5.1 Pilot Probe. Tubing of sufficient strength to withstand being 
driven into the landfill by a post driver and an outside diameter of at 
least 6 mm (0.25 in.) smaller than the sample probe. The pilot probe 
shall be capped on both ends and long enough to go through the landfill 
cover and extend no less than 0.9 m (3 ft) into the landfill.
    6.5.2 Post Driver and Compressor. Capable of driving the pilot probe 
and the sampling probe into the landfill. The Kitty Hawk portable post 
driver has been found to be acceptable.
    6.6 Auger Procedure. The following are needed only if the tester 
chooses to use the procedure described in Section 8.2.2.
    6.6.1 Auger. Capable of drilling through the landfill cover and to a 
depth of no less than 0.9 m (3 ft) into the landfill.
    6.6.2 Pea Gravel.
    6.6.3 Bentonite.
    6.7 NMOC Analyzer, Barometer, Thermometer, and Syringes. Same as in 
Sections 6.3.1, 6.3.2, 6.33, and 6.2.10, respectively, of Method 25.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 NMOC Analysis. Same as in Method 25, Section 7.2.
    7.2 Calibration. Same as in Method 25, Section 7.4, except omit 
Section 7.4.3.
    7.3 Quality Assurance Audit Samples.
    7.3.1 It is recommended, but not required, that a performance audit 
sample be analyzed in conjunction with the field samples. The audit 
sample should be in a suitable sample matrix at a concentration similar 
to the actual field samples.
    7.3.2 When making compliance determinations, and upon availability, 
audit samples may be obtained from the appropriate EPA Regional Office 
or from the responsible enforcement authority and analyzed in 
conjunction with the field samples.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sample Tank Evacuation and Leak-Check. Conduct the sample tank 
evacuation and leak-check either in the laboratory or the field. Connect 
the pressure gauge and sampling valve to the sample tank. Evacuate the 
sample tank to 10 mm Hg (5.4 in H<INF>2</INF>O) absolute pressure or 
less. Close the sampling valve, and allow the tank to sit for 30 
minutes. The tank is acceptable if no change more than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm is noted. Include the results of the leak-check in 
the test report.
    8.2 Sample Probe Installation. The tester may use the procedure in 
Section 8.2.1 or 8.2.2.
    8.2.1 Pilot Probe Procedure. Use the post driver to drive the pilot 
probe at least 0.9 m (3 ft) below the landfill cover. Alternative 
procedures to drive the probe into the landfill may be used subject to 
the approval of the Administrator's designated representative.
    8.2.1.1 Remove the pilot probe and drive the sample probe into the 
hole left by the

[[Page 523]]

pilot probe. The sample probe shall extend at least 0.9 m (3 ft) below 
the landfill cover and shall protrude about 0.3 m (1 ft) above the 
landfill cover. Seal around the sampling probe with bentonite and cap 
the sampling probe with the sampling probe cap.
    8.2.2 Auger Procedure. Use an auger to drill a hole to at least 0.9 
m (3 ft) below the landfill cover. Place the sample probe in the hole 
and backfill with pea gravel to a level 0.6 m (2 ft) from the surface. 
The sample probe shall protrude at least 0.3 m (1 ft) above the landfill 
cover. Seal the remaining area around the probe with bentonite. Allow 24 
hours for the landfill gases to equilibrate inside the augured probe 
before sampling.
    8.3 Sample Train Assembly. Just before assembling the sample train, 
measure the sample tank vacuum using the pressure gauge. Record the 
vacuum, the ambient temperature, and the barometric pressure at this 
time. Assemble the sampling probe purging system as shown in Figure 25C-
1.
    8.4 Sampling Procedure. Open the sampling valve and use the purge 
pump and the flow control valve to evacuate at least two sample probe 
volumes from the system at a flow rate of 500 ml/min or less. Close the 
sampling valve and replace the purge pump with the sample tank apparatus 
as shown in Figure 25C-2. Open the sampling valve and the sample tank 
valve and, using the flow control valve, sample at a flow rate of 500 
ml/min or less until either a constant flow rate can no longer be 
maintained because of reduced sample tank vacuum or the appropriate 
composite volume is attained. Disconnect the sampling tank apparatus and 
pressurize the sample cylinder to approximately 1,060 mm Hg (567 in. 
H<INF>2</INF>O) absolute pressure with helium, and record the final 
pressure. Alternatively, the sample tank may be pressurized in the lab.
    8.4.1 The following restrictions apply to compositing samples from 
different probe sites into a single cylinder: (1) Individual composite 
samples per cylinder must be of equal volume; this must be verified by 
recording the flow rate, sampling time, vacuum readings, or other 
appropriate volume measuring data, (2) individual composite samples must 
have a minimum volume of 1 liter unless data is provided showing smaller 
volumes can be accurately measured, and (3) composite samples must not 
be collected using the final cylinder vacuum as it diminishes to ambient 
pressure.
    8.4.2 Use Method 3C to determine the percent N<INF>2</INF> in each 
cylinder. The presence of N<INF>2</INF> indicates either infiltration of 
ambient air into the landfill gas sample or an inappropriate testing 
site has been chosen where anaerobic decomposition has not begun. The 
landfill gas sample is acceptable if the concentration of N<INF>2</INF> 
is less than 20 percent. Alternatively, Method 3C may be used to 
determine the oxygen content of each cylinder as an air infiltration 
test. With this option, the oxygen content of each cylinder must be less 
than 5 percent.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.4.1.........................  Verify that        Ensures that ambient
                                 landfill gas       air was not drawn
                                 sample contains    into the landfill
                                 less than 20       gas sample.
                                 percent N2 or 5
                                 percent O2.
10.1, 10.2....................  NMOC analyzer      Ensures precision of
                                 initial and        analytical results.
                                 daily
                                 performance
                                 checks.
11.1.4........................  Audit Sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 Analyses.          technique and
                                                    instrument
                                                    calibration.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a record of performance of each item.

    10.1 Initial NMOC Analyzer Performance Test. Same as in Method 25, 
Section 10.1, except omit the linearity checks for CO<INF>2</INF> 
standards.
    10.2 NMOC Analyzer Daily Calibration.
    10.2.1 NMOC Response Factors. Same as in Method 25, Section 10.2.2.
    10.3 Sample Tank Volume. The volume of the gas sampling tanks must 
be determined. Determine the tank volumes by weighing them empty and 
then filled with deionized water; weigh to the nearest 5 g, and record 
the results. Alternatively, measure the volume of water used to fill 
them to the nearest 5 ml.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 The oxidation, reduction, and measurement of NMOC's is similar 
to Method 25. Before putting the NMOC analyzer into routine operation, 
conduct an initial performance test. Start the analyzer, and perform all 
the necessary functions in order to put the analyzer into proper working 
order. Conduct the performance test according to the procedures 
established in Section 10.1. Once the performance test has been 
successfully completed and the NMOC calibration response factor has been 
determined, proceed with sample analysis as follows:

[[Page 524]]

    11.1.1 Daily Operations and Calibration Checks. Before and 
immediately after the analysis of each set of samples or on a daily 
basis (whichever occurs first), conduct a calibration test according to 
the procedures established in Section 10.2. If the criteria of the daily 
calibration test cannot be met, repeat the NMOC analyzer performance 
test (Section 10.1) before proceeding.
    11.1.2 Operating Conditions. Same as in Method 25, Section 11.2.1.
    11.1.3 Analysis of Sample Tank. Purge the sample loop with sample, 
and then inject the sample. Under the specified operating conditions, 
the CO<INF>2</INF> in the sample will elute in approximately 100 
seconds. As soon as the detector response returns to baseline following 
the CO<INF>2</INF> peak, switch the carrier gas flow to backflush, and 
raise the column oven temperature to 195 [deg]C (383 [deg]F) as rapidly 
as possible. A rate of 30 [deg]C/min (54 [deg]F/min) has been shown to 
be adequate. Record the value obtained for any measured NMOC. Return the 
column oven temperature to 85 [deg]C (185 [deg]F) in preparation for the 
next analysis. Analyze each sample in triplicate, and report the average 
as C<INF>tm</INF>.
    11.2 Audit Sample Analysis. When the method is used to analyze 
samples to demonstrate compliance with a source emission regulation, an 
audit sample, if available, must be analyzed.
    11.2.1 Concurrently analyze the audit sample and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.
    11.2.2 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
must be used for the compliance samples and the audit sample. If this 
condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance analyses 
for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is waived. An 
audit sample set may not be used to validate different sets of 
compliance samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement 
agencies, unless prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement 
agencies.
    11.3 Audit Sample Results.
    11.3.1 Calculate the audit sample concentrations and submit results 
using the instructions provided with the audit samples.
    11.3.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.3.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst must agree within 20 percent of the actual concentration. If the 
20-percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and audit 
samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test report.
    11.3.4 Failure to meet the 20-percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit 
results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Note: All equations are written using absolute pressure; absolute 
pressures are determined by adding the measured barometric pressure to 
the measured gauge or manometer pressure.

    12.1 Nomenclature.

B<INF>w</INF>=Moisture content in the sample, fraction.
C<INF>N2</INF>=Measured N<INF>2</INF> concentration, fraction.
C<INF>t</INF>=Calculated NMOC concentration, ppmv C equivalent.
C<INF>tm</INF>=Measured NMOC concentration, ppmv C equivalent.
P<INF>b</INF>=Barometric pressure, mm Hg.
P<INF>t</INF>=Gas sample tank pressure after sampling, but before 
pressurizing, mm Hg absolute.
P<INF>tf</INF>=Final gas sample tank pressure after pressurizing, mm Hg 
absolute.
P<INF>ti</INF>=Gas sample tank pressure after evacuation, mm Hg 
absolute.
P<INF>w</INF>=Vapor pressure of H<INF>2</INF>O (from Table 25C-1), mm 
Hg.
r=Total number of analyzer injections of sample tank during analysis 
(where j=injection number, 1 * * * r).
T<INF>t</INF>=Sample tank temperature at completion of sampling, [deg]K.
T<INF>ti</INF>=Sample tank temperature before sampling, [deg]K.
T<INF>tf</INF>=Sample tank temperature after pressurizing, [deg]K.

    12.2 Water Correction. Use Table 25C-1 (Section 17.0), the LFG 
temperature, and barometric pressure at the sampling site to calculate 
B<INF>w</INF>.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.383

    12.3 NMOC Concentration. Use the following equation to calculate the 
concentration of NMOC for each sample tank.

[[Page 525]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.384

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Salo, Albert E., Samuel Witz, and Robert D. MacPhee. 
Determination of Solvent Vapor Concentrations by Total Combustion 
Analysis: A Comparison of Infrared with Flame Ionization Detectors. 
Paper No. 75-33.2. (Presented at the 68th Annual Meeting of the Air 
Pollution Control Association. Boston, Massachusetts. June 15-20, 1975.) 
14 p.
    2. Salo, Albert E., William L. Oaks, and Robert D. MacPhee. 
Measuring the Organic Carbon Content of Source Emissions for Air 
Pollution Control. Paper No. 74-190. (Presented at the 67th Annual 
Meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association. Denver, Colorado. June 
9-13, 1974.) 25 p.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 526]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.385


                    Table 25C-1--Moisture Correction
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Vapor                    Vapor
                                       Pressure  Temperature,   Pressure
         Temperature, [deg]C           of H2O,      [deg]C      of H2O,
                                        mm Hg                    mm Hg
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4...................................        6.1           18        15.5
6...................................        7.0           20        17.5
8...................................        8.0           22        19.8
10..................................        9.2           24        22.4
12..................................       10.5           26        25.2
14..................................       12.0           28        28.3
16..................................       13.6           30        31.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 527]]

Method 25D--Determination of the Volatile Organic Concentration of Waste 
                                 Samples

    Note: Performance of this method should not be attempted by persons 
unfamiliar with the operation of a flame ionization detector (FID) or an 
electrolytic conductivity detector (ELCD) because knowledge beyond the 
scope of this presentation is required.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Volatile Organic Compounds. No CAS No. assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for determining the 
volatile organic (VO) concentration of a waste sample.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Principle. A sample of waste is obtained at a point which is 
most representative of the unexposed waste (where the waste has had 
minimum opportunity to volatilize to the atmosphere). The sample is 
suspended in an organic/aqueous matrix, then heated and purged with 
nitrogen for 30 min. in order to separate certain organic compounds. 
Part of the sample is analyzed for carbon concentration, as methane, 
with an FID, and part of the sample is analyzed for chlorine 
concentration, as chloride, with an ELCD. The VO concentration is the 
sum of the carbon and chlorine content of the sample.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Well-mixed in the context of this method refers to turbulent 
flow which results in multiple-phase waste in effect behaving as single-
phase waste due to good mixing.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Note: Mention of trade names or specific products does not 
constitute endorsement by the Environmental Protection Agency.

    6.1 Sampling. The following equipment is required:
    6.1.1 Sampling Tube. Flexible Teflon, 0.25 in. ID (6.35 mm).
    6.1.2 Sample Container. Borosilicate glass, 40-mL, and a Teflon-
lined screw cap capable of forming an air tight seal.
    6.1.3 Cooling Coil. Fabricated from 0.25 in (6.35 mm). ID 304 
stainless steel tubing with a thermocouple at the coil outlet.
    6.2 Analysis. The following equipment is required.
    6.2.1 Purging Apparatus. For separating the VO from the waste 
sample. A schematic of the system is shown in Figure 25D-1. The purging 
apparatus consists of the following major components.
    6.2.1.1 Purging Flask. A glass container to hold the sample while it 
is heated and purged with dry nitrogen. The cap of the purging flask is 
equipped with three fittings: one for a purging lance (fitting with the 
<greek-i>7 Ace-thread), one for the Teflon exit tubing (side fitting, 
also a <greek-i>7 Ace-thread), and a third (a 50-mm Ace-thread) to 
attach the base of the purging flask as shown in Figure 25D-2. The base 
of the purging flask is a 50-mm ID (2 in) cylindrical glass tube. One 
end of the tube is open while the other end is sealed. Exact dimensions 
are shown in Figure 25D-2.
    6.2.1.2 Purging Lance. Glass tube, 6-mm OD (0.2 in) by 30 cm (12 in) 
long. The purging end of the tube is fitted with a four-arm bubbler with 
each tip drawn to an opening 1 mm (0.04 in) in diameter. Details and 
exact dimensions are shown in Figure 25D-2.
    6.2.1.3 Coalescing Filter. Porous fritted disc incorporated into a 
container with the same dimensions as the purging flask. The details of 
the design are shown in Figure 25D-3.
    6.2.1.4 Constant Temperature Chamber. A forced draft oven capable of 
maintaining a uniform temperature around the purging flask and 
coalescing filter of 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C (167 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F).
    6.2.1.5 Three-way Valve. Manually operated, stainless steel. To 
introduce calibration gas into system.
    6.2.1.6 Flow Controllers. Two, adjustable. One capable of 
maintaining a purge gas flow rate of 6 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.06 L/min 
(0.2 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.002 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min) The other capable 
of maintaining a calibration gas flow rate of 1-100 mL/min (0.00004-
0.004 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min).
    6.2.1.7 Rotameter. For monitoring the air flow through the purging 
system (0-10 L/min)(0-0.4 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min).
    6.2.1.8 Sample Splitters. Two heated flow restrictors (placed inside 
oven or heated to 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F) ). At a purge rate of 6 L/min (0.2 
ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min), one will supply a constant flow to the first 
detector (the rest of the flow will be directed to the second sample 
splitter). The second splitter will split the analytical flow between 
the second detector and the flow restrictor. The approximate flow to the 
FID will be 40 mL/min (0.0014 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min) and to the ELCD will 
be 15 mL/min (0.0005 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min), but the exact flow must be 
adjusted to be compatible with the individual detector and to meet its 
linearity requirement. The two sample splitters will

[[Page 528]]

be connected to each other by 1/8[foot] OD (3.175 mm) stainless steel 
tubing.
    6.2.1.9 Flow Restrictor. Stainless steel tubing, 1/8[foot] OD (3.175 
mm), connecting the second sample splitter to the ice bath. Length is 
determined by the resulting pressure in the purging flask (as measured 
by the pressure gauge). The resulting pressure from the use of the flow 
restrictor shall be 6-7 psig.
    6.2.1.10 Filter Flask. With one-hole stopper. Used to hold ice bath. 
Excess purge gas is vented through the flask to prevent condensation in 
the flowmeter and to trap volatile organic compounds.
    6.2.1.11 Four-way Valve. Manually operated, stainless steel. Placed 
inside oven, used to bypass purging flask.
    6.2.1.12 On/Off Valves. Two, stainless steel. One heat resistant up 
to 130 [deg]C (266 [deg]F) and placed between oven and ELCD. The other a 
toggle valve used to control purge gas flow.
    6.2.1.13 Pressure Gauge. Range 0-40 psi. To monitor pressure in 
purging flask and coalescing filter.
    6.2.1.14 Sample Lines. Teflon, 1/4[foot] OD (6.35 mm), used inside 
the oven to carry purge gas to and from purging chamber and to and from 
coalescing filter to four-way valve. Also used to carry sample from 
four-way valve to first sample splitter.
    6.2.1.15 Detector Tubing. Stainless steel, 1/8[foot] OD (3.175 mm), 
heated to 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (248 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F) . Used to carry sample gas from each sample 
splitter to a detector. Each piece of tubing must be wrapped with heat 
tape and insulating tape in order to insure that no cold spots exist. 
The tubing leading to the ELCD will also contain a heat-resistant on-off 
valve (Section 6.2.1.12) which shall also be wrapped with heat-tape and 
insulation.
    6.2.2 Volatile Organic Measurement System. Consisting of an FID to 
measure the carbon concentration of the sample and an ELCD to measure 
the chlorine concentration.
    6.2.2.1 FID. A heated FID meeting the following specifications is 
required.
    6.2.2.1.1 Linearity. A linear response (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
percent) over the operating range as demonstrated by the procedures 
established in Section 10.1.1.
    6.2.2.1.2 Range. A full scale range of 50 pg carbon/sec to 50 
[micro]g carbon/sec. Signal attenuators shall be available to produce a 
minimum signal response of 10 percent of full scale.
    6.2.2.1.3 Data Recording System. A digital integration system 
compatible with the FID for permanently recording the output of the 
detector. The recorder shall have the capability to start and stop 
integration at points selected by the operator or it shall be capable of 
the ``integration by slices'' technique (this technique involves 
breaking down the chromatogram into smaller increments, integrating the 
area under the curve for each portion, subtracting the background for 
each portion, and then adding all of the areas together for the final 
area count).
    6.2.2.2 ELCD. An ELCD meeting the following specifications is 
required. 1-propanol must be used as the electrolyte. The electrolyte 
flow through the conductivity cell shall be 1 to 2 mL/min (0.00004 to 
0.00007 ft\3\/min).

    Note: A \1/4\-in. ID (6.35 mm) quartz reactor tube is strongly 
recommended to reduce carbon buildup and the resulting detector 
maintenance.

    6.2.2.2.1 Linearity. A linear response (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 
percent) over the response range as demonstrated by the procedures in 
Section 10.1.2.
    6.2.2.2.2 Range. A full scale range of 5.0 pg/sec to 500 ng/sec 
chloride. Signal attenuators shall be available to produce a minimum 
signal response of 10 percent of full scale.
    6.2.2.2.3 Data Recording System. A digital integration system 
compatible with the output voltage range of the ELCD. The recorder must 
have the capability to start and stop integration at points selected by 
the operator or it shall be capable of performing the ``integration by 
slices'' technique.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Sampling.
    7.1.1 Polyethylene Glycol (PEG). Ninety-eight percent pure with an 
average molecular weight of 400. Before using the PEG, remove any 
organic compounds that might be detected as volatile organics by heating 
it to 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F) and purging it with nitrogen at a flow 
rate of 1 to 2 L/min (0.04 to 0.07 ft\3\/min) for 2 hours. The cleaned 
PEG must be stored under a 1 to 2 L/min (0.04 to 0.07 ft\3\/min) 
nitrogen purge until use. The purge apparatus is shown in Figure 25D-4.
    7.2 Analysis.
    7.2.1 Sample Separation. The following are required for the sample 
purging step.
    7.2.1.1 PEG. Same as Section 7.1.1.
    7.2.1.2 Purge Gas. Zero grade nitrogen (N<INF>2</INF>), containing 
less than 1 ppm carbon.
    7.2.2 Volatile Organics Measurement. The following are required for 
measuring the VO concentration.
    7.2.2.1 Hydrogen (H<INF>2</INF>). Zero grade H<INF>2</INF>, 99.999 
percent pure.
    7.2.2.2 Combustion Gas. Zero grade air or oxygen as required by the 
FID.
    7.2.2.3 Calibration Gas. Pressurized gas cylinder containing 10 
percent propane and 1 percent 1,1-dichloroethylene by volume in 
nitrogen.
    7.2.2.4 Water. Deionized distilled water that conforms to American 
Society for Testing and Materials Specification D 1193-74, Type 3, is 
required for analysis. At the option of the analyst, the 
KMnO<INF>4</INF> test for oxidizable organic matter may be omitted when 
high concentrations are not expected to be present.

[[Page 529]]

    7.2.2.5 1-Propanol. ACS grade or better. Electrolyte Solution. For 
use in the ELCD.
    7.3 Quality Assurance Audit Samples.
    7.3.1 It is recommended, but not required, that a performance audit 
sample be analyzed in conjunction with the field samples. The audit 
sample should be in a suitable sample matrix at a concentration similar 
to the actual field samples.
    7.3.2 When making compliance determinations, and upon availability, 
audit samples may be obtained from the appropriate EPA regional Office 
or from the responsible enforcement authority and analyzed in 
conjunction with the field samples.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Sampling.
    8.1.1 Sampling Plan Design and Development. Use the procedures in 
chapter nine of Reference 1 in Section 16 as guidance in developing a 
sampling plan.
    8.1.2 Single Phase or Well-mixed Waste.
    8.1.2.1 Install a sampling tap to obtain the sample at a point which 
is most representative of the unexposed waste (where the waste has had 
minimum opportunity to volatilize to the atmosphere). Assemble the 
sampling apparatus as shown in Figure 25D-5.
    8.1.2.2 Prepare the sampling containers as follows: Pour 30 mL of 
clean PEG into the container. PEG will reduce but not eliminate the loss 
of organics during sample collection. Weigh the sample container with 
the screw cap, the PEG, and any labels to the nearest 0.01 g and record 
the weight (m<INF>st</INF>). Store the containers in an ice bath until 1 
hour before sampling (PEG will solidify at ice bath temperatures; allow 
the containers to reach room temperature before sampling).
    8.1.2.3 Begin sampling by purging the sample lines and cooling coil 
with at least four volumes of waste. Collect the purged material in a 
separate container and dispose of it properly.
    8.1.2.4 After purging, stop the sample flow and direct the sampling 
tube to a preweighed sample container, prepared as described in Section 
8.1.2.2. Keep the tip of the tube below the surface of the PEG during 
sampling to minimize contact with the atmosphere. Sample at a flow rate 
such that the temperature of the waste is less than 10 [deg]C (50 
[deg]F). Fill the sample container and immediately cap it (within 5 
seconds) so that a minimum headspace exists in the container. Store 
immediately in a cooler and cover with ice.
    8.1.3 Multiple-phase Waste. Collect a 10 g sample of each phase of 
waste generated using the procedures described in Section 8.1.2 or 
8.1.5. Each phase of the waste shall be analyzed as a separate sample. 
Calculate the weighted average VO concentration of the waste using 
Equation 25D-13 (Section 12.14).
    8.1.4 Solid waste. Add approximately 10 g of the solid waste to a 
container prepared in the manner described in Section 8.1.2.2, 
minimizing headspace. Cap and chill immediately.
    8.1.5 Alternative to Tap Installation. If tap installation is 
impractical or impossible, fill a large, clean, empty container by 
submerging the container into the waste below the surface of the waste. 
Immediately fill a container prepared in the manner described in Section 
8.1.2.2 with approximately 10 g of the waste collected in the large 
container. Minimize headspace, cap and chill immediately.
    8.1.6 Alternative sampling techniques may be used upon the approval 
of the Administrator.
    8.2 Sample Recovery.
    8.2.1 Assemble the purging apparatus as shown in Figures 25D-1 and 
25D-2. The oven shall be heated to 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C 
(167 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F). The sampling lines leading from 
the oven to the detectors shall be heated to 120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 [deg]C (248 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>18 [deg]F) with no 
cold spots. The flame ionization detector shall be operated with a 
heated block. Adjust the purging lance so that it reaches the bottom of 
the chamber.
    8.2.2 Remove the sample container from the cooler, and wipe the 
exterior of the container to remove any extraneous ice, water, or other 
debris. Reweigh the sample container to the nearest 0.01 g, and record 
the weight (m<INF>sf</INF>). Pour the contents of the sample container 
into the purging flask, rinse the sample container three times with a 
total of 20 mL of PEG (since the sample container originally held 30 mL 
of PEG, the total volume of PEG added to the purging flask will be 50 
mL), transferring the rinsings to the purging flask after each rinse. 
Cap purging flask between rinses. The total volume of PEG in the purging 
flask shall be 50 mL. Add 50 mL of water to the purging flask.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Quality Control Samples. If audit samples are not available, 
prepare and analyze the two types of quality control samples (QCS) 
listed in Sections 9.4.1 and 9.4.2. Before placing the system in 
operation, after a shutdown of greater than six months, and after any 
major modifications, analyze each QCS in triplicate. For each detector, 
calculate the percent recovery by dividing measured concentration by 
theoretical concentration and multiplying by 100. Determine the mean 
percent recovery for each detector for each QCS triplicate analysis. The 
RSD for any triplicate analysis shall be <=10 percent. For QCS 1 
(methylene chloride), the percent recovery shall be <ls-thn-eq>=90 
percent for carbon as methane, and <ls-thn-eq>=55 percent for chlorine

[[Page 530]]

as chloride. For QCS 2 (1,3-dichloro-2-propanol), the percent recovery 
shall be <=15 percent for carbon as methane, and <=6 percent for 
chlorine as chloride. If the analytical system does not meet the above-
mentioned criteria for both detectors, check the system parameters 
(temperature, system pressure, purge rate, etc.), correct the problem, 
and repeat the triplicate analysis of each QCS.
    9.1.1 QCS 1, Methylene Chloride. Prepare a stock solution by 
weighing, to the nearest 0.1 mg, 55 [micro]L of HPLC grade methylene 
chloride in a tared 5 mL volumetric flask. Record the weight in 
milligrams, dilute to 5 mL with cleaned PEG, and inject 100 [micro]L of 
the stock solution into a sample prepared as a water blank (50 mL of 
cleaned PEG and 60 mL of water in the purging flask). Analyze the QCS 
according to the procedures described in Sections 10.2 and 10.3, 
excluding Section 10.2.2. To calculate the theoretical carbon 
concentration (in mg) in QCS 1, multiply mg of methylene chloride in the 
stock solution by 3.777 x 10<SUP>-3</SUP>. To calculate the theoretical 
chlorine concentration (in mg) in QCS 1, multiply mg of methylene 
chloride in the stock solution by 1.670 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP>.
    9.1.2 QCS 2, 1,3-dichloro-2-propanol. Prepare a stock solution by 
weighing, to the nearest 0.1 mg, 60 [micro]L of high purity grade 1,3-
dichloro-2-propanol in a tared 5 mL volumetric flask. Record the weight 
in milligrams, dilute to 5 mL with cleaned PEG, and inject 100 [micro]L 
of the stock solution into a sample prepared as a water blank (50 mL of 
cleaned PEG and 60 mL of water in the purging flask). Analyze the QCS 
according to the procedures described in Sections 10.2 and 10.3, 
excluding Section 10.2.2. To calculate the theoretical carbon 
concentration (in mg) in QCS 2, multiply mg of 1,3-dichloro-2-propanol 
in the stock solution by 7.461 x 10<SUP>-3</SUP>. To calculate the 
theoretical chlorine concentration (in mg) in QCS 2, multiply mg of 1,3-
dichloro-2-propanol in the stock solution by 1.099 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP>.
    9.1.3 Routine QCS Analysis. For each set of compliance samples (in 
this context, set is per facility, per compliance test), analyze one QCS 
1 and one QCS 2 sample. The percent recovery for each sample for each 
detector shall be <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>13 percent of the mean recovery 
established for the most recent set of QCS triplicate analysis (Section 
9.4). If the sample does not meet this criteria, check the system 
components and analyze another QCS 1 and 2 until a single set of QCS 
meet the <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>13 percent criteria.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Initial Performance Check of Purging System. Before placing the 
system in operation, after a shutdown of greater than six months, after 
any major modifications, and at least once per month during continuous 
operation, conduct the linearity checks described in Sections 10.1.1 and 
10.1.2. Install calibration gas at the three-way calibration gas valve. 
See Figure 25D-1.
    10.1.1 Linearity Check Procedure. Using the calibration standard 
described in Section 7.2.2.3 and by varying the injection time, it is 
possible to calibrate at multiple concentration levels. Use Equation 
25D-3 to calculate three sets of calibration gas flow rates and run 
times needed to introduce a total mass of carbon, as methane, 
(m<INF>c</INF>) of 1, 5, and 10 mg into the system (low, medium and high 
FID calibration, respectively). Use Equation 25D-4 to calculate three 
sets of calibration gas flow rates and run times needed to introduce a 
total chloride mass (m<INF>ch</INF>) of 1, 5, and 10 mg into the system 
(low, medium and high ELCD calibration, respectively). With the system 
operating in standby mode, allow the FID and the ELCD to establish a 
stable baseline. Set the secondary pressure regulator of the calibration 
gas cylinder to the same pressure as the purge gas cylinder and set the 
proper flow rate with the calibration flow controller (see Figure 25D-
1). The calibration gas flow rate can be measured with a flowmeter 
attached to the vent position of the calibration gas valve. Set the 
four-way bypass valve to standby position so that the calibration gas 
flows through the coalescing filter only. Inject the calibration gas by 
turning the calibration gas valve from vent position to inject position. 
Continue the calibration gas flow for the appropriate period of time 
before switching the calibration valve to vent position. Continue 
recording the response of the FID and the ELCD for 5 min after switching 
off calibration gas flow. Make triplicate injections of all six levels 
of calibration.
    10.1.2 Linearity Criteria. Calculate the average response factor 
(Equations 25D-5 and 25D-6) and the relative standard deviation (RSD) 
(Equation 25D-10) at each level of the calibration curve for both 
detectors. Calculate the overall mean of the three response factor 
averages for each detector. The FID linearity is acceptable if each 
response factor is within 5 percent of the overall mean and if the RSD 
for each set of triplicate injections is less than 5 percent. The ELCD 
linearity is acceptable if each response factor is within 10 percent of 
the overall mean and if the RSD for each set of triplicate injections is 
less than 10 percent. Record the overall mean value of the response 
factors for the FID and the ELCD. If the calibration for either the FID 
or the ELCD does not meet the criteria, correct the detector/system 
problem and repeat Sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.2.
    10.2 Daily Calibrations.
    10.2.1 Daily Linearity Check. Follow the procedures outlined in 
Section 10.1.1 to analyze the medium level calibration for both the FID 
and the ELCD in duplicate at the start of the day. Calculate the 
response factors and the RSDs for each detector. For the

[[Page 531]]

FID, the calibration is acceptable if the average response factor is 
within 5 percent of the overall mean response factor (Section 10.1.2) 
and if the RSD for the duplicate injection is less than 5 percent. For 
the ELCD, the calibration is acceptable if the average response factor 
is within 10 percent of the overall mean response factor (Section 
10.1.2) and if the RSD for the duplicate injection is less than 10 
percent. If the calibration for either the FID or the ELCD does not meet 
the criteria, correct the detector/system problem and repeat Sections 
10.1.1 and 10.1.2.
    10.2.2 Calibration Range Check.
    10.2.2.1 If the waste concentration for either detector falls below 
the range of calibration for that detector, use the procedure outlined 
in Section 10.1.1 to choose two calibration points that bracket the new 
target concentration. Analyze each of these points in triplicate (as 
outlined in Section 10.1.1) and use the criteria in Section 10.1.2 to 
determine the linearity of the detector in this ``mini-calibration'' 
range.
    10.2.2.2 After the initial linearity check of the mini-calibration 
curve, it is only necessary to test one of the points in duplicate for 
the daily calibration check (in addition to the points specified in 
Section 10.2.1). The average daily mini-calibration point should fit the 
linearity criteria specified in Section 10.2.1. If the calibration for 
either the FID or the ELCD does not meet the criteria, correct the 
detector/system problem and repeat the calibration procedure mentioned 
in the first paragraph of Section 10.2.2. A mini-calibration curve for 
waste concentrations above the calibration curve for either detector is 
optional.
    10.3 Analytical Balance. Calibrate against standard weights.

                              11.0 Analysis

    11.1 Sample Analysis.
    11.1.1 Turn on the constant temperature chamber and allow the 
temperature to equilibrate at 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C (167 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F). Turn the four-way valve so that the 
purge gas bypasses the purging flask, the purge gas flowing through the 
coalescing filter and to the detectors (standby mode). Turn on the purge 
gas. Allow both the FID and the ELCD to warm up until a stable baseline 
is achieved on each detector. Pack the filter flask with ice. Replace 
ice after each run and dispose of the waste water properly. When the 
temperature of the oven reaches 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C (167 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F), start both integrators and record 
baseline. After 1 min, turn the four-way valve so that the purge gas 
flows through the purging flask, to the coalescing filter and to the 
sample splitters (purge mode). Continue recording the response of the 
FID and the ELCD. Monitor the readings of the pressure gauge and the 
rotameter. If the readings fall below established setpoints, stop the 
purging, determine the source of the leak, and resolve the problem 
before resuming. Leaks detected during a sampling period invalidate that 
sample.
    11.1.2 As the purging continues, monitor the output of the detectors 
to make certain that the analysis is proceeding correctly and that the 
results are being properly recorded. Every 10 minutes read and record 
the purge flow rate, the pressure and the chamber temperature. Continue 
the purging for 30 minutes.
    11.1.3 For each detector output, integrate over the entire area of 
the peak starting at 1 minute and continuing until the end of the run. 
Subtract the established baseline area from the peak area. Record the 
corrected area of the peak. See Figure 25D-6 for an example integration.
    11.2 Water Blank. A water blank shall be analyzed for each batch of 
cleaned PEG prepared. Transfer about 60 mL of water into the purging 
flask. Add 50 mL of the cleaned PEG to the purging flask. Treat the 
blank as described in Sections 8.2 and 8.3, excluding Section 8.2.2. 
Calculate the concentration of carbon and chlorine in the blank sample 
(assume 10 g of waste as the mass). A VO concentration equivalent to 
<=10 percent of the applicable standard may be subtracted from the 
measured VO concentration of the waste samples. Include all blank 
results and documentation in the test report.
    11.3 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.3.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, an audit sample, if 
available, must be analyzed.
    11.3.2 Concurrently analyze the audit sample and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.
    11.3.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
must be used for the compliance samples and the audit sample. If this 
condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance analyses 
for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is waived. An 
audit sample may not be used to validate different sets of compliance 
samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement agencies, unless 
prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement agencies.
    11.4 Audit Sample Results.
    11.4.1 Calculate the audit sample concentrations and submit results 
using the instructions provided with the audit samples.
    11.4.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.

[[Page 532]]

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.

A<INF>b</INF>=Area under the water blank response curve, counts.
A<INF>c</INF>=Area under the calibration response curve, counts.
A<INF>s</INF>=Area under the sample response curve, counts.
C=Concentration of volatile organics in the sample, ppmw.
C<INF>c</INF>=Concentration of carbon, as methane, in the calibration 
gas, mg/L.
C<INF>ch</INF>=Concentration of chloride in the calibration gas, mg/L.
C<INF>j</INF>=VO concentration of phase j, ppmw.
DR<INF>t</INF>=Average daily response factor of the FID, mg 
CH<INF>4</INF>/counts.
Dr<INF>th</INF>=Average daily response factor of the ELCD, mg 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP>/counts.
F<INF>j</INF>=Weight fraction of phase j present in the waste.
m<INF>c</INF>=Mass of carbon, as methane, in a calibration run, mg.
m<INF>ch</INF>=Mass of chloride in a calibration run, mg.
m<INF>s</INF>=Mass of the waste sample, g.
m<INF>sc</INF>=Mass of carbon, as methane, in the sample, mg.
m<INF>sf</INF>=Mass of sample container and waste sample, g.
m<INF>sh</INF>=Mass of chloride in the sample, mg.
m<INF>st</INF>=Mass of sample container prior to sampling, g.
m<INF>VO</INF>=Mass of volatile organics in the sample, mg.
n=Total number of phases present in the waste.
P<INF>p</INF>=Percent propane in calibration gas (L/L).
P<INF>vc</INF>=Percent 1,1-dichloroethylene in calibration gas (L/L).
Q<INF>c</INF>=Flow rate of calibration gas, L/min.
t<INF>c</INF>=Length of time standard gas is delivered to the analyzer, 
min.
W=Weighted average VO concentration, ppmw.

    12.2 Concentration of Carbon, as Methane, in the Calibration Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.386
    
    12.3 Concentration of Chloride in the Calibration Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.387
    
    12.4 Mass of Carbon, as Methane, in a Calibration Run.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.388
    
    12.5 Mass of Chloride in a Calibration Run.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.389
    
    12.6 FID Response Factor, mg/counts.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.390
    
    12.7 ELCD Response Factor, mg/counts.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.391
    
    12.8 Mass of Carbon in the Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.392
    
    12.9 Mass of Chloride in the Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.393
    
    12.10 Mass of Volatile Organics in the Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.394
    
    12.11 Relative Standard Deviation.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.395
    
    12.12 Mass of Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.396
    
    12.13 Concentration of Volatile Organics in Waste.

[[Page 533]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.397

    12.14 Weighted Average VO Concentration of Multi-phase Waste.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.398
    
                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemistry 
Methods'', U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Publication SW-846, 3rd 
Edition, November 1986 as amended by Update I, November 1990.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 534]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.399


[[Page 535]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.400


[[Page 536]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.401


[[Page 537]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.402


[[Page 538]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.403


[[Page 539]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.404

Method 25E--Determination of Vapor Phase Organic Concentration in Waste 
                                 Samples

    Note: Performance of this method should not be attempted by persons 
unfamiliar with the operation of a flame ionization detector (FID) nor 
by those who are unfamiliar with source sampling because knowledge 
beyond the scope of this presentation is required. This method is not 
inclusive with respect to specifications (e.g., reagents and standards) 
and calibration procedures. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, persons using 
this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least the following 
additional test methods: Method 106, part 61, Appendix B, and Method 18, 
part 60, Appendix A.

[[Page 540]]

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable for determining the 
vapor pressure of waste cited by an applicable regulation.
    1.2 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 The headspace vapor of the sample is analyzed for carbon content 
by a headspace analyzer, which uses an FID.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 The analyst shall select the operating parameters best suited to 
the requirements for a particular analysis. The analyst shall produce 
confirming data through an adequate supplemental analytical technique 
and have the data available for review by the Administrator.

                          5.0 Safety [Reserved]

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sampling. The following equipment is required:
    6.1.1 Sample Containers. Vials, glass, with butyl rubber septa, 
Perkin-Elmer Corporation Numbers 0105-0129 (glass vials), B001-0728 
(gray butyl rubber septum, plug style), 0105-0131 (butyl rubber septa), 
or equivalent. The seal must be made from butyl rubber. Silicone rubber 
seals are not acceptable.
    6.1.2 Vial Sealer. Perkin-Elmer Number 105-0106, or equivalent.
    6.1.3 Gas-Tight Syringe. Perkin-Elmer Number 00230117, or 
equivalent.
    6.1.4 The following equipment is required for sampling.
    6.1.4.1 Tap.
    6.1.4.2 Tubing. Teflon, 0.25-in. ID.

    Note: Mention of trade names or specific products does not 
constitute endorsement by the Environmental Protection Agency.

    6.1.4.3 Cooling Coil. Stainless steel (304), 0.25 in.-ID, equipped 
with a thermocouple at the coil outlet.
    6.2 Analysis. The following equipment is required.
    6.2.1 Balanced Pressure Headspace Sampler. Perkin-Elmer HS-6, HS-
100, or equivalent, equipped with a glass bead column instead of a 
chromatographic column.
    6.2.2 FID. An FID meeting the following specifications is required.
    6.2.2.1 Linearity. A linear response (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
percent) over the operating range as demonstrated by the procedures 
established in Section 10.2.
    6.2.2.2 Range. A full scale range of 1 to 10,000 parts per million 
(ppm) propane (C<INF>3</INF>H<INF>8</INF>). Signal attenuators shall be 
available to produce a minimum signal response of 10 percent of full 
scale.
    6.2.3 Data Recording System. Analog strip chart recorder or digital 
integration system compatible with the FID for permanently recording the 
output of the detector.
    6.2.4 Temperature Sensor. Capable of reading temperatures in the 
range of 30 to 60 [deg]C (86 to 140 [deg]F) with an accuracy of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 [deg]C (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 [deg]F).

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Analysis. The following items are required for analysis.
    7.1.1 Hydrogen (H<INF>2</INF>). Zero grade hydrogen, as required by 
the FID.
    7.1.2 Carrier Gas. Zero grade nitrogen, containing less than 1 ppm 
carbon (C) and less than 1 ppm carbon dioxide.
    7.1.3 Combustion Gas. Zero grade air or oxygen as required by the 
FID.
    7.2 Calibration and Linearity Check.
    7.2.1 Stock Cylinder Gas Standard. 100 percent propane. The 
manufacturer shall: (a) Certify the gas composition to be accurate to 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent or better (see Section 7.2.1.1); (b) 
recommend a maximum shelf life over which the gas concentration does not 
change by greater than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent from the 
certified value; and (c) affix the date of gas cylinder preparation, 
certified propane concentration, and recommended maximum shelf life to 
the cylinder before shipment to the buyer.
    7.2.1.1 Cylinder Standards Certification. The manufacturer shall 
certify the concentration of the calibration gas in the cylinder by (a) 
directly analyzing the cylinder and (b) calibrating his analytical 
procedure on the day of cylinder analysis. To calibrate his analytical 
procedure, the manufacturer shall use, as a minimum, a three-point 
calibration curve.
    7.2.1.2 Verification of Manufacturer's Calibration Standards. Before 
using, the manufacturer shall verify each calibration standard by (a) 
comparing it to gas mixtures prepared in accordance with the procedure 
described in Section 7.1 of Method 106 of Part 61, Appendix B, or by (b) 
calibrating it against Standard Reference Materials (SRM's) prepared by 
the National Bureau of Standards, if such SRM's are available. The 
agreement between the initially determined concentration value and the 
verification concentration value must be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
percent. The manufacturer must reverify all calibration standards on a 
time interval consistent with the shelf life of the cylinder standards 
sold.

      8.0 Sampling Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Install a sampling tap to obtain a sample at a point which is 
most representative of the unexposed waste (where the waste has had 
minimum opportunity to volatilize to

[[Page 541]]

the atmosphere). Assemble the sampling apparatus as shown in Figure 25E-
1.
    8.2 Begin sampling by purging the sample lines and cooling coil with 
at least four volumes of waste. Collect the purged material in a 
separate container and dispose of it properly.
    8.3 After purging, stop the sample flow and transfer the Teflon 
sampling tube to a sample container. Sample at a flow rate such that the 
temperature of the waste is <10 [deg]C (<50 [deg]F). Fill the sample 
container halfway (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent) and cap it within 5 
seconds. Store immediately in a cooler and cover with ice.
    8.4 Alternative sampling techniques may be used upon the approval of 
the Administrator.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.2, 10.3....................  FID calibration    Ensure precision of
                                 and response       analytical results.
                                 check.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a record of performance of each item.

    10.1 Use the procedures in Sections 10.2 to calibrate the headspace 
analyzer and FID and check for linearity before the system is first 
placed in operation, after any shutdown longer than 6 months, and after 
any modification of the system.
    10.2 Calibration and Linearity. Use the procedures in Section 10 of 
Method 18 of Part 60, Appendix A, to prepare the standards and calibrate 
the flowmeters, using propane as the standard gas. Fill the calibration 
standard vials halfway (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent) with deionized 
water. Purge and fill the airspace with calibration standard. Prepare a 
minimum of three concentrations of calibration standards in triplicate 
at concentrations that will bracket the applicable cutoff. For a cutoff 
of 5.2 kPa (0.75 psi), prepare nominal concentrations of 30,000, 50,000, 
and 70,000 ppm as propane. For a cutoff of 27.6 kPa (4.0 psi), prepare 
nominal concentrations of 200,000, 300,000, and 400,000 ppm as propane.
    10.2.1 Use the procedures in Section 11.3 to measure the FID 
response of each standard. Use a linear regression analysis to calculate 
the values for the slope (k) and the y-intercept (b). Use the procedures 
in Sections 12.3 and 12.2 to test the calibration and the linearity.
    10.3 Daily FID Calibration Check. Check the calibration at the 
beginning and at the end of the daily runs by using the following 
procedures. Prepare 2 calibration standards at the nominal cutoff 
concentration using the procedures in Section 10.2. Place one at the 
beginning and one at the end of the daily run. Measure the FID response 
of the daily calibration standard and use the values for k and b from 
the most recent calibration to calculate the concentration of the daily 
standard. Use an equation similar to 25E-2 to calculate the percent 
difference between the daily standard and C<INF>s</INF>. If the 
difference is within 5 percent, then the previous values for k and b can 
be used. Otherwise, use the procedures in Section 10.2 to recalibrate 
the FID.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Allow one hour for the headspace vials to equilibrate at the 
temperature specified in the regulation. Allow the FID to warm up until 
a stable baseline is achieved on the detector.
    11.2 Check the calibration of the FID daily using the procedures in 
Section 10.3.
    11.3 Follow the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the normal 
operation of the headspace sampler and FID.
    11.4 Use the procedures in Sections 12.4 and 12.5 to calculate the 
vapor phase organic vapor pressure in the samples.
    11.5 Monitor the output of the detector to make certain that the 
results are being properly recorded.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.

A=Measurement of the area under the response curve, counts.
b=y-intercept of the linear regression line.
C<INF>a</INF>=Measured vapor phase organic concentration of sample, ppm 
as propane.
C<INF>ma</INF>=Average measured vapor phase organic concentration of 
standard, ppm as propane.
C<INF>m</INF>=Measured vapor phase organic concentration of standard, 
ppm as propane.
C<INF>s</INF>=Calculated standard concentration, ppm as propane.
k=Slope of the linear regression line.
P<INF>bar</INF>=Atmospheric pressure at analysis conditions, mm Hg (in. 
Hg).
P*=Organic vapor pressure in the sample, kPa (psi).
PD=Percent difference between the average measured vapor phase organic 
concentration (C<INF>m</INF>) and the calculated standard concentration 
(C<INF>s</INF>).
RSD=Relative standard deviation.
[beta] =1.333 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> kPa/[(mm Hg)(ppm)], (4.91 x 
10<SUP>-7</SUP> psi/[(in. Hg)(ppm)])


[[Page 542]]


    12.2 Linearity. Use the following equation to calculate the measured 
standard concentration for each standard vial.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.405

    12.2.1 Calculate the average measured standard concentration 
(C<INF>ma</INF>) for each set of triplicate standards and use the 
following equation to calculate PD between C<INF>ma</INF> and 
C<INF>s</INF>. The instrument linearity is acceptable if the PD is 
within five for each standard.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.406

    12.3. Relative Standard Deviation (RSD). Use the following equation 
to calculate the RSD for each triplicate set of standards.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.407

The calibration is acceptable if the RSD is within five for each 
standard concentration.
    12.4 Concentration of organics in the headspace. Use the following 
equation to calculate the concentration of vapor phase organics in each 
sample.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.408

    12.5 Vapor Pressure of Organics in the Headspace Sample. Use the 
following equation to calculate the vapor pressure of organics in the 
sample.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.409

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Salo, Albert E., Samuel Witz, and Robert D. MacPhee. 
``Determination of Solvent Vapor Concentrations by Total Combustion 
Analysis: a Comparison of Infared with Flame Ionization Detectors. Paper 
No. 75-33.2. (Presented at the 68th Annual Meeting of the Air Pollution 
Control Association. Boston, Massachusetts.
    2. Salo, Albert E., William L. Oaks, and Robert D. MacPhee. 
``Measuring the Organic Carbon Content of Source Emissions for Air 
Pollution Control. Paper No. 74-190. (Presented at the 67th Annual 
Meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association. Denver, Colorado. June 
9-13, 1974.) p. 25.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 543]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.412


[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-7, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

           Appendix A-8 to Part 60--Test Methods 26 through 29

Method 26--Determination of Hydrogen Chloride Emissions From Stationary 
Sources
Method 26A--Determination of hydrogen halide and halogen emissions from 
stationary sources--isokinetic method

[[Page 544]]

Method 27--Determination of vapor tightness of gasoline delivery tank 
using pressure-vacuum test
Method 28--Certification and auditing of wood heaters
Method 28A--Measurement of air to fuel ratio and minimum achievable burn 
rates for wood-fired appliances
Method 29--Determination of metals emissions from stationary sources
    The test methods in this appendix are referred to in Sec. 60.8 
(Performance Tests) and Sec. 60.11 (Compliance With Standards and 
Maintenance Requirements) of 40 CFR part 60, subpart A (General 
Provisions). Specific uses of these test methods are described in the 
standards of performance contained in the subparts, beginning with 
Subpart D.
    Within each standard of performance, a section title ``Test Methods 
and Procedures'' is provided to: (1) Identify the test methods to be 
used as reference methods to the facility subject to the respective 
standard and (2) identify any special instructions or conditions to be 
followed when applying a method to the respective facility. Such 
instructions (for example, establish sampling rates, volumes, or 
temperatures) are to be used either in addition to, or as a substitute 
for procedures in a test method. Similarly, for sources subject to 
emission monitoring requirements, specific instructions pertaining to 
any use of a test method as a reference method are provided in the 
subpart or in Appendix B.
    Inclusion of methods in this appendix is not intended as an 
endorsement or denial of their applicability to sources that are not 
subject to standards of performance. The methods are potentially 
applicable to other sources; however, applicability should be confirmed 
by careful and appropriate evaluation of the conditions prevalent at 
such sources.
    The approach followed in the formulation of the test methods 
involves specifications for equipment, procedures, and performance. In 
concept, a performance specification approach would be preferable in all 
methods because this allows the greatest flexibility to the user. In 
practice, however, this approach is impractical in most cases because 
performance specifications cannot be established. Most of the methods 
described herein, therefore, involve specific equipment specifications 
and procedures, and only a few methods in this appendix rely on 
performance criteria.
    Minor changes in the test methods should not necessarily affect the 
validity of the results and it is recognized that alternative and 
equivalent methods exist. Section 60.8 provides authority for the 
Administrator to specify or approve (1) equivalent methods, (2) 
alternative methods, and (3) minor changes in the methodology of the 
test methods. It should be clearly understood that unless otherwise 
identified all such methods and changes must have prior approval of the 
Administrator. An owner employing such methods or deviations from the 
test methods without obtaining prior approval does so at the risk of 
subsequent disapproval and retesting with approved methods.
    Within the test methods, certain specific equipment or procedures 
are recognized as being acceptable or potentially acceptable and are 
specifically identified in the methods. The items identified as 
acceptable options may be used without approval but must be identified 
in the test report. The potentially approvable options are cited as 
``subject to the approval of the Administrator'' or as ``or 
equivalent.'' Such potentially approvable techniques or alternatives may 
be used at the discretion of the owner without prior approval. However, 
detailed descriptions for applying these potentially approvable 
techniques or alternatives are not provided in the test methods. Also, 
the potentially approvable options are not necessarily acceptable in all 
applications. Therefore, an owner electing to use such potentially 
approvable techniques or alternatives is responsible for: (1) assuring 
that the techniques or alternatives are in fact applicable and are 
properly executed; (2) including a written description of the 
alternative method in the test report (the written method must be clear 
and must be capable of being performed without additional instruction, 
and the degree of detail should be similar to the detail contained in 
the test methods); and (3) providing any rationale or supporting data 
necessary to show the validity of the alternative in the particular 
application. Failure to meet these requirements can result in the 
Administrator's disapproval of the alternative.

 Method 26--Determination of Hydrogen Halide and Halogen Emissions From 
                Stationary Sources Non-Isokinetic Method

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Analytes                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hydrogen Chloride (HCl).................................       7647-01-0
Hydrogen Bromide (HBr)..................................      10035-10-6
Hydrogen Fluoride (HF)..................................       7664-39-3
Chlorine (Cl2)..........................................       7882-50-5
Bromine (Br2)...........................................       7726-95-6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for determining 
emissions of hydrogen halides (HX) (HCl, HBr, and HF) and halogens 
(X<INF>2</INF>) (Cl<INF>2</INF> and Br<INF>2</INF>) from stationary 
sources when specified by the applicable subpart. Sources, such as those 
controlled by wet scrubbers, that emit acid particulate matter must be 
sampled using Method 26A.

[[Page 545]]

    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 An integrated sample is extracted from the source and passed 
through a prepurged heated probe and filter into dilute sulfuric acid 
and dilute sodium hydroxide solutions which collect the gaseous hydrogen 
halides and halogens, respectively. The filter collects particulate 
matter including halide salts but is not routinely recovered and 
analyzed. The hydrogen halides are solubilized in the acidic solution 
and form chloride (Cl<SUP>-</SUP>), bromide (Br<SUP>-</SUP>), and 
fluoride (F<SUP>-</SUP>) ions. The halogens have a very low solubility 
in the acidic solution and pass through to the alkaline solution where 
they are hydrolyzed to form a proton (H<SUP>+</SUP>), the halide ion, 
and the hypohalous acid (HClO or HBrO). Sodium thiosulfate is added in 
excess to the alkaline solution to assure reaction with the hypohalous 
acid to form a second halide ion such that 2 halide ions are formed for 
each molecule of halogen gas. The halide ions in the separate solutions 
are measured by ion chromatography (IC).

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Volatile materials, such as chlorine dioxide (ClO<INF>2</INF>) 
and ammonium chloride (NH<INF>4</INF>Cl), which produce halide ions upon 
dissolution during sampling are potential interferents. Interferents for 
the halide measurements are the halogen gases which disproportionate to 
a hydrogen halide and a hydrohalous acid upon dissolution in water. 
However, the use of acidic rather than neutral or basic solutions for 
collection of the hydrogen halides greatly reduces the dissolution of 
any halogens passing through this solution.
    4.2 The simultaneous presence of HBr and CL<INF>2</INF> may cause a 
positive bias in the HCL result with a corresponding negative bias in 
the Cl<INF>2</INF> result as well as affecting the HBr/Br<INF>2</INF> 
split.
    4.3 High concentrations of nitrogen oxides (NO<INF>X</INF>) may 
produce sufficient nitrate (NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP> to interfere with 
measurements of very low Br<SUP>-</SUP> levels.
    4.4 A glass wool plug should not be used to remove particulate 
matter since a negative bias in the data could result.
    4.5 There is anecdotal evidence that HF may be outgassed from new 
teflon components. If HF is a target analyte, then preconditioning of 
new teflon components, by heating should be considered.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine 
the applicability of regulatory limitations before performing this test 
method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.2 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in 
higher concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. 
Reacts violently with metals and organics.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Note: Mention of trade names or specific products does not 
constitute endorsement by the Environmental Protection Agency.

    6.1 Sampling. The sampling train is shown in Figure 26-1, and 
component parts are discussed below.
    6.1.1 Probe. Borosilicate glass, approximately \3/8\-in. (9-mm) I.D. 
with a heating system to prevent moisture condensation. A Teflon-glass 
filter in a mat configuration should be installed to remove particulate 
matter from the gas stream (see Section 6.1.6).
    6.1.2 Three-way Stopcock. A borosilicate-glass three-way stopcock 
with a heating system to prevent moisture condensation. The heated 
stopcock should connect to the outlet of the heated filter and the inlet 
of the first impinger. The heating system should be capable of 
preventing condensation up to the inlet of the first impinger. Silicone 
grease may be used, if necessary, to prevent leakage.
    6.1.3 Impingers. Four 30-ml midget impingers with leak-free glass 
connectors. Silicone grease may be used, if necessary, to prevent 
leakage. For sampling at high moisture sources or for sampling times 
greater than one hour, a midget impinger with a shortened stem (such 
that the gas sample

[[Page 546]]

does not bubble through the collected condensate) should be used in 
front of the first impinger.
    6.1.4 Drying Tube or Impinger. Tube or impinger, of Mae West design, 
filled with 6- to 16-mesh indicating type silica gel, or equivalent, to 
dry the gas sample and to protect the dry gas meter and pump. If the 
silica gel has been used previously, dry at 175 [deg]C (350 [deg]F) for 
2 hours. New silica gel may be used as received. Alternatively, other 
types of desiccants (equivalent or better) may be used.
    6.1.5 Heating System. Any heating system capable of maintaining a 
temperature around the probe and filter holder greater than 120 [deg]C 
(248 [deg]F) during sampling, or such other temperature as specified by 
an applicable subpart of the standards or approved by the Administrator 
for a particular application.
    6.1.6 Filter Holder and Support. The filter holder shall be made of 
Teflon or quartz. The filter support shall be made of Teflon. All Teflon 
filter holders and supports are available from Savillex Corp., 5325 Hwy 
101, Minnetonka, MN 55345.
    6.1.7 Sample Line. Leak-free, with compatible fittings to connect 
the last impinger to the needle valve.
    6.1.8 Rate Meter. Rotameter, or equivalent, capable of measuring 
flow rate to within 2 percent of the selected flow rate of 2 liters/min 
(0.07 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/min).
    6.1.9 Purge Pump, Purge Line, Drying Tube, Needle Valve, and Rate 
Meter. Pump capable of purging the sampling probe at 2 liters/min, with 
drying tube, filled with silica gel or equivalent, to protect pump, and 
a rate meter capable of measuring 0 to 5 liters/min (0.2 ft<SUP>3</SUP>/
min).
    6.1.10 Stopcock Grease, Valve, Pump, Volume Meter, Barometer, and 
Vacuum Gauge. Same as in Method 6, Sections 6.1.1.4, 6.1.1.7, 6.1.1.8, 
6.1.1.10, 6.1.2, and 6.1.3.
    6.1.11 Temperature Measuring Devices. Temperature sensors to monitor 
the temperature of the probe and to monitor the temperature of the 
sampling system from the outlet of the probe to the inlet of the first 
impinger.
    6.1.12 Ice Water Bath. To minimize loss of absorbing solution.
    6.2 Sample Recovery.
    6.2.1 Wash Bottles. Polyethylene or glass, 500-ml or larger, two.
    6.2.2 Storage Bottles. 100- or 250-ml, high-density polyethylene 
bottles with Teflon screw cap liners to store impinger samples.
    6.3 Sample Preparation and Analysis. The materials required for 
volumetric dilution and chromatographic analysis of samples are 
described below.
    6.3.1 Volumetric Flasks. Class A, 100-ml size.
    6.3.2 Volumetric Pipets. Class A, assortment. To dilute samples to 
the calibration range of the ion chromatograph.
    6.3.3 Ion Chromatograph (IC). Suppressed or non-suppressed, with a 
conductivity detector and electronic integrator operating in the peak 
area mode. Other detectors, strip chart recorders, and peak height 
measurements may be used.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents must conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society (ACS reagent grade). When such 
specifications are not available, the best available grade shall be 
used.

    7.1 Sampling.
    7.1.1 Filter. A 25-mm (1 in) (or other size) Teflon glass mat, 
Pallflex TX40HI75 (Pallflex Inc., 125 Kennedy Drive, Putnam, CT 06260). 
This filter is in a mat configuration to prevent fine particulate matter 
from entering the sampling train. Its composition is 75% Teflon/25% 
borosilicate glass. Other filters may be used, but they must be in a mat 
(as opposed to a laminate) configuration and contain at least 75% 
Teflon. For practical rather than scientific reasons, when the stack gas 
temperature exceeds 210 [deg]C (410 [deg]F) and the HCl concentration is 
greater than 20 ppm, a quartz-fiber filter may be used since Teflon 
becomes unstable above this temperature.
    7.1.2 Water. Deionized, distilled water that conforms to American 
Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specification D 1193-77 or 91, 
Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).
    7.1.3 Acidic Absorbing Solution, 0.1 N Sulfuric Acid 
(H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). To prepare 100 ml of the absorbing 
solution for the front impinger pair, slowly add 0.28 ml of concentrated 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> to about 90 ml of water while stirring, and 
adjust the final volume to 100 ml using additional water. Shake well to 
mix the solution.
    7.1.4 Silica Gel. Indicating type, 6 to 16 mesh. If previously used, 
dry at 180 [deg]C (350 [deg]F) for 2 hours. New silica gel may be used 
as received. Alternatively, other types of desiccants may be used, 
subject to the approval of the Administrator.
    7.1.5 Alkaline Adsorbing Solution, 0.1 N Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). To 
prepare 100 ml of the scrubber solution for the third and fourth 
impinger, dissolve 0.40 g of solid NaOH in about 90 ml of water, and 
adjust the final solution volume to 100 ml using additional water. Shake 
well to mix the solution.
    7.1.6 Sodium Thiosulfate (Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF> 5 
H<INF>2</INF>O)
    7.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.2.

[[Page 547]]

    7.2.2 Absorbing Solution Blanks. A separate blank solution of each 
absorbing reagent should be prepared for analysis with the field 
samples. Dilute 30 ml of each absorbing solution to approximately the 
same final volume as the field samples using the blank sample of rinse 
water.
    7.2.3 Halide Salt Stock Standard Solutions. Prepare concentrated 
stock solutions from reagent grade sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium 
bromide (NaBr), and sodium fluoride (NaF). Each must be dried at 110 
[deg]C (230 [deg]F) for two or more hours and then cooled to room 
temperature in a desiccator immediately before weighing. Accurately 
weigh 1.6 to 1.7 g of the dried NaCl to within 0.1 mg, dissolve in 
water, and dilute to 1 liter. Calculate the exact Cl<SUP>-</SUP> 
concentration using Equation 26-1 in Section 12.2. In a similar manner, 
accurately weigh and solubilize 1.2 to 1.3 g of dried NaBr and 2.2 to 
2.3 g of NaF to make 1-liter solutions. Use Equations 26-2 and 26-3 in 
Section 12.2, to calculate the Br<SUP>-</SUP> and F<SUP>-</SUP> 
concentrations. Alternately, solutions containing a nominal certified 
concentration of 1000 mg/l NaCl are commercially available as convenient 
stock solutions from which standards can be made by appropriate 
volumetric dilution. Refrigerate the stock standard solutions and store 
no longer than one month.
    7.2.4 Chromatographic Eluent. Effective eluents for nonsuppressed IC 
using a resin-or silica-based weak ion exchange column are a 4 mM 
potassium hydrogen phthalate solution, adjusted to pH 4.0 using a 
saturated sodium borate solution, and a 4 mM 4-hydroxy benzoate 
solution, adjusted to pH 8.6 using 1 N NaOH. An effective eluent for 
suppressed ion chromatography is a solution containing 3 mM sodium 
bicarbonate and 2.4 mM sodium carbonate. Other dilute solutions buffered 
to a similar pH and containing no interfering ions may be used. When 
using suppressed ion chromatography, if the ``water dip'' resulting from 
sample injection interferes with the chloride peak, use a 2 mM NaOH/2.4 
mM sodium bicarbonate eluent.
    7.3 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. When making compliance 
determinations, and upon availability, audit samples may be obtained 
from the appropriate EPA regional Office or from the responsible 
enforcement authority.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Note: Because of the complexity of this method, testers and analyst 
should be trained and experienced with the procedure to ensure reliable 
results.

    8.1 Sampling.
    8.1.1 Preparation of Collection Train. Prepare the sampling train as 
follows: Pour 15 ml of the acidic absorbing solution into each one of 
the first pair of impingers, and 15 ml of the alkaline absorbing 
solution into each one of the second pair of impingers. Connect the 
impingers in series with the knockout impinger first, if used, followed 
by the two impingers containing the acidic absorbing solution and the 
two impingers containing the alkaline absorbing solution. Place a fresh 
charge of silica gel, or equivalent, in the drying tube or impinger at 
the end of the impinger train.
    8.1.2 Adjust the probe temperature and the temperature of the filter 
and the stopcock, i.e., the heated area in Figure 26-1 to a temperature 
sufficient to prevent water condensation. This temperature should be at 
least 20 [deg]C (68 [deg]F) above the source temperature, and greater 
than 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F). The temperature should be monitored 
throughout a sampling run to ensure that the desired temperature is 
maintained. It is important to maintain a temperature around the probe 
and filter of greater than 120 [deg]C (248 [deg]F) since it is extremely 
difficult to purge acid gases off these components. (These components 
are not quantitatively recovered and hence any collection of acid gases 
on these components would result in potential undereporting of these 
emission. The applicable subparts may specify alternative higher 
temperatures.)
    8.1.3 Leak-Check Procedure.
    8.1.3.1 Sampling Train. A leak-check prior to the sampling run is 
optional; however, a leak-check after the sampling run is mandatory. The 
leak-check procedure is as follows: Temporarily attach a suitable [e.g., 
0-40 cc/min (0-2.4 in\3\/min)] rotameter to the outlet of the dry gas 
meter and place a vacuum gauge at or near the probe inlet. Plug the 
probe inlet, pull a vacuum of at least 250 mm Hg (10 in. Hg), and note 
the flow rate as indicated by the rotameter. A leakage rate not in 
excess of 2 percent of the average sampling rate is acceptable.

    Note: Carefully release the probe inlet plug before turning off the 
pump.

    8.1.3.2 Pump. It is suggested (not mandatory) that the pump be leak-
checked separately, either prior to or after the sampling run. If done 
prior to the sampling run, the pump leak-check shall precede the leak-
check of the sampling train described immediately above; if done after 
the sampling run, the pump leak-check shall follow the train leak-check. 
To leak-check the pump, proceed as follows: Disconnect the drying tube 
from the probe-impinger assembly. Place a vacuum gauge at the inlet to 
either the drying tube or pump, pull a vacuum of 250 mm (10 in) Hg, plug 
or pinch off the outlet of the flow meter, and then turn off the pump. 
The vacuum should remain stable for at least 30 sec. Other leak-check 
procedures may be

[[Page 548]]

used, subject to the approval of the Administrator, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency.
    8.1.4 Purge Procedure. Immediately before sampling, connect the 
purge line to the stopcock, and turn the stopcock to permit the purge 
pump to purge the probe (see Figure 1A of Figure 26-1). Turn on the 
purge pump, and adjust the purge rate to 2 liters/min (0.07 ft\3\/min). 
Purge for at least 5 minutes before sampling.
    8.1.5 Sample Collection. Turn on the sampling pump, pull a slight 
vacuum of approximately 25 mm Hg (1 in Hg) on the impinger train, and 
turn the stopcock to permit stack gas to be pulled through the impinger 
train (see Figure 1C of Figure 26-1). Adjust the sampling rate to 2 
liters/min, as indicated by the rate meter, and maintain this rate to 
within 10 percent during the entire sampling run. Take readings of the 
dry gas meter volume and temperature, rate meter, and vacuum gauge at 
least once every five minutes during the run. A sampling time of one 
hour is recommended. Shorter sampling times may introduce a significant 
negative bias in the HCl concentration. At the conclusion of the 
sampling run, remove the train from the stack, cool, and perform a leak-
check as described in Section 8.1.3.1.
    8.2 Sample Recovery.
    8.2.1 Disconnect the impingers after sampling. Quantitatively 
transfer the contents of the acid impingers and the knockout impinger, 
if used, to a leak-free storage bottle. Add the water rinses of each of 
these impingers and connecting glassware to the storage bottle.
    8.2.2 Repeat this procedure for the alkaline impingers and 
connecting glassware using a separate storage bottle. Add 25 mg of 
sodium thiosulfate per the product of ppm of halogen anticipated to be 
in the stack gas times the volume (dscm) of stack gas sampled (0.7 mg 
per ppm-dscf).

    Note: This amount of sodium thiosulfate includes a safety factor of 
approximately 5 to assure complete reaction with the hypohalous acid to 
form a second Cl<SUP>-</SUP> ion in the alkaline solution.

    8.2.3 Save portions of the absorbing reagents (0.1 N 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> and 0.1 N NaOH) equivalent to the amount 
used in the sampling train (these are the absorbing solution blanks 
described in Section 7.2.2); dilute to the approximate volume of the 
corresponding samples using rinse water directly from the wash bottle 
being used. Add the same amount of sodium thiosulfate solution to the 
0.1 N NaOH absorbing solution blank. Also, save a portion of the rinse 
water used to rinse the sampling train. Place each in a separate, 
prelabeled storage bottle. The sample storage bottles should be sealed, 
shaken to mix, and labeled. Mark the fluid level.
    8.3 Sample Preparation for Analysis. Note the liquid levels in the 
storage bottles and confirm on the analysis sheet whether or not leakage 
occurred during transport. If a noticeable leakage has occurred, either 
void the sample or use methods, subject to the approval of the 
Administrator, to correct the final results. Quantitatively transfer the 
sample solutions to 100-ml volumetric flasks, and dilute to 100 ml with 
water.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11.2..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analytical
                                 analysis.          technique,
                                                    preparation of
                                                    standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Volume Metering System, Temperature Sensors, Rate Meter, and 
Barometer. Same as in Method 6, Sections 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, and 10.4.
    10.2 Ion Chromatograph.
    10.2.1 To prepare the calibration standards, dilute given amounts 
(1.0 ml or greater) of the stock standard solutions to convenient 
volumes, using 0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> or 0.1 N NaOH, as 
appropriate. Prepare at least four calibration standards for each 
absorbing reagent containing the appropriate stock solutions such that 
they are within the linear range of the field samples.
    10.2.2 Using one of the standards in each series, ensure adequate 
baseline separation for the peaks of interest.
    10.2.3 Inject the appropriate series of calibration standards, 
starting with the lowest concentration standard first both before and 
after injection of the quality control check sample, reagent blanks, and 
field samples. This allows compensation for any instrument drift 
occurring during sample analysis. The values from duplicate injections 
of these calibration samples should agree within 5 percent of their mean 
for the analysis to be valid.
    10.2.4 Determine the peak areas, or heights, for the standards and 
plot individual values versus halide ion concentrations in [micro]g/ml.
    10.2.5 Draw a smooth curve through the points. Use linear regression 
to calculate a

[[Page 549]]

formula describing the resulting linear curve.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Sample Analysis.
    11.1.1 The IC conditions will depend upon analytical column type and 
whether suppressed or non-suppressed IC is used. An example chromatogram 
from a non-suppressed system using a 150-mm Hamilton PRP-X100 anion 
column, a 2 ml/min flow rate of a 4 mM 4-hydroxy benzoate solution 
adjusted to a pH of 8.6 using 1 N NaOH, a 50 [micro]l sample loop, and a 
conductivity detector set on 1.0 [micro]S full scale is shown in Figure 
26-2.
    11.1.2 Before sample analysis, establish a stable baseline. Next, 
inject a sample of water, and determine if any Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, 
Br<SUP>-</SUP>, or F<SUP>-</SUP> appears in the chromatogram. If any of 
these ions are present, repeat the load/injection procedure until they 
are no longer present. Analysis of the acid and alkaline absorbing 
solution samples requires separate standard calibration curves; prepare 
each according to Section 10.2. Ensure adequate baseline separation of 
the analyses.
    11.1.3 Between injections of the appropriate series of calibration 
standards, inject in duplicate the reagent blanks, quality control 
sample, and the field samples. Measure the areas or heights of the 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, and F<SUP>-</SUP> peaks. Use the mean 
response of the duplicate injections to determine the concentrations of 
the field samples and reagent blanks using the linear calibration curve. 
The values from duplicate injections should agree within 5 percent of 
their mean for the analysis to be valid. If the values of duplicate 
injections are not within 5 percent of the mean, the duplicate 
injections shall be repeated and all four values used to determine the 
average response. Dilute any sample and the blank with equal volumes of 
water if the concentration exceeds that of the highest standard.
    11.2 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.2.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, a set of two EPA audit 
samples must be analyzed, subject to availability.
    11.2.2 Concurrently analyze the audit samples and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.
    11.2.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
shall be used for the compliance samples and the EPA audit samples. If 
this condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance 
analyses for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is 
waived. An audit sample set may not be used to validate different sets 
of compliance samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement 
agencies, unless prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement 
agencies.
    11.3 Audit Sample Results.
    11.3.1 Calculate the concentrations in mg/L of audit sample and 
submit results following the instructions provided with the audit 
samples.
    11.3.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.3.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst shall agree within 10 percent of the actual concentrations. If 
the 10 percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and 
audit samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test 
report.
    11.3.4 Failure to meet the 10 percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit 
results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Note: Retain at least one extra decimal figure beyond those 
contained in the available data in intermediate calculations, and round 
off only the final answer appropriately.

    12.1 Nomenclature.

B<INF>X</INF><SUP>-</SUP>=Mass concentration of applicable absorbing 
solution blank, [micro]g halide ion (Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, 
F<SUP>-</SUP>) /ml, not to exceed 1 [micro]g/ml which is 10 times the 
published analytical detection limit of 0.1 [micro]g/ml.
C=Concentration of hydrogen halide (HX) or halogen (X<INF>2</INF>), dry 
basis, mg/dscm.
K=10<SUP>-3</SUP> mg/[micro]g.
K<INF>HCl</INF>=1.028 ([micro]g HCl/[micro]g-mole)/([micro]g 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]g-mole).
K<INF>HBr</INF>=1.013 ([micro]g HBr/[micro]g-mole)/([micro]g 
Br<SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]g-mole).
K<INF>HF</INF>=1.053 ([micro]g HF/[micro]g-mole)/([micro]g 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]g-mole).
m<INF>HX</INF>=Mass of HCl, HBr, or HF in sample, [micro]g.
m<INF>X2</INF>=Mass of Cl<INF>2</INF> or Br<INF>2</INF> in sample, 
[micro]g.
S<INF>X</INF><SUP>-</SUP>=Analysis of sample, [micro]g halide ion 
(Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, F<SUP>-</SUP>)/ml.
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Dry gas volume measured by the dry gas meter, 
corrected to standard conditions, dscm.
V<INF>s</INF>=Volume of filtered and diluted sample, ml.

    12.2 Calculate the exact Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, and 
F<SUP>-</SUP> concentration in the halide salt stock standard solutions 
using the following equations.

[[Page 550]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.413

    12.3 Sample Volume, Dry Basis, Corrected to Standard Conditions. 
Calculate the sample volume using Eq. 6-1 of Method 6.
    12.4 Total [micro]g HCl, HBr, or HF Per Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.414
    
    12.5 Total [micro]g Cl<INF>2</INF> or Br<INF>2</INF> Per Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.415
    
    12.6 Concentration of Hydrogen Halide or Halogen in Flue Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.416
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision and Bias. The within-laboratory relative standard 
deviations are 6.2 and 3.2 percent at HCl concentrations of 3.9 and 15.3 
ppm, respectively. The method does not exhibit a bias to Cl<INF>2</INF> 
when sampling at concentrations less than 50 ppm.
    13.2 Sample Stability. The collected Cl<SUP>-</SUP>samples can be 
stored for up to 4 weeks.
    13.3 Detection Limit. A typical IC instrumental detection limit for 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP> is 0.2 [micro]g/ml. Detection limits for the other 
analyses should be similar. Assuming 50 ml liquid recovered from both 
the acidified impingers, and the basic impingers, and 0.06 dscm of stack 
gas sampled, then the analytical detection limit in the stack gas would 
be about 0.1 ppm for HCl and Cl<INF>2</INF>, respectively.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Steinsberger, S. C. and J. H. Margeson, ``Laboratory and Field 
Evaluation of a Methodology for Determination of Hydrogen Chloride 
Emissions from Municipal and Hazardous Waste Incinerators,'' U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, 
Report No. 600/3-89/064, April 1989. Available from the National 
Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161 as PB89220586/AS.
    2. State of California, Air Resources Board, Method 421, 
``Determination of Hydrochloric Acid Emissions from Stationary 
Sources,'' March 18, 1987.
    3. Cheney, J.L. and C.R. Fortune. Improvements in the Methodology 
for Measuring Hydrochloric Acid in Combustion Source Emissions. J. 
Environ. Sci. Health. A19(3): 337-350. 1984.
    4. Stern, D. A., B. M. Myatt, J. F. Lachowski, and K. T. McGregor. 
Speciation of Halogen and Hydrogen Halide Compounds in Gaseous 
Emissions. In: Incineration and Treatment of Hazardous Waste: 
Proceedings of the 9th Annual Research Symposium, Cincinnati, Ohio, May 
2-4, 1983. Publication No. 600/9-84-015. July 1984. Available from 
National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161 as PB84-
234525.
    5. Holm, R. D. and S. A. Barksdale. Analysis of Anions in Combustion 
Products. In: Ion Chromatographic Analysis of Environmental Pollutants. 
E. Sawicki, J. D. Mulik, and E. Wittgenstein (eds.). Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, Ann Arbor Science Publishers. 1978. pp. 99-110.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 551]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.417


[[Page 552]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.418

Method 26A--Determination of Hydrogen Halide and Halogen Emissions From 
                  Stationary Sources Isokinetic Method

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 2, Method 5, and Method 
26.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Analytes                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hydrogen Chloride (HCl).................................       7647-01-0
Hydrogen Bromide (HBr)..................................      10035-10-6
Hydrogen Fluoride (HF)..................................       7664-39-3
Chlorine (Cl2)..........................................       7882-50-5
Bromine (Br2)...........................................       7726-95-6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 This method is applicable for determining emissions of hydrogen 
halides (HX) [HCl, HBr, and HF] and halogens (X<INF>2</INF>) 
[Cl<INF>2</INF> and Br<INF>2</INF>] from stationary sources when 
specified by the applicable subpart. This method collects the emission 
sample isokinetically and is therefore particularly suited for sampling 
at sources, such as those controlled by wet scrubbers, emitting acid 
particulate matter (e.g., hydrogen halides dissolved in water droplets).
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Principle. Gaseous and particulate pollutants are withdrawn 
isokinetically from the source and collected in an optional cyclone, on 
a filter, and in absorbing solutions. The cyclone collects any liquid 
droplets and is not necessary if the source emissions do not contain 
them; however, it is preferable to include the cyclone in the sampling 
train to protect the filter from any liquid present. The filter collects 
particulate matter including halide salts but is not routinely recovered 
or analyzed. Acidic and alkaline absorbing solutions collect the gaseous 
hydrogen halides and halogens, respectively. Following sampling of 
emissions containing liquid droplets, any halides/halogens dissolved in 
the liquid in the cyclone and on the filter are vaporized to gas and 
collected in the impingers by pulling conditioned ambient air through 
the sampling train. The hydrogen halides are solubilized in the acidic 
solution and form chloride (Cl<SUP>-</SUP>), bromide (Br<SUP>-</SUP>),

[[Page 553]]

and fluoride (F<SUP>-</SUP>) ions. The halogens have a very low 
solubility in the acidic solution and pass through to the alkaline 
solution where they are hydrolyzed to form a proton (H<SUP>+</SUP>), the 
halide ion, and the hypohalous acid (HClO or HBrO). Sodium thiosulfate 
is added to the alkaline solution to assure reaction with the hypohalous 
acid to form a second halide ion such that 2 halide ions are formed for 
each molecule of halogen gas. The halide ions in the separate solutions 
are measured by ion chromatography (IC). If desired, the particulate 
matter recovered from the filter and the probe is analyzed following the 
procedures in Method 5.

    Note: If the tester intends to use this sampling arrangement to 
sample concurrently for particulate matter, the alternative Teflon probe 
liner, cyclone, and filter holder should not be used. The Teflon filter 
support must be used. The tester must also meet the probe and filter 
temperature requirements of both sampling trains.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Volatile materials, such as chlorine dioxide (ClO<INF>2</INF>) 
and ammonium chloride (NH<INF>4</INF>Cl), which produce halide ions upon 
dissolution during sampling are potential interferents. Interferents for 
the halide measurements are the halogen gases which disproportionate to 
a hydrogen halide and an hypohalous acid upon dissolution in water. The 
use of acidic rather than neutral or basic solutions for collection of 
the hydrogen halides greatly reduces the dissolution of any halogens 
passing through this solution.
    4.2 The simultaneous presence of both HBr and Cl<INF>2</INF> may 
cause a positive bias in the HCl result with a corresponding negative 
bias in the Cl<INF>2</INF> result as well as affecting the HBr/
Br<INF>2</INF> split.
    4.3 High concentrations of nitrogen oxides (NO<INF>X</INF>) may 
produce sufficient nitrate (NO<INF>3</INF><SUP>-</SUP>) to interfere 
with measurements of very low Br<SUP>-</SUP>levels.
    4.4 There is anecdotal evidence that HF may be outgassed from new 
Teflon components. If HF is a target analyte then preconditioning of new 
Teflon components, by heating, should be considered.

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine 
the applicability of regulatory limitations before performing this test 
method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burns as thermal 
burns.
    5.2.1 Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). Causes severe damage to eyes and 
skin. Inhalation causes irritation to nose, throat, and lungs. Reacts 
exothermically with limited amounts of water.
    5.2.2 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m<SUP>3</SUP> for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in 
higher concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. 
Reacts violently with metals and organics.

                       6.0. Equipment and Supplies

    Note: Mention of trade names or specific products does not 
constitute endorsement by the Environmental Protection Agency.

    6.1 Sampling. The sampling train is shown in Figure 26A-1; the 
apparatus is similar to the Method 5 train where noted as follows:
    6.1.1 Probe Nozzle. Borosilicate or quartz glass; constructed and 
calibrated according to Method 5, Sections 6.1.1.1 and 10.1, and coupled 
to the probe liner using a Teflon union; a stainless steel nut is 
recommended for this union. When the stack temperature exceeds 210 
[deg]C (410 [deg]F), a one-piece glass nozzle/liner assembly must be 
used.
    6.1.2 Probe Liner. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.2, except metal 
liners shall not be used. Water-cooling of the stainless steel sheath is 
recommended at temperatures exceeding 500 [deg]C (932 [deg]F). Teflon 
may be used in limited applications where the minimum stack temperature 
exceeds 120 [deg]C (250 [deg]F) but never exceeds the temperature where 
Teflon is estimated to become unstable [approximately 210 [deg]C (410 
[deg]F)].
    6.1.3 Pitot Tube, Differential Pressure Gauge, Filter Heating 
System, Metering System, Barometer, Gas Density Determination Equipment. 
Same as Method 5, Sections 6.1.1.3, 6.1.1.4, 6.1.1.6, 6.1.1.9, 6.1.2, 
and 6.1.3.
    6.1.4 Cyclone (Optional). Glass or Teflon. Use of the cyclone is 
required only when the sample gas stream is saturated with moisture; 
however, the cyclone is recommended to protect the filter from any 
liquid droplets present.
    6.1.5 Filter Holder. Borosilicate or quartz glass, or Teflon filter 
holder, with a Teflon filter support and a sealing gasket. The sealing 
gasket shall be constructed of Teflon or equivalent materials. The 
holder design shall provide a positive seal against leakage at

[[Page 554]]

any point along the filter circumference. The holder shall be attached 
immediately to the outlet of the cyclone.
    6.1.6 Impinger Train. The following system shall be used to 
determine the stack gas moisture content and to collect the hydrogen 
halides and halogens: five or six impingers connected in series with 
leak-free ground glass fittings or any similar leak-free 
noncontaminating fittings. The first impinger shown in Figure 26A-1 
(knockout or condensate impinger) is optional and is recommended as a 
water knockout trap for use under high moisture conditions. If used, 
this impinger should be constructed as described below for the alkaline 
impingers, but with a shortened stem, and should contain 50 ml of 0.1 N 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>. The following two impingers (acid impingers 
which each contain 100 ml of 0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>) shall be 
of the Greenburg-Smith design with the standard tip (Method 5, Section 
6.1.1.8). The next two impingers (alkaline impingers which each contain 
100 ml of 0.1 N NaOH) and the last impinger (containing silica gel) 
shall be of the modified Greenburg-Smith design (Method 5, Section 
6.1.1.8). The condensate, acid, and alkaline impingers shall contain 
known quantities of the appropriate absorbing reagents. The last 
impinger shall contain a known weight of silica gel or equivalent 
desiccant. Teflon impingers are an acceptable alternative.
    6.1.7 Heating System. Any heating system capable of maintaining a 
temperature around the probe and filter holder greater than 120 [deg]C 
(248 [deg]F) during sampling, or such other temperature as specified by 
an applicable subpart of the standards or approved by the Administrator 
for a particular application.
    6.1.8 Ambient Air Conditioning Tube (Optional). Tube tightly packed 
with approximately 150 g of fresh 8 to 20 mesh sodium hydroxide-coated 
silica, or equivalent, (Ascarite II has been found suitable) to dry and 
remove acid gases from the ambient air used to remove moisture from the 
filter and cyclone, when the cyclone is used. The inlet and outlet ends 
of the tube should be packed with at least 1-cm thickness of glass wool 
or filter material suitable to prevent escape of fines. Fit one end with 
flexible tubing, etc. to allow connection to probe nozzle following the 
test run.
    6.2 Sample Recovery.
    6.2.1 Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes, Wash Bottles, Glass 
Sample Storage Containers, Petri Dishes, Graduated Cylinder and/or 
Balance, and Rubber Policeman. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.2.1, 6.2.2, 
6.2.3, 6.2.4, 6.2.5, and 6.2.7.
    6.2.2 Plastic Storage Containers. Screw-cap polypropylene or 
polyethylene containers to store silica gel. High-density polyethylene 
bottles with Teflon screw cap liners to store impinger reagents, 1-
liter.
    6.2.3 Funnels. Glass or high-density polyethylene, to aid in sample 
recovery.
    6.3 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    6.3.1 Volumetric Flasks. Class A, various sizes.
    6.3.2 Volumetric Pipettes. Class A, assortment. To dilute samples to 
calibration range of the ion chromatograph (IC).
    6.3.3 Ion Chromatograph (IC). Suppressed or nonsuppressed, with a 
conductivity detector and electronic integrator operating in the peak 
area mode. Other detectors, a strip chart recorder, and peak heights may 
be used.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Note: Unless otherwise indicated, all reagents must conform to the 
specifications established by the Committee on Analytical Reagents of 
the American Chemical Society (ACS reagent grade). When such 
specifications are not available, the best available grade shall be 
used.

    7.1 Sampling.
    7.1.1 Filter. Teflon mat (e.g., Pallflex TX40HI45) filter. When the 
stack gas temperature exceeds 210 [deg]C (410 [deg]F) a quartz fiber 
filter may be used.
    7.1.2 Water. Deionized, distilled water that conforms to American 
Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specification D 1193-77 or 91, 
Type 3 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).
    7.1.3 Acidic Absorbing Solution, 0.1 N Sulfuric Acid 
(H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). To prepare 1 L, slowly add 2.80 ml of 
concentrated 17.9 M H2SO4 to about 900 ml of water while stirring, and 
adjust the final volume to 1 L using additional water. Shake well to mix 
the solution.
    7.1.4 Silica Gel, Crushed Ice, and Stopcock Grease. Same as Method 
5, Sections 7.1.2, 7.1.4, and 7.1.5, respectively.
    7.1.5 Alkaline Absorbing Solution, 0.1 N Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH). To 
prepare 1 L, dissolve 4.00 g of solid NaOH in about 900 ml of water and 
adjust the final volume to 1 L using additional water. Shake well to mix 
the solution.
    7.1.6 Sodium Thiosulfate, 
(Na<INF>2</INF>S<INF>2</INF>O<INF>3</INF>3.5 H<INF>2</INF>O).
    7.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    7.2.1 Water. Same as in Section 7.1.2.
    7.2.2 Absorbing Solution Blanks. A separate blank solution of each 
absorbing reagent should be prepared for analysis with the field 
samples. Dilute 200 ml of each absorbing solution (250 ml of the acidic 
absorbing solution, if a condensate impinger is used) to the same final 
volume as the field samples using the blank sample of rinse water. If a 
particulate determination is conducted, collect a blank sample of 
acetone.
    7.2.3 Halide Salt Stock Standard Solutions. Prepare concentrated 
stock solutions from reagent grade sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium 
bromide (NaBr), and sodium fluoride

[[Page 555]]

(NaF). Each must be dried at 110 [deg]C (230 [deg]F) for two or more 
hours and then cooled to room temperature in a desiccator immediately 
before weighing. Accurately weigh 1.6 to 1.7 g of the dried NaCl to 
within 0.1 mg, dissolve in water, and dilute to 1 liter. Calculate the 
exact Cl<SUP>-</SUP>concentration using Equation 26A-1 in Section 12.2. 
In a similar manner, accurately weigh and solubilize 1.2 to 1.3 g of 
dried NaBr and 2.2 to 2.3 g of NaF to make 1-liter solutions. Use 
Equations 26A-2 and 26A-3 in Section 12.2, to calculate the 
Br<SUP>-</SUP>and F<SUP>-</SUP>concentrations. Alternately, solutions 
containing a nominal certified concentration of 1000 mg/L NaCl are 
commercially available as convenient stock solutions from which 
standards can be made by appropriate volumetric dilution. Refrigerate 
the stock standard solutions and store no longer than one month.
    7.2.4 Chromatographic Eluent. Same as Method 26, Section 7.2.4.
    7.2.5 Water. Same as Section 7.1.1.
    7.2.6 Acetone. Same as Method 5, Section 7.2.
    7.3 Quality Assurance Audit Samples. When making compliance 
determinations, and upon availability, audit samples may be obtained 
from the appropriate EPA regional Office or from the responsible 
enforcement authority.

    Note: The responsible enforcement authority should be notified at 
least 30 days prior to the test date to allow sufficient time for sample 
delivery.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    Note: Because of the complexity of this method, testers and analysts 
should be trained and experienced with the procedures to ensure reliable 
results.

    8.1 Sampling.
    8.1.1 Pretest Preparation. Follow the general procedure given in 
Method 5, Section 8.1, except the filter need only be desiccated and 
weighed if a particulate determination will be conducted.
    8.1.2 Preliminary Determinations. Same as Method 5, Section 8.2.
    8.1.3 Preparation of Sampling Train. Follow the general procedure 
given in Method 5, Section 8.1.3, except for the following variations: 
Add 50 ml of 0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> to the condensate 
impinger, if used. Place 100 ml of 0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> in 
each of the next two impingers. Place 100 ml of 0.1 N NaOH in each of 
the following two impingers. Finally, transfer approximately 200-300 g 
of preweighed silica gel from its container to the last impinger. Set up 
the train as in Figure 26A-1. When used, the optional cyclone is 
inserted between the probe liner and filter holder and located in the 
heated filter box.
    8.1.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Follow the leak-check procedures given 
in Method 5, Sections 8.4.2 (Pretest Leak-Check), 8.4.3 (Leak-Checks 
During the Sample Run), and 8.4.4 (Post-Test Leak-Check).
    8.1.5 Sampling Train Operation. Follow the general procedure given 
in Method 5, Section 8.5. It is important to maintain a temperature 
around the probe, filter (and cyclone, if used) of greater than 120 
[deg]C (248 [deg]F) since it is extremely difficult to purge acid gases 
off these components. (These components are not quantitatively recovered 
and hence any collection of acid gases on these components would result 
in potential undereporting these emissions. The applicable subparts may 
specify alternative higher temperatures.) For each run, record the data 
required on a data sheet such as the one shown in Method 5, Figure 5-3. 
If the condensate impinger becomes too full, it may be emptied, 
recharged with 50 ml of 0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>, and replaced 
during the sample run. The condensate emptied must be saved and included 
in the measurement of the volume of moisture collected and included in 
the sample for analysis. The additional 50 ml of absorbing reagent must 
also be considered in calculating the moisture. Before the sampling 
train integrity is compromised by removing the impinger, conduct a leak-
check as described in Method 5, Section 8.4.2.
    8.1.6 Post-Test Moisture Removal (Optional). When the optional 
cyclone is included in the sampling train or when liquid is visible on 
the filter at the end of a sample run even in the absence of a cyclone, 
perform the following procedure. Upon completion of the test run, 
connect the ambient air conditioning tube at the probe inlet and operate 
the train with the filter heating system at least 120 [deg]C (248 
[deg]F) at a low flow rate (e.g., [Delta]H=1 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) to 
vaporize any liquid and hydrogen halides in the cyclone or on the filter 
and pull them through the train into the impingers. After 30 minutes, 
turn off the flow, remove the conditioning tube, and examine the cyclone 
and filter for any visible liquid. If liquid is visible, repeat this 
step for 15 minutes and observe again. Keep repeating until the cyclone 
is dry.

    Note: It is critical that this is repeated until the cyclone is 
completely dry.

    8.2 Sample Recovery. Allow the probe to cool. When the probe can be 
handled safely, wipe off all the external surfaces of the tip of the 
probe nozzle and place a cap loosely over the tip to prevent gaining or 
losing particulate matter. Do not cap the probe tip tightly while the 
sampling train is cooling down because this will create a vacuum in the 
filter holder, drawing water from the impingers into the holder. Before 
moving the sampling train to the cleanup site, remove the probe from the 
sample train, wipe off any silicone grease, and cap the open outlet of 
the impinger train, being careful not to lose any condensate that might 
be present. Wipe off

[[Page 556]]

any silicone grease and cap the filter or cyclone inlet. Remove the 
umbilical cord from the last impinger and cap the impinger. If a 
flexible line is used between the first impinger and the filter holder, 
disconnect it at the filter holder and let any condensed water drain 
into the first impinger. Wipe off any silicone grease and cap the filter 
holder outlet and the impinger inlet. Ground glass stoppers, plastic 
caps, serum caps, Teflon tape, Parafilm, or aluminum foil may be used to 
close these openings. Transfer the probe and filter/impinger assembly to 
the cleanup area. This area should be clean and protected from the 
weather to minimize sample contamination or loss. Inspect the train 
prior to and during disassembly and note any abnormal conditions. Treat 
samples as follows:
    8.2.1 Container No. 1 (Optional; Filter Catch for Particulate 
Determination). Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.1, Container No. 1.
    8.2.2 Container No. 2 (Optional; Front-Half Rinse for Particulate 
Determination). Same as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.2, Container No. 2.
    8.2.3 Container No. 3 (Knockout and Acid Impinger Catch for Moisture 
and Hydrogen Halide Determination). Disconnect the impingers. Measure 
the liquid in the acid and knockout impingers to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
ml by using a graduated cylinder or by weighing it to <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 g by using a balance. Record the volume or weight of 
liquid present. This information is required to calculate the moisture 
content of the effluent gas. Quantitatively transfer this liquid to a 
leak-free sample storage container. Rinse these impingers and connecting 
glassware including the back portion of the filter holder (and flexible 
tubing, if used) with water and add these rinses to the storage 
container. Seal the container, shake to mix, and label. The fluid level 
should be marked so that if any sample is lost during transport, a 
correction proportional to the lost volume can be applied. Retain rinse 
water and acidic absorbing solution blanks to be analyzed with the 
samples.
    8.2.4 Container No. 4 (Alkaline Impinger Catch for Halogen and 
Moisture Determination). Measure and record the liquid in the alkaline 
impingers as described in Section 8.2.3. Quantitatively transfer this 
liquid to a leak-free sample storage container. Rinse these two 
impingers and connecting glassware with water and add these rinses to 
the container. Add 25 mg of sodium thiosulfate per ppm halogen 
anticipated to be in the stack gas multiplied by the volume (dscm) of 
stack gas sampled (0.7 mg/ppm-dscf). Seal the container, shake to mix, 
and label; mark the fluid level. Retain alkaline absorbing solution 
blank to be analyzed with the samples.

    Note: 25 mg per sodium thiosulfate per ppm halogen anticipated to be 
in the stack includes a safety factor of approximately 5 to assure 
complete reaction with the hypohalous acid to form a second 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP> ion in the alkaline solution.

    8.2.5 Container No. 5 (Silica Gel for Moisture Determination). Same 
as Method 5, Section 8.7.6.3, Container No. 3.
    8.2.6 Container Nos. 6 through 9 (Reagent Blanks). Save portions of 
the absorbing reagents (0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> and 0.1 N 
NaOH) equivalent to the amount used in the sampling train; dilute to the 
approximate volume of the corresponding samples using rinse water 
directly from the wash bottle being used. Add the same ratio of sodium 
thiosulfate solution used in container No. 4 to the 0.1 N NaOH absorbing 
reagent blank. Also, save a portion of the rinse water alone and a 
portion of the acetone equivalent to the amount used to rinse the front 
half of the sampling train. Place each in a separate, prelabeled sample 
container.
    8.2.7 Prior to shipment, recheck all sample containers to ensure 
that the caps are well-secured. Seal the lids of all containers around 
the circumference with Teflon tape. Ship all liquid samples upright and 
all particulate filters with the particulate catch facing upward.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Miscellaneous Quality Control Measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
            Section                  measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.1.4, 10.1...................  Sampling           Ensure accurate
                                 equipment leak-    measurement of stack
                                 check and          gas flow rate,
                                 calibration.       sample volume.
11.5..........................  Audit sample       Evaluate analyst's
                                 analysis.          technique and
                                                    standards
                                                    preparation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9.1 Volume Metering System Checks. Same as Method 5, Section 9.2.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Probe Nozzle, Pitot Tube Assembly, Dry Gas Metering System, 
Probe Heater, Temperature Sensors, Leak-Check of Metering System, and 
Barometer. Same as Method 5, Sections 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 
8.4.1, and 10.6, respectively.
    10.2 Ion Chromatograph.

[[Page 557]]

    10.2.1 To prepare the calibration standards, dilute given amounts 
(1.0 ml or greater) of the stock standard solutions to convenient 
volumes, using 0.1 N H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> or 0.1 N NaOH, as 
appropriate. Prepare at least four calibration standards for each 
absorbing reagent containing the three stock solutions such that they 
are within the linear range of the field samples.
    10.2.2 Using one of the standards in each series, ensure adequate 
baseline separation for the peaks of interest.
    10.2.3 Inject the appropriate series of calibration standards, 
starting with the lowest concentration standard first both before and 
after injection of the quality control check sample, reagent blanks, and 
field samples. This allows compensation for any instrument drift 
occurring during sample analysis. The values from duplicate injections 
of these calibration samples should agree within 5 percent of their mean 
for the analysis to be valid.
    10.2.4 Determine the peak areas, or height, of the standards and 
plot individual values versus halide ion concentrations in [micro]g/ml.
    10.2.5 Draw a smooth curve through the points. Use linear regression 
to calculate a formula describing the resulting linear curve.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    Note: the liquid levels in the sample containers and confirm on the 
analysis sheet whether or not leakage occurred during transport. If a 
noticeable leakage has occurred, either void the sample or use methods, 
subject to the approval of the Administrator, to correct the final 
results.

    11.1 Sample Analysis.
    11.1.1 The IC conditions will depend upon analytical column type and 
whether suppressed or non-suppressed IC is used. An example chromatogram 
from a non-suppressed system using a 150-mm Hamilton PRP-X100 anion 
column, a 2 ml/min flow rate of a 4 mM 4-hydroxy benzoate solution 
adjusted to a pH of 8.6 using 1 N NaOH, a 50 [micro]l sample loop, and a 
conductivity detector set on 1.0 [micro]S full scale is shown in Figure 
26-2.
    11.1.2 Before sample analysis, establish a stable baseline. Next, 
inject a sample of water, and determine if any Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, 
Br<SUP>-</SUP>, or F<SUP>-</SUP> appears in the chromatogram. If any of 
these ions are present, repeat the load/injection procedure until they 
are no longer present. Analysis of the acid and alkaline absorbing 
solution samples requires separate standard calibration curves; prepare 
each according to Section 10.2. Ensure adequate baseline separation of 
the analyses.
    11.1.3 Between injections of the appropriate series of calibration 
standards, inject in duplicate the reagent blanks, quality control 
sample, and the field samples. Measure the areas or heights of the 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, and F<SUP>-</SUP> peaks. Use the mean 
response of the duplicate injections to determine the concentrations of 
the field samples and reagent blanks using the linear calibration curve. 
The values from duplicate injections should agree within 5 percent of 
their mean for the analysis to be valid. If the values of duplicate 
injections are not within 5 percent of the mean, the duplicator 
injections shall be repeated and all four values used to determine the 
average response. Dilute any sample and the blank with equal volumes of 
water if the concentration exceeds that of the highest standard.
    11.2 Container Nos. 1 and 2 and Acetone Blank (Optional; Particulate 
Determination). Same as Method 5, Sections 11.2.1 and 11.2.2, 
respectively.
    11.3 Container No. 5. Same as Method 5, Section 11.2.3 for silica 
gel.
    11.4 Audit Sample Analysis.
    11.4.1 When the method is used to analyze samples to demonstrate 
compliance with a source emission regulation, a set of two EPA audit 
samples must be analyzed, subject to availability.
    11.4.2 Concurrently analyze the audit samples and the compliance 
samples in the same manner to evaluate the technique of the analyst and 
the standards preparation.
    11.4.3 The same analyst, analytical reagents, and analytical system 
shall be used for the compliance samples and the EPA audit samples. If 
this condition is met, duplicate auditing of subsequent compliance 
analyses for the same enforcement agency within a 30-day period is 
waived. An audit sample set may not be used to validate different sets 
of compliance samples under the jurisdiction of separate enforcement 
agencies, unless prior arrangements have been made with both enforcement 
agencies.
    11.5 Audit Sample Results.
    11.5.1 Calculate the concentrations in mg/L of audit sample and 
submit results following the instructions provided with the audit 
samples.
    11.5.2 Report the results of the audit samples and the compliance 
determination samples along with their identification numbers, and the 
analyst's name to the responsible enforcement authority. Include this 
information with reports of any subsequent compliance analyses for the 
same enforcement authority during the 30-day period.
    11.5.3 The concentrations of the audit samples obtained by the 
analyst shall agree within 10 percent of the actual concentrations. If 
the 10 percent specification is not met, reanalyze the compliance and 
audit samples, and include initial and reanalysis values in the test 
report.
    11.5.4 Failure to meet the 10 percent specification may require 
retests until the audit problems are resolved. However, if the audit

[[Page 558]]

results do not affect the compliance or noncompliance status of the 
affected facility, the Administrator may waive the reanalysis 
requirement, further audits, or retests and accept the results of the 
compliance test. While steps are being taken to resolve audit analysis 
problems, the Administrator may also choose to use the data to determine 
the compliance or noncompliance status of the affected facility.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Note: Retain at least one extra decimal figure beyond those 
contained in the available data in intermediate calculations, and round 
off only the final answer appropriately.

    12.1 Nomenclature. Same as Method 5, Section 12.1. In addition:

B<INF>X-</INF>=Mass concentration of applicable absorbing solution 
blank, [micro]g halide ion (Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, 
F<SUP>-</SUP>)/ml, not to exceed 1 [micro]g/ml which is 10 times the 
published analytical detection limit of 0.1 [micro]g/ml. (It is also 
approximately 5 percent of the mass concentration anticipated to result 
from a one hour sample at 10 ppmv HCl.)
C=Concentration of hydrogen halide (HX) or halogen (X<INF>2</INF>), dry 
basis, mg/dscm.
K=10<SUP>-3</SUP> mg/[micro]g.
K<INF>HCl</INF>=1.028 ([micro]g HCl/[micro]g-mole)/([micro]g 
Cl<SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]g-mole).
K<INF>HBr</INF>=1.013 ([micro]g HBr/[micro]g-mole)/([micro]g 
Br<SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]g-mole).
K<INF>HF</INF>=1.053 ([micro]g HF/[micro]g-mole)/([micro]g 
F<SUP>-</SUP>/[micro]g-mole).
m<INF>HX</INF>=Mass of HCl, HBr, or HF in sample, ug.
m<INF>X2</INF>=Mass of Cl<INF>2</INF> or Br<INF>2</INF> in sample, ug.
S<INF>X-</INF>=Analysis of sample, ug halide ion (Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, 
Br<SUP>-</SUP>, F<SUP>-</SUP>)/ml.
V<INF>s</INF>=Volume of filtered and diluted sample, ml.

    12.2 Calculate the exact Cl<SUP>-</SUP>, Br<SUP>-</SUP>, and 
F<SUP>-</SUP> concentration in the halide salt stock standard solutions 
using the following equations.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.419

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.420

    12.3 Average Dry Gas Meter Temperature and Average Orifice Pressure 
Drop. See data sheet (Figure 5-3 of Method 5).
    12.4 Dry Gas Volume. Calculate V<INF>m(std)</INF> and adjust for 
leakage, if necessary, using the equation in Section 12.3 of Method 5.
    12.5 Volume of Water Vapor and Moisture Content. Calculate the 
volume of water vapor V<INF>w(std)</INF> and moisture content 
B<INF>ws</INF> from the data obtained in this method (Figure 5-3 of 
Method 5); use Equations 5-2 and 5-3 of Method 5.
    12.6 Isokinetic Variation and Acceptable Results. Use Method 5, 
Section 12.11.
    12.7 Acetone Blank Concentration, Acetone Wash Blank Residue Weight, 
Particulate Weight, and Particulate Concentration. For particulate 
determination.
    12.8 Total [micro]g HCl, HBr, or HF Per Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.421
    
    12.9 Total [micro]g Cl<INF>2</INF> or Br<INF>2</INF> Per Sample.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.422
    
    12.10 Concentration of Hydrogen Halide or Halogen in Flue Gas.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.423
    
    12.11 Stack Gas Velocity and Volumetric Flow Rate. Calculate the 
average stack gas velocity and volumetric flow rate, if needed, using 
data obtained in this method and the equations in Sections 12.3 and 12.4 
of Method 2.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision and Bias. The method has a possible measurable 
negative bias below 20 ppm HCl perhaps due to reaction with small 
amounts of moisture in the probe and filter. Similar bias for the other 
hydrogen halides is possible.
    13.2 Sample Stability. The collected Cl-samples can be stored for up 
to 4 weeks for analysis for HCl and Cl2.
    13.3 Detection Limit. A typical analytical detection limit for HCl 
is 0.2 [micro]g/ml. Detection limits for the other analyses should be 
similar. Assuming 300 ml of liquid recovered for the acidified impingers 
and a similar

[[Page 559]]

amounts recovered from the basic impingers, and 1 dscm of stack gas 
sampled, the analytical detection limits in the stack gas would be about 
0.04 ppm for HCl and Cl2, respectively.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Steinsberger, S. C. and J. H. Margeson. Laboratory and Field 
Evaluation of a Methodology for Determination of Hydrogen Chloride 
Emissions from Municipal and Hazardous Waste Incinerators. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development. 
Publication No. 600/3-89/064. April 1989. Available from National 
Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161 as PB89220586/AS.
    2. State of California Air Resources Board. Method 421--
Determination of Hydrochloric Acid Emissions from Stationary Sources. 
March 18, 1987.
    3. Cheney, J.L. and C.R. Fortune. Improvements in the Methodology 
for Measuring Hydrochloric Acid in Combustion Source Emissions. J. 
Environ. Sci. Health. A19(3): 337-350. 1984.
    4. Stern, D.A., B.M. Myatt, J.F. Lachowski, and K.T. McGregor. 
Speciation of Halogen and Hydrogen Halide Compounds in Gaseous 
Emissions. In: Incineration and Treatment of Hazardous Waste: 
Proceedings of the 9th Annual Research Symposium, Cincinnati, Ohio, May 
2-4, 1983. Publication No. 600/9-84-015. July 1984. Available from 
National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161 as PB84-
234525.
    5. Holm, R.D. and S.A. Barksdale. Analysis of Anions in Combustion 
Products. In: Ion Chromatographic Analysis of Environmental Pollutants, 
E. Sawicki, J.D. Mulik, and E. Wittgenstein (eds.). Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
Ann Arbor Science Publishers. 1978. pp. 99-110.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 560]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.424

 Method 27--Determination of Vapor Tightness of Gasoline Delivery Tank 
                       Using Pressure Vaccuum Test

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Applicability. This method is applicable for the determination 
of vapor tightness of a gasoline delivery collection equipment.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Pressure and vacuum are applied alternately to the compartments 
of a gasoline delivery tank and the change in pressure or vacuum is 
recorded after a specified period of time.

[[Page 561]]

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Allowable pressure change ([Delta]p) means the allowable amount 
of decrease in pressure during the static pressure test, within the time 
period t, as specified in the appropriate regulation, in mm 
H<INF>2</INF>O.
    3.2 Allowable vacuum change ([Delta]v) means the allowable amount of 
decrease in vacuum during the static vacuum test, within the time period 
t, as specified in the appropriate regulation, in mm H<INF>2</INF>O.
    3.3 Compartment means a liquid-tight division of a delivery tank.
    3.4 Delivery tank means a container, including associated pipes and 
fittings, that is attached to or forms a part of any truck, trailer, or 
railcar used for the transport of gasoline.
    3.5 Delivery tank vapor collection equipment means any piping, 
hoses, and devices on the delivery tank used to collect and route 
gasoline vapors either from the tank to a bulk terminal vapor control 
system or from a bulk plant or service station into the tank.
    3.6 Gasoline means a petroleum distillate or petroleum distillate/
alcohol blend having a Reid vapor pressure of 27.6 kilopascals or 
greater which is used as a fuel for internal combustion engines.
    3.7 Initial pressure (Pi) means the pressure applied to the delivery 
tank at the beginning of the static pressure test, as specified in the 
appropriate regulation, in mm H<INF>2</INF>O.
    3.8 Initial vacuum (Vi) means the vacuum applied to the delivery 
tank at the beginning of the static vacuum test, as specified in the 
appropriate regulation, in mm H<INF>3</INF>.
    3.9 Time period of the pressure or vacuum test (t) means the time 
period of the test, as specified in the appropriate regulation, during 
which the change in pressure or vacuum is monitored, in minutes.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Gasoline contains several volatile organic compounds (e.g., 
benzene and hexane) which presents a potential for fire and/or 
explosions. It is advisable to take appropriate precautions when testing 
a gasoline vessel's vapor tightness, such as refraining from smoking and 
using explosion-proof equipment.
    5.2 This method may involve hazardous materials, operations, and 
equipment. This test method may not address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
test method to establish appropriate safety and health practices and 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this test method

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    The following equipment and supplies are required for testing:
    6.1 Pressure Source. Pump or compressed gas cylinder of air or inert 
gas sufficient to pressurize the delivery tank to 500 mm (20 in.) 
H<INF>2</INF>O above atmospheric pressure.
    6.2 Regulator. Low pressure regulator for controlling pressurization 
of the delivery tank.
    6.3 Vacuum Source. Vacuum pump capable of evacuating the delivery 
tank to 250 mm (10 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O below atmospheric pressure.
    6.4 Pressure-Vacuum Supply Hose.
    6.5 Manometer. Liquid manometer, or equivalent instrument, capable 
of measuring up to 500 mm (20 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O gauge pressure with 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm (0.1 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O precision.
    6.6 Pressure-Vacuum Relief Valves. The test apparatus shall be 
equipped with an inline pressure-vacuum relief valve set to activate at 
675 mm (26.6 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O above atmospheric pressure or 250 mm 
(10 in.) H2O below atmospheric pressure, with a capacity equal to the 
pressurizing or evacuating pumps.
    6.7 Test Cap for Vapor Recovery Hose. This cap shall have a tap for 
manometer connection and a fitting with shut-off valve for connection to 
the pressure-vacuum supply hose.
    6.8 Caps for Liquid Delivery Hoses.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Pretest Preparations.
    8.1.1 Summary. Testing problems may occur due to the presence of 
volatile vapors and/or temperature fluctuations inside the delivery 
tank. Under these conditions, it is often difficult to obtain a stable 
initial pressure at the beginning of a test, and erroneous test results 
may occur. To help prevent this, it is recommended that prior to 
testing, volatile vapors be removed from the tank and the temperature 
inside the tank be allowed to stabilize. Because it is not always 
possible to completely attain these pretest conditions, a provision to 
ensure reproducible results is included. The difference in results for 
two consecutive runs must meet the criteria in Sections 8.2.2.5 and 
8.2.3.5.
    8.1.2 Emptying of Tank. The delivery tank shall be emptied of all 
liquid.
    8.1.3 Purging of Vapor. As much as possible the delivery tank shall 
be purged of all volatile vapors by any safe, acceptable method. One 
method is to carry a load of non-volatile liquid fuel, such as diesel or 
heating oil, immediately prior to the test, thus flushing out all the 
volatile gasoline vapors. A second method is to remove the volatile 
vapors by blowing ambient air into each tank compartment for at least 20 
minutes. This second method is usually not as effective and

[[Page 562]]

often causes stabilization problems, requiring a much longer time for 
stabilization during the testing.
    8.1.4 Temperature Stabilization. As much as possible, the test shall 
be conducted under isothermal conditions. The temperature of the 
delivery tank should be allowed to equilibrate in the test environment. 
During the test, the tank should be protected from extreme environmental 
and temperature variability, such as direct sunlight.
    8.2 Test Procedure.
    8.2.1 Preparations.
    8.2.1.1 Open and close each dome cover.
    8.2.1.2 Connect static electrical ground connections to the tank. 
Attach the liquid delivery and vapor return hoses, remove the liquid 
delivery elbows, and plug the liquid delivery fittings.

    Note: The purpose of testing the liquid delivery hoses is to detect 
tears or holes that would allow liquid leakage during a delivery. Liquid 
delivery hoses are not considered to be possible sources of vapor 
leakage, and thus, do not have to be attached for a vapor leakage test. 
Instead, a liquid delivery hose could be either visually inspected, or 
filled with water to detect any liquid leakage.

    8.2.1.3 Attach the test cap to the end of the vapor recovery hose.
    8.2.1.4 Connect the pressure-vacuum supply hose and the pressure-
vacuum relief valve to the shut-off valve. Attach a manometer to the 
pressure tap.
    8.2.1.5 Connect compartments of the tank internally to each other if 
possible. If not possible, each compartment must be tested separately, 
as if it were an individual delivery tank.
    8.2.2 Pressure Test.
    8.2.2.1 Connect the pressure source to the pressure-vacuum supply 
hose.
    8.2.2.2 Open the shut-off valve in the vapor recovery hose cap. 
Apply air pressure slowly, pressurize the tank to P<INF>i</INF>, the 
initial pressure specified in the regulation.
    8.2.2.3 Close the shut-off and allow the pressure in the tank to 
stabilize, adjusting the pressure if necessary to maintain pressure of 
P<INF>i</INF>. When the pressure stabilizes, record the time and initial 
pressure.
    8.2.2.4 At the end of the time period (t) specified in the 
regulation, record the time and final pressure.
    8.2.2.5 Repeat steps 8.2.2.2 through 8.2.2.4 until the change in 
pressure for two consecutive runs agrees within 12.5 mm (0.5 in.) 
H<INF>2</INF>O. Calculate the arithmetic average of the two results.
    8.2.2.6 Compare the average measured change in pressure to the 
allowable pressure change, [Delta]p, specified in the regulation. If the 
delivery tank does not satisfy the vapor tightness criterion specified 
in the regulation, repair the sources of leakage, and repeat the 
pressure test until the criterion is met.
    8.2.2.7 Disconnect the pressure source from the pressure-vacuum 
supply hose, and slowly open the shut-off valve to bring the tank to 
atmospheric pressure.
    8.2.3 Vacuum Test.
    8.2.3.1 Connect the vacuum source to the pressure-vacuum supply 
hose.
    8.2.3.2 Open the shut-off valve in the vapor recovery hose cap. 
Slowly evacuate the tank to V<INF>i</INF>, the initial vacuum specified 
in the regulation.
    8.2.3.3 Close the shut-off valve and allow the pressure in the tank 
to stabilize, adjusting the pressure if necessary to maintain a vacuum 
of V<INF>i</INF>. When the pressure stabilizes, record the time and 
initial vacuum.
    8.2.3.4 At the end of the time period specified in the regulation 
(t), record the time and final vacuum.
    8.2.3.5 Repeat steps 8.2.3.2 through 8.2.3.4 until the change in 
vacuum for two consecutive runs agrees within 12.5 mm (0.5 in.) 
H<INF>2</INF>O. Calculate the arithmetic average of the two results.
    8.2.3.6 Compare the average measured change in vacuum to the 
allowable vacuum change, [Delta]v, as specified in the regulation. If 
the delivery tank does not satisfy the vapor tightness criterion 
specified in the regulation, repair the sources of leakage, and repeat 
the vacuum test until the criterion is met.
    8.2.3.7 Disconnect the vacuum source from the pressure-vacuum supply 
hose, and slowly open the shut-off valve to bring the tank to 
atmospheric pressure.
    8.2.4 Post-Test Clean-up. Disconnect all test equipment and return 
the delivery tank to its pretest condition.

                           9.0 Quality Control

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Quality control
          Section(s)                 measure               Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2.2.5, 8.3.3.5..............  Repeat test        Ensures data
                                 procedures until   precision.
                                 change in
                                 pressure or
                                 vacuum for two
                                 consecutive runs
                                 agrees within
                                 <plus-minus<ls-
                                 thn-eq>12.5 mm
                                 (0.5 in.) H2O.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 563]]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                  11.0 Analytical Procedures [Reserved]

             12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations [Reserved]

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Precision. The vapor tightness of a gasoline delivery tank 
under positive or negative pressure, as measured by this method, is 
precise within 12.5 mm (0.5 in.) H<INF>2</INF>O
    13.2 Bias. No bias has been identified.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 The pumping of water into the bottom of a delivery tank is an 
acceptable alternative to the pressure source described above. Likewise, 
the draining of water out of the bottom of a delivery tank may be 
substituted for the vacuum source. Note that some of the specific step-
by-step procedures in the method must be altered slightly to accommodate 
these different pressure and vacuum sources.
    16.2 Techniques other than specified above may be used for purging 
and pressurizing a delivery tank, if prior approval is obtained from the 
Administrator. Such approval will be based upon demonstrated equivalency 
with the above method.

                       17.0 References [Reserved]

    18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

          Method 28--Certification and Auditing of Wood Heaters

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 1, Method 2, Method 3, 
Method 4, Method 5, Method 5G, Method 5H, Method 6, Method 6C, and 
Method 16A.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.
    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the certification 
and auditing of wood heaters, including pellet burning wood heaters.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Particulate matter emissions are measured from a wood heater 
burning a prepared test fuel crib in a test facility maintained at a set 
of prescribed conditions. Procedures for determining burn rates and 
particulate emission rates and for reducing data are provided.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 2 x 4 or 4 x 4 means two inches by four inches or four inches by 
four inches (50 mm by 100 mm or 100 mm by 100 mm), as nominal dimensions 
for lumber.
    3.2 Burn rate means the rate at which test fuel is consumed in a 
wood heater. Measured in kilograms or lbs of wood (dry basis) per hour 
(kg/hr or lb/hr).
    3.3 Certification or audit test means a series of at least four test 
runs conducted for certification or audit purposes that meets the burn 
rate specifications in Section 8.4.
    3.4 Firebox means the chamber in the wood heater in which the test 
fuel charge is placed and combusted.
    3.5 Height means the vertical distance extending above the loading 
door, if fuel could reasonably occupy that space, but not more than 2 
inches above the top (peak height) of the loading door, to the floor of 
the firebox (i.e., below a permanent grate) if the grate allows a 1-inch 
diameter piece of wood to pass through the grate, or, if not, to the top 
of the grate. Firebox height is not necessarily uniform but must account 
for variations caused by internal baffles, air channels, or other 
permanent obstructions.
    3.6 Length means the longest horizontal fire chamber dimension that 
is parallel to a wall of the chamber.
    3.7 Pellet burning wood heater means a wood heater which meets the 
following criteria: (1) The manufacturer makes no reference to burning 
cord wood in advertising or other literature, (2) the unit is safety 
listed for pellet fuel only, (3) the unit operating and instruction 
manual must state that the use of cordwood is prohibited by law, and (4) 
the unit must be manufactured and sold including the hopper and auger 
combination as integral parts.
    3.8 Secondary air supply means an air supply that introduces air to 
the wood heater such that the burn rate is not altered by more than 25 
percent when the secondary air supply is adjusted during the test run. 
The wood heater manufacturer can document this through design drawings 
that show the secondary air is introduced only into a mixing chamber or 
secondary chamber outside the firebox.

[[Page 564]]

    3.9 Test facility means the area in which the wood heater is 
installed, operated, and sampled for emissions.
    3.10 Test fuel charge means the collection of test fuel pieces 
placed in the wood heater at the start of the emission test run.
    3.11 Test fuel crib means the arrangement of the test fuel charge 
with the proper spacing requirements between adjacent fuel pieces.
    3.12 Test fuel loading density means the weight of the as-fired test 
fuel charge per unit volume of usable firebox.
    3.13 Test fuel piece means the 2 x 4 or 4 x 4 wood piece cut to the 
length required for the test fuel charge and used to construct the test 
fuel crib.
    3.14 Test run means an individual emission test which encompasses 
the time required to consume the mass of the test fuel charge.
    3.15 Usable firebox volume means the volume of the firebox 
determined using its height, length, and width as defined in this 
section.
    3.16 Width means the shortest horizontal fire chamber dimension that 
is parallel to a wall of the chamber.
    3.17 Wood heater means an enclosed, woodburning appliance capable of 
and intended for space heating or domestic water heating, as defined in 
the applicable regulation.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of either Method 5G or Method 5H, with the 
addition of the following:
    6.1 Insulated Solid Pack Chimney. For installation of wood heaters. 
Solid pack insulated chimneys shall have a minimum of 2.5 cm (1 in.) 
solid pack insulating material surrounding the entire flue and possess a 
label demonstrating conformance to U.L. 103 (incorporated by reference--
see Sec. 60.17).
    6.2 Platform Scale and Monitor. For monitoring of fuel load weight 
change. The scale shall be capable of measuring weight to within 0.05 kg 
(0.1 lb) or 1 percent of the initial test fuel charge weight, whichever 
is greater.
    6.3 Wood Heater Temperature Monitors. Seven, each capable of 
measuring temperature to within 1.5 percent of expected absolute 
temperatures.
    6.4 Test Facility Temperature Monitor. A thermocouple located 
centrally in a vertically oriented 150 mm (6 in.) long, 50 mm (2 in.) 
diameter pipe shield that is open at both ends, capable of measuring 
temperature to within 1.5 percent of expected temperatures.
    6.5 Balance (optional). Balance capable of weighing the test fuel 
charge to within 0.05 kg (0.1 lb).
    6.6 Moisture Meter. Calibrated electrical resistance meter for 
measuring test fuel moisture to within 1 percent moisture content.
    6.7 Anemometer. Device capable of detecting air velocities less than 
0.10 m/sec (20 ft/min), for measuring air velocities near the test 
appliance.
    6.8 Barometer. Mercury, aneroid or other barometer capable of 
measuring atmospheric pressure to within 2.5 mm Hg (0.1 in. Hg).
    6.9 Draft Gauge. Electromanometer or other device for the 
determination of flue draft or static pressure readable to within 0.50 
Pa (0.002 in. H<INF>2</INF>O).
    6.10 Humidity Gauge. Psychrometer or hygrometer for measuring room 
humidity.
    6.11 Wood Heater Flue.
    6.11.1 Steel flue pipe extending to 2.6 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.15 m 
(8.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 ft) above the top of the platform scale, 
and above this level, insulated solid pack type chimney extending to 4.6 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 m (15 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ft) above the 
platform scale, and of the size specified by the wood heater 
manufacturer. This applies to both freestanding and insert type wood 
heaters.
    6.11.2 Other chimney types (e.g., solid pack insulated pipe) may be 
used in place of the steel flue pipe if the wood heater manufacturer's 
written appliance specifications require such chimney for home 
installation (e.g., zero clearance wood heater inserts). Such 
alternative chimney or flue pipe must remain and be sealed with the wood 
heater following the certification test.
    6.12 Test Facility. The test facility shall meet the following 
requirements during testing:
    6.12.1 The test facility temperature shall be maintained between 18 
and 32 [deg]C (65 and 90 [deg]F) during each test run.
    6.12.2 Air velocities within 0.6 m (2 ft) of the test appliance and 
exhaust system shall be less than 0.25 m/sec (50 ft/min) without fire in 
the unit.
    6.12.3 The flue shall discharge into the same space or into a space 
freely communicating with the test facility. Any hood or similar device 
used to vent combustion products shall not induce a draft greater than 
1.25 Pa (0.005 in. H<INF>2</INF>O) on the wood heater measured when the 
wood heater is not operating.
    6.12.4 For test facilities with artificially induced barometric 
pressures (e.g., pressurized chambers), the barometric pressure in

[[Page 565]]

the test facility shall not exceed 775 mm Hg (30.5 in. Hg) during any 
test run.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 6.0 of either Method 5G or Method 5H, with the 
addition of the following:
    7.1 Test Fuel. The test fuel shall conform to the following 
requirements:
    7.1.1 Fuel Species. Untreated, air-dried, Douglas fir lumber. Kiln-
dried lumber is not permitted. The lumber shall be certified C grade 
(standard) or better Douglas fir by a lumber grader at the mill of 
origin as specified in the West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau Standard 
No. 16 (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17).
    7.1.2 Fuel Moisture. The test fuel shall have a moisture content 
range between 16 to 20 percent on a wet basis (19 to 25 percent dry 
basis). Addition of moisture to previously dried wood is not allowed. It 
is recommended that the test fuel be stored in a temperature and 
humidity-controlled room.
    7.1.3 Fuel Temperature. The test fuel shall be at the test facility 
temperature of 18 to 32 [deg]C (65 to 90 [deg]F).
    7.1.4 Fuel Dimensions. The dimensions of each test fuel piece shall 
conform to the nominal measurements of 2x4 and 4x4 lumber. Each piece of 
test fuel (not including spacers) shall be of equal length, except as 
necessary to meet requirements in Section 8.8, and shall closely 
approximate \5/6\ the dimensions of the length of the usable firebox. 
The fuel piece dimensions shall be determined in relation to the 
appliance's firebox volume according to guidelines listed below:
    7.1.4.1 If the usable firebox volume is less than or equal to 0.043 
m<SUP>3</SUP> (1.5 ft<SUP>3</SUP>), use 2x4 lumber.
    7.1.4.2 If the usable firebox volume is greater than 0.043 
m<SUP>3</SUP> (1.5 ft<SUP>3</SUP>) and less than or equal to 0.085 
m<SUP>3</SUP> (3.0 ft<SUP>3</SUP>), use 2x4 and 4x4 lumber. About half 
the weight of the test fuel charge shall be 2x4 lumber, and the 
remainder shall be 4x4 lumber.
    7.1.4.3 If the usable firebox volume is greater than 0.085 
m<SUP>3</SUP> (3.0 ft<SUP>3</SUP>), use 4x4 lumber.
    7.2 Test Fuel Spacers. Air-dried, Douglas fir lumber meeting the 
requirements outlined in Sections 7.1.1 through 7.1.3. The spacers shall 
be 130x40x20 mm (5x1.5x0.75 in.).

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Test Run Requirements.
    8.1.1 Burn Rate Categories. One emission test run is required in 
each of the following burn rate categories:

                                              Burn Rate Categories
                                       [Average kg/hr (lb/hr), dry basis]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Category 1                      Category 2               Category 3               Category 4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<0.80................................  0.80 to 1.25...........  1.25 to 1.90...........  Maximum.
(<1.76)..............................  (1.76 to 2.76).........  (2.76 to 4.19).........  burn rate.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    8.1.1.1 Maximum Burn Rate. For Category 4, the wood heater shall be 
operated with the primary air supply inlet controls fully open (or, if 
thermostatically controlled, the thermostat shall be set at maximum heat 
output) during the entire test run, or the maximum burn rate setting 
specified by the manufacturer's written instructions.
    8.1.1.2 Other Burn Rate Categories. For burn rates in Categories 1 
through 3, the wood heater shall be operated with the primary air supply 
inlet control, or other mechanical control device, set at a 
predetermined position necessary to obtain the average burn rate 
required for the category.
    8.1.1.3 Alternative Burn Rates for Burn Rate Categories 1 and 2.
    8.1.1.3.1 If a wood heater cannot be operated at a burn rate below 
0.80 kg/hr (1.76 lb/hr), two test runs shall be conducted with burn 
rates within Category 2. If a wood heater cannot be operated at a burn 
rate below 1.25 kg/hr (2.76 lb/hr), the flue shall be dampered or the 
air supply otherwise controlled in order to achieve two test runs within 
Category 2.
    8.1.1.3.2 Evidence that a wood heater cannot be operated at a burn 
rate less than 0.80 kg/hr shall include documentation of two or more 
attempts to operate the wood heater in burn rate Category 1 and fuel 
combustion has stopped, or results of two or more test runs 
demonstrating that the burn rates were greater than 0.80 kg/hr when the 
air supply controls were adjusted to the lowest possible position or 
settings. Stopped fuel combustion is evidenced when an elapsed time of 
30 minutes or more has occurred without a measurable (< 0.05 kg (0.1 lb) 
or 1.0 percent, whichever is greater) weight change in the test fuel 
charge. See also Section 8.8.3. Report the evidence and the reasoning 
used to determine that a test in burn rate Category 1 cannot be 
achieved; for example, two unsuccessful attempts to operate at a burn 
rate of 0.4 kg/hr are not sufficient evidence that burn rate Category 1 
cannot be achieved.

    Note: After July 1, 1990, if a wood heater cannot be operated at a 
burn rate less than 0.80 kg/hr, at least one test run with an average 
burn rate of 1.00 kg/hr or less shall be conducted. Additionally, if 
flue dampering

[[Page 566]]

must be used to achieve burn rates below 1.25 kg/hr (or 1.0 kg/hr), 
results from a test run conducted at burn rates below 0.90 kg/hr need 
not be reported or included in the test run average provided that such 
results are replaced with results from a test run meeting the criteria 
above.

    8.2 Catalytic Combustor and Wood Heater Aging. The catalyst-equipped 
wood heater or a wood heater of any type shall be aged before the 
certification test begins. The aging procedure shall be conducted and 
documented by a testing laboratory accredited according to procedures in 
Sec. 60.535 of 40 CFR part 60.
    8.2.1 Catalyst-equipped Wood Heater. Operate the catalyst-equipped 
wood heater using fuel meeting the specifications outlined in Sections 
7.1.1 through 7.1.3, or cordwood with a moisture content between 15 and 
25 percent on a wet basis. Operate the wood heater at a medium burn rate 
(Category 2 or 3) with a new catalytic combustor in place and in 
operation for at least 50 hours. Record and report hourly catalyst exit 
temperature data (Section 8.6.2) and the hours of operation.
    8.2.2 Non-Catalyst Wood Heater. Operate the wood heater using the 
fuel described in Section 8.4.1 at a medium burn rate for at least 10 
hours. Record and report the hours of operation.
    8.3 Pretest Recordkeeping. Record the test fuel charge dimensions 
and weights, and wood heater and catalyst descriptions as shown in the 
example in Figure 28-1.
    8.4 Wood Heater Installation. Assemble the wood heater appliance and 
parts in conformance with the manufacturer's written installation 
instructions. Place the wood heater centrally on the platform scale and 
connect the wood heater to the flue described in Section 6.11. Clean the 
flue with an appropriately sized, wire chimney brush before each 
certification test.
    8.5 Wood Heater Temperature Monitors.
    8.5.1 For catalyst-equipped wood heaters, locate a temperature 
monitor (optional) about 25 mm (1 in.) upstream of the catalyst at the 
centroid of the catalyst face area, and locate a temperature monitor 
(mandatory) that will indicate the catalyst exhaust temperature. This 
temperature monitor is centrally located within 25 mm (1 in.) downstream 
at the centroid of catalyst face area. Record these locations.
    8.5.2 Locate wood heater surface temperature monitors at five 
locations on the wood heater firebox exterior surface. Position the 
temperature monitors centrally on the top surface, on two sidewall 
surfaces, and on the bottom and back surfaces. Position the monitor 
sensing tip on the firebox exterior surface inside of any heat shield, 
air circulation walls, or other wall or shield separated from the 
firebox exterior surface. Surface temperature locations for unusual 
design shapes (e.g., spherical, etc.) shall be positioned so that there 
are four surface temperature monitors in both the vertical and 
horizontal planes passing at right angles through the centroid of the 
firebox, not including the fuel loading door (total of five temperature 
monitors).
    8.6 Test Facility Conditions.
    8.6.1 Locate the test facility temperature monitor on the horizontal 
plane that includes the primary air intake opening for the wood heater. 
Locate the temperature monitor 1 to 2 m (3 to 6 ft) from the front of 
the wood heater in the 90[deg] sector in front of the wood heater.
    8.6.2 Use an anemometer to measure the air velocity. Measure and 
record the room air velocity before the pretest ignition period (Section 
8.7) and once immediately following the test run completion.
    8.6.3 Measure and record the test facility's ambient relative 
humidity, barometric pressure, and temperature before and after each 
test run.
    8.6.4 Measure and record the flue draft or static pressure in the 
flue at a location no greater than 0.3 m (1 ft) above the flue connector 
at the wood heater exhaust during the test run at the recording 
intervals (Section 8.8.2).
    8.7 Wood Heater Firebox Volume.
    8.7.1 Determine the firebox volume using the definitions for height, 
width, and length in Section 3. Volume adjustments due to presence of 
firebrick and other permanent fixtures may be necessary. Adjust width 
and length dimensions to extend to the metal wall of the wood heater 
above the firebrick or permanent obstruction if the firebrick or 
obstruction extending the length of the side(s) or back wall extends 
less than one-third of the usable firebox height. Use the width or 
length dimensions inside the firebrick if the firebrick extends more 
than one-third of the usable firebox height. If a log retainer or grate 
is a permanent fixture and the manufacturer recommends that no fuel be 
placed outside the retainer, the area outside of the retainer is 
excluded from the firebox volume calculations.
    8.7.2 In general, exclude the area above the ash lip if that area is 
less than 10 percent of the usable firebox volume. Otherwise, take into 
account consumer loading practices. For instance, if fuel is to be 
loaded front-to-back, an ash lip may be considered usable firebox 
volume.
    8.7.3 Include areas adjacent to and above a baffle (up to two inches 
above the fuel loading opening) if four inches or more horizontal space 
exist between the edge of the baffle and a vertical obstruction (e.g., 
sidewalls or air channels).
    8.8 Test Fuel Charge.
    8.8.1 Prepare the test fuel pieces in accordance with the 
specifications outlined in Sections 7.1 and 7.2. Determine the test fuel

[[Page 567]]

moisture content with a calibrated electrical resistance meter or other 
equivalent performance meter. If necessary, convert fuel moisture 
content values from dry basis (%M<INF>d</INF>) to wet basis 
(%M<INF>w</INF>) in Section 12.2 using Equation 28-1. Determine fuel 
moisture for each fuel piece (not including spacers) by averaging at 
least three moisture meter readings, one from each of three sides, 
measured parallel to the wood grain. Average all the readings for all 
the fuel pieces in the test fuel charge. If an electrical resistance 
type meter is used, penetration of insulated electrodes shall be one-
fourth the thickness of the test fuel piece or 19 mm (0.75 in.), 
whichever is greater. Measure the moisture content within a 4-hour 
period prior to the test run. Determine the fuel temperature by 
measuring the temperature of the room where the wood has been stored for 
at least 24 hours prior to the moisture determination.
    8.8.2 Attach the spacers to the test fuel pieces with uncoated, 
ungalvanized nails or staples as illustrated in Figure 28-2. Attachment 
of spacers to the top of the test fuel piece(s) on top of the test fuel 
charge is optional.
    8.8.3 To avoid stacking difficulties, or when a whole number of test 
fuel pieces does not result, all piece lengths shall be adjusted 
uniformly to remain within the specified loading density. The shape of 
the test fuel crib shall be geometrically similar to the shape of the 
firebox volume without resorting to special angular or round cuts on the 
individual fuel pieces.
    8.8.4 The test fuel loading density shall be 112 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>11.2 kg/m<SUP>3</SUP> (7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.7 lb/
ft3) of usable firebox volume on a wet basis.
    8.9 Sampling Equipment. Prepare the sampling equipment as defined by 
the selected method (i.e., either Method 5G or Method 5H). Collect one 
particulate emission sample for each test run.
    8.10 Secondary Air Adjustment Validation.
    8.10.1 If design drawings do not show the introduction of secondary 
air into a chamber outside the firebox (see ``secondary air supply'' 
under Section 3.0, Definitions), conduct a separate test of the wood 
heater's secondary air supply. Operate the wood heater at a burn rate in 
Category 1 (Section 8.1.1) with the secondary air supply operated 
following the manufacturer's written instructions. Start the secondary 
air validation test run as described in Section 8.8.1, except no 
emission sampling is necessary and burn rate data shall be recorded at 
5-minute intervals.
    8.10.2 After the start of the test run, operate the wood heater with 
the secondary air supply set as per the manufacturer's instructions, but 
with no adjustments to this setting. After 25 percent of the test fuel 
has been consumed, adjust the secondary air supply controls to another 
setting, as per the manufacturer's instructions. Record the burn rate 
data (5-minute intervals) for 20 minutes following the air supply 
adjustment.
    8.10.3 Adjust the air supply control(s) to the original position(s), 
operate at this condition for at least 20 minutes, and repeat the air 
supply adjustment procedure above. Repeat the procedure three times at 
equal intervals over the entire burn period as defined in Section 8.8. 
If the secondary air adjustment results in a burn rate change of more 
than an average of 25 percent between the 20-minute periods before and 
after the secondary adjustments, the secondary air supply shall be 
considered a primary air supply, and no adjustment to this air supply is 
allowed during the test run.
    8.10.4 The example sequence below describes a typical secondary air 
adjustment validation check. The first cycle begins after at least 25 
percent of the test fuel charge has been consumed.

Cycle 1
    Part 1, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
    Part 2, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
    Part 3, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
Cycle 2
    Part 1, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
    Part 2, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
    Part 3, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
Cycle 3
    Part 1, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
    Part 2, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min
    Part 3, sec air adjusted to final position--20 min

Note that the cycles may overlap; that is, Part 3 of Cycle 1 may 
coincide in part or in total with Part 1 of Cycle 2. The calculation of 
the secondary air percent effect for this example is as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.425


[[Page 568]]


    8.11 Pretest Ignition. Build a fire in the wood heater in accordance 
with the manufacturer's written instructions.
    8.11.1 Pretest Fuel Charge. Crumpled newspaper loaded with kindling 
may be used to help ignite the pretest fuel. The pretest fuel, used to 
sustain the fire, shall meet the same fuel requirements prescribed in 
Section 7.1. The pretest fuel charge shall consist of whole 2x4's that 
are no less than \1/3\ the length of the test fuel pieces. Pieces of 4x4 
lumber in approximately the same weight ratio as for the test fuel 
charge may be added to the pretest fuel charge.
    8.11.2 Wood Heater Operation and Adjustments. Set the air inlet 
supply controls at any position that will maintain combustion of the 
pretest fuel load. At least one hour before the start of the test run, 
set the air supply controls at the approximate positions necessary to 
achieve the burn rate desired for the test run. Adjustment of the air 
supply controls, fuel addition or subtractions, and coalbed raking shall 
be kept to a minimum but are allowed up to 15 minutes prior to the start 
of the test run. For the purposes of this method, coalbed raking is the 
use of a metal tool (poker) to stir coals, break burning fuel into 
smaller pieces, dislodge fuel pieces from positions of poor combustion, 
and check for the condition of uniform charcoalization. Record all 
adjustments made to the air supply controls, adjustments to and 
additions or subtractions of fuel, and any other changes to wood heater 
operations that occur during pretest ignition period. Record fuel weight 
data and wood heater temperature measurements at 10-minute intervals 
during the hour of the pretest ignition period preceding the start of 
the test run. During the 15-minute period prior to the start of the test 
run, the wood heater loading door shall not be open more than a total of 
1 minute. Coalbed raking is the only adjustment allowed during this 
period.

    Note: One purpose of the pretest ignition period is to achieve 
uniform charcoalization of the test fuel bed prior to loading the test 
fuel charge. Uniform charcoalization is a general condition of the test 
fuel bed evidenced by an absence of large pieces of burning wood in the 
coal bed and the remaining fuel pieces being brittle enough to be broken 
into smaller charcoal pieces with a metal poker. Manipulations to the 
fuel bed prior to the start of the test run should be done to achieve 
uniform charcoalization while maintaining the desired burn rate. In 
addition, some wood heaters (e.g., high mass units) may require extended 
pretest burn time and fuel additions to reach an initial average surface 
temperature sufficient to meet the thermal equilibrium criteria in 
Section 8.3.

    8.11.3 The weight of pretest fuel remaining at the start of the test 
run is determined as the difference between the weight of the wood 
heater with the remaining pretest fuel and the tare weight of the 
cleaned, dry wood heater with or without dry ash or sand added 
consistent with the manufacturer's instructions and the owner's manual. 
The tare weight of the wood heater must be determined with the wood 
heater (and ash, if added) in a dry condition.
    8.12 Test Run. Complete a test run in each burn rate category, as 
follows:
    8.12.1 Test Run Start.
    8.12.1.1 When the kindling and pretest fuel have been consumed to 
leave a fuel weight between 20 and 25 percent of the weight of the test 
fuel charge, record the weight of the fuel remaining and start the test 
run. Record and report any other criteria, in addition to those 
specified in this section, used to determine the moment of the test run 
start (e.g., firebox or catalyst temperature), whether such criteria are 
specified by the wood heater manufacturer or the testing laboratory. 
Record all wood heater individual surface temperatures, catalyst 
temperatures, any initial sampling method measurement values, and begin 
the particulate emission sampling. Within 1 minute following the start 
of the test run, open the wood heater door, load the test fuel charge, 
and record the test fuel charge weight. Recording of average, rather 
than individual, surface temperatures is acceptable for tests conducted 
in accordance with Sec. 60.533(o)(3)(i) of 40 CFR part 60.
    8.12.1.2 Position the fuel charge so that the spacers are parallel 
to the floor of the firebox, with the spacer edges abutting each other. 
If loading difficulties result, some fuel pieces may be placed on edge. 
If the usable firebox volume is between 0.043 and 0.085 m<SUP>3</SUP> 
(1.5 and 3.0 ft<SUP>3</SUP>), alternate the piece sizes in vertical 
stacking layers to the extent possible. For example, place 2 x 4's on 
the bottom layer in direct contact with the coal bed and 4 x 4's on the 
next layer, etc. (See Figure 28-3). Position the fuel pieces parallel to 
each other and parallel to the longest wall of the firebox to the extent 
possible within the specifications in Section 8.8.
    8.12.1.3 Load the test fuel in appliances having unusual or 
unconventional firebox design maintaining air space intervals between 
the test fuel pieces and in conformance with the manufacturer's written 
instructions. For any appliance that will not accommodate the loading 
arrangement specified in the paragraph above, the test facility 
personnel shall contact the Administrator for an alternative loading 
arrangement.
    8.12.1.4 The wood heater door may remain open and the air supply 
controls adjusted up to five minutes after the start of the test run in 
order to make adjustments to the test fuel charge and to ensure ignition 
of the test fuel charge has occurred. Within the five minutes after the 
start of the test run, close the wood heater door and adjust the air 
supply controls to the position determined to produce

[[Page 569]]

the desired burn rate. No other adjustments to the air supply controls 
or the test fuel charge are allowed (except as specified in Sections 
8.12.3 and 8.12.4) after the first five minutes of the test run. Record 
the length of time the wood heater door remains open, the adjustments to 
the air supply controls, and any other operational adjustments.
    8.12.2 Data Recording. Record on a data sheet similar to that shown 
in Figure 28-4, at intervals no greater than 10 minutes, fuel weight 
data, wood heater individual surface and catalyst temperature 
measurements, other wood heater operational data (e.g., draft), test 
facility temperature and sampling method data.
    8.12.3 Test Fuel Charge Adjustment. The test fuel charge may be 
adjusted (i.e., repositioned) once during a test run if more than 60 
percent of the initial test fuel charge weight has been consumed and 
more than 10 minutes have elapsed without a measurable (<0.05 kg (0.1 
lb) or 1.0 percent, whichever is greater) weight change. The time used 
to make this adjustment shall be less than 15 seconds.
    8.12.4 Air Supply Adjustment. Secondary air supply controls may be 
adjusted once during the test run following the manufacturer's written 
instructions (see Section 8.10). No other air supply adjustments are 
allowed during the test run. Recording of wood heater flue draft during 
the test run is optional for tests conducted in accordance with Sec. 
60.533(o)(3)(i) of 40 CFR part 60.
    8.12.5 Auxiliary Wood Heater Equipment Operation. Heat exchange 
blowers sold with the wood heater shall be operated during the test run 
following the manufacturer's written instructions. If no manufacturer's 
written instructions are available, operate the heat exchange blower in 
the ``high'' position. (Automatically operated blowers shall be operated 
as designed.) Shaker grates, by-pass controls, or other auxiliary 
equipment may be adjusted only one time during the test run following 
the manufacturer's written instructions.
    Record all adjustments on a wood heater operational written record.

    Note: If the wood heater is sold with a heat exchange blower as an 
option, test the wood heater with the heat exchange blower operating as 
described in Sections 8.1 through 8.12 and report the results. As an 
alternative to repeating all test runs without the heat exchange blower 
operating, one additional test run may be without the blower operating 
as described in Section 8.12.5 at a burn rate in Category 2 (Section 
8.1.1). If the emission rate resulting from this test run without the 
blower operating is equal to or less than the emission rate plus 1.0 g/
hr (0.0022 lb/hr) for the test run in burn rate Category 2 with the 
blower operating, the wood heater may be considered to have the same 
average emission rate with or without the blower operating. Additional 
test runs without the blower operating are unnecessary.

    8.13 Test Run Completion. Continue emission sampling and wood heater 
operation for 2 hours. The test run is completed when the remaining 
weight of the test fuel charge is 0.00 kg (0.0 lb). End the test run 
when the scale has indicated a test fuel charge weight of 0.00 kg (0.0 
lb) or less for 30 seconds. At the end of the test run, stop the 
particulate sampling, and record the final fuel weight, the run time, 
and all final measurement values.
    8.14 Wood Heater Thermal Equilibrium. The average of the wood heater 
surface temperatures at the end of the test run shall agree with the 
average surface temperature at the start of the test run to within 70 
[deg]C (126 [deg]F).
    8.15 Consecutive Test Runs. Test runs on a wood heater may be 
conducted consecutively provided that a minimum one-hour interval occurs 
between test runs.
    8.16 Additional Test Runs. The testing laboratory may conduct more 
than one test run in each of the burn rate categories specified in 
Section 8.1.1. If more than one test run is conducted at a specified 
burn rate, the results from at least two-thirds of the test runs in that 
burn rate category shall be used in calculating the weighted average 
emission rate (see Section 12.2). The measurement data and results of 
all test runs shall be reported regardless of which values are used in 
calculating the weighted average emission rate (see Note in Section 
8.1).

                           9.0 Quality Control

    Same as Section 9.0 of either Method 5G or Method 5H.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardizations

    Same as Section 10.0 of either Method 5G or Method 5H, with the 
addition of the following:
    10.1 Platform Scale. Perform a multi-point calibration (at least 
five points spanning the operational range) of the platform scale before 
its initial use. The scale manufacturer's calibration results are 
sufficient for this purpose. Before each certification test, audit the 
scale with the wood heater in place by weighing at least one calibration 
weight (Class F) that corresponds to between 20 percent and 80 percent 
of the expected test fuel charge weight. If the scale cannot reproduce 
the value of the calibration weight within 0.05 kg (0.1 lb) or 1 percent 
of the expected test fuel charge weight, whichever is greater, 
recalibrate the scale before use with at least five calibration weights 
spanning the operational range of the scale.
    10.2 Balance (optional). Calibrate as described in Section 10.1.

[[Page 570]]

    10.3 Temperature Monitor. Calibrate as in Method 2, Section 4.3, 
before the first certification test and semiannually thereafter.
    10.4 Moisture Meter. Calibrate as per the manufacturer's 
instructions before each certification test.
    10.5 Anemometer. Calibrate the anemometer as specified by the 
manufacturer's instructions before the first certification test and 
semiannually thereafter.
    10.6 Barometer. Calibrate against a mercury barometer before the 
first certification test and semiannually thereafter.
    10.7 Draft Gauge. Calibrate as per the manufacturer's instructions; 
a liquid manometer does not require calibration.
    10.8 Humidity Gauge. Calibrate as per the manufacturer's 
instructions before the first certification test and semiannually 
thereafter.

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    Same as Section 11.0 of either Method 5G or Method 5H.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Section 12.0 of either Method 5G or Method 5H, with the 
addition of the following:
    12.1 Nomenclature.

BR=Dry wood burn rate, kg/hr (lb/hr)
E<INF>i</INF>=Emission rate for test run, i, from Method 5G or 5H, g/hr 
(lb/hr)
E<INF>w</INF>=Weighted average emission rate, g/hr (lb/hr)
k<INF>i</INF>=Test run weighting factor=P<INF>i+1</INF> - 
P<INF>i-1</INF>
%M<INF>d</INF>=Fuel moisture content, dry basis, percent.
%M<INF>w</INF>=Average moisture in test fuel charge, wet basis, percent.
n=Total number of test runs.
P<INF>i</INF>=Probability for burn rate during test run, i, obtained 
from Table 28-1. Use linear interpolation to determine probability 
values for burn rates between those listed on the table.
W<INF>wd</INF>=Total mass of wood burned during the test run, kg (lb).

    12.2 Wet Basis Fuel Moisture Content.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.426
    
    12.3 Weighted Average Emission Rate. Calculate the weighted average 
emission rate (E<INF>w</INF>) using Equation 28-1:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.427

    Note: P<INF>o</INF> always equals 0, P<INF>(n+1)</INF> always equals 
1, P<INF>1</INF> corresponds to the probability of the lowest recorded 
burn rate, P<INF>2</INF> corresponds to the probability of the next 
lowest burn rate, etc. An example calculation is in Section 12.3.1.

    12.3.1 Example Calculation of Weighted Average Emission Rate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Burn rate    Emissions
        Burn rate category          Test  No.   (Dry-kg/hr)     (g/hr)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1................................            1         0.65          5.0
2\1\.............................            2         0.85          6.7
2................................            3         0.90          4.7
2................................            4         1.00          5.3
3................................            5         1.45          3.8
4................................            6         2.00         5.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ As permitted in Section 6.6, this test run may be omitted from the
  calculation of the weighted average emission rate because three runs
  were conducted for this burn rate category.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Test No.                             Burn rate        Pi           Ei           Ki
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0...........................................................  ...........        0.000  ...........  ...........
1...........................................................         0.65        0.121          5.0        0.300
2...........................................................         0.90        0.300          4.7        0.259
3...........................................................         1.00        0.380          5.3        0.422
4...........................................................         1.45        0.722          3.8        0.532
5...........................................................         2.00        0.912          5.1        0.278
6...........................................................  ...........        1.000  ...........  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
K1=P2 - P0=0.300 - 0=0.300
K2=P3 - P1=0.381 - 0.121=0.259
K3=P4 - P2=0.722 - 0.300=0.422
K4=P5 - P3=0.912 - 0.380=0.532
K5=P6 - P4=1.000 - 0.722=0.278

       Weighted Average Emission Rate, E<INF>w</INF>, Calculation

[[Page 571]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.428

    12.4 Average Wood Heater Surface Temperatures. Calculate the average 
of the wood heater surface temperatures for the start of the test run 
(Section 8.12.1) and for the test run completion (Section 8.13). If the 
two average temperatures do not agree within 70 [deg]C (125 [deg]F), 
report the test run results, but do not include the test run results in 
the test average. Replace such test run results with results from 
another test run in the same burn rate category.
    12.5 Burn Rate. Calculate the burn rate (BR) using Equation 28-3:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.429
    
    12.6 Reporting Criteria. Submit both raw and reduced test data for 
wood heater tests.
    12.6.1 Suggested Test Report Format.
    12.6.1.1 Introduction.
    12.6.1.1.1 Purpose of test-certification, audit, efficiency, 
research and development.
    12.6.1.1.2 Wood heater identification-manufacturer, model number, 
catalytic/noncatalytic, options.
    12.6.1.1.3 Laboratory-name, location (altitude), participants.
    12.6.1.1.4 Test information-date wood heater received, date of 
tests, sampling methods used, number of test runs.
    12.6.1.2 Summary and Discussion of Results
    12.6.1.2.1 Table of results (in order of increasing burn rate)-test 
run number, burn rate, particulate emission rate, efficiency (if 
determined), averages (indicate which test runs are used).
    12.6.1.2.2 Summary of other data-test facility conditions, surface 
temperature averages, catalyst temperature averages, pretest fuel 
weights, test fuel charge weights, run times.
    12.6.1.2.3 Discussion-Burn rate categories achieved, test run result 
selection, specific test run problems and solutions.
    12.6.1.3 Process Description.
    12.6.1.3.1 Wood heater dimensions-volume, height, width, lengths (or 
other linear dimensions), weight, volume adjustments.
    12.6.1.3.2 Firebox configuration-air supply locations and operation, 
air supply introduction location, refractory location and dimensions, 
catalyst location, baffle and by-pass location and operation (include 
line drawings or photographs).
    12.6.1.3.3 Process operation during test-air supply settings and 
adjustments, fuel bed adjustments, draft.
    12.6.1.3.4 Test fuel-test fuel properties (moisture and 
temperature), test fuel crib description (include line drawing or 
photograph), test fuel loading density.
    12.6.1.4 Sampling Locations.
    12.6.1.4.1 Describe sampling location relative to wood heater. 
Include drawing or photograph.
    12.6.1.5 Sampling and Analytical Procedures
    12.6.1.5.1 Sampling methods-brief reference to operational and 
sampling procedures and optional and alternative procedures used.
    12.6.1.5.2 Analytical methods-brief description of sample recovery 
and analysis procedures.
    12.6.1.6 Quality Control and Assurance Procedures and Results
    12.6.1.6.1 Calibration procedures and results-certification 
procedures, sampling and analysis procedures.
    12.6.1.6.2 Test method quality control procedures-leak-checks, 
volume meter checks, stratification (velocity) checks, proportionality 
results.
    12.6.1.7 Appendices
    12.6.1.7.1 Results and Example Calculations. Complete summary tables 
and accompanying examples of all calculations.
    12.6.1.7.2 Raw Data. Copies of all uncorrected data sheets for 
sampling measurements, temperature records and sample recovery data. 
Copies of all pretest burn rate and wood heater temperature data.

[[Page 572]]

    12.6.1.7.3 Sampling and Analytical Procedures. Detailed description 
of procedures followed by laboratory personnel in conducting the 
certification test, emphasizing particular parts of the procedures 
differing from the methods (e.g., approved alternatives).
    12.6.1.7.4 Calibration Results. Summary of all calibrations, checks, 
and audits pertinent to certification test results with dates.
    12.6.1.7.5 Participants. Test personnel, manufacturer 
representatives, and regulatory observers.
    12.6.1.7.6 Sampling and Operation Records. Copies of uncorrected 
records of activities not included on raw data sheets (e.g., wood heater 
door open times and durations).
    12.6.1.7.7 Additional Information. Wood heater manufacturer's 
written instructions for operation during the certification test.
    12.6.2.1 Wood Heater Identification. Report wood heater 
identification information. An example data form is shown in Figure 28-
4.
    12.6.2.2 Test Facility Information. Report test facility 
temperature, air velocity, and humidity information. An example data 
form is shown on Figure 28-4.
    12.6.2.3 Test Equipment Calibration and Audit Information. Report 
calibration and audit results for the platform scale, test fuel balance, 
test fuel moisture meter, and sampling equipment including volume 
metering systems and gaseous analyzers.
    12.6.2.4 Pretest Procedure Description. Report all pretest 
procedures including pretest fuel weight, burn rates, wood heater 
temperatures, and air supply settings. An example data form is shown on 
Figure 28-4.
    12.6.2.5 Particulate Emission Data. Report a summary of test results 
for all test runs and the weighted average emission rate. Submit copies 
of all data sheets and other records collected during the testing. 
Submit examples of all calculations.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Pellet Burning Heaters. Certification testing requirements and 
procedures for pellet burning wood heaters are identical to those for 
other wood heaters, with the following exceptions:
    16.1.1 Test Fuel Properties. The test fuel shall be all wood pellets 
with a moisture content no greater than 20 percent on a wet basis (25 
percent on a dry basis). Determine the wood moisture content with either 
ASTM D 2016-74 or 83, (Method A), ASTM D 4444-92, or ASTM D 4442-84 or 
92 (all noted ASTM standards are incorporated by reference--see Sec. 
60.17).
    16.1.2 Test Fuel Charge Specifications. The test fuel charge size 
shall be as per the manufacturer's written instructions for maintaining 
the desired burn rate.
    16.1.3 Wood Heater Firebox Volume. The firebox volume need not be 
measured or determined for establishing the test fuel charge size. The 
firebox dimensions and other heater specifications needed to identify 
the heater for certification purposes shall be reported.
    16.1.4 Heater Installation. Arrange the heater with the fuel supply 
hopper on the platform scale as described in Section 8.6.1.
    16.1.5 Pretest Ignition. Start a fire in the heater as directed by 
the manufacturer's written instructions, and adjust the heater controls 
to achieve the desired burn rate. Operate the heater at the desired burn 
rate for at least 1 hour before the start of the test run.
    16.1.6 Test Run. Complete a test run in each burn rate category as 
follows:
    16.1.6.1 Test Run Start. When the wood heater has operated for at 
least 1 hour at the desired burn rate, add fuel to the supply hopper as 
necessary to complete the test run, record the weight of the fuel in the 
supply hopper (the wood heater weight), and start the test run. Add no 
additional fuel to the hopper during the test run.
    Record all the wood heater surface temperatures, the initial 
sampling method measurement values, the time at the start of the test, 
and begin the emission sampling. Make no adjustments to the wood heater 
air supply or wood supply rate during the test run.
    16.1.6.2 Data Recording. Record the fuel (wood heater) weight data, 
wood heater temperature and operational data, and emission sampling data 
as described in Section 8.12.2.
    16.1.6.3 Test Run Completion. Continue emission sampling and wood 
heater operation for 2 hours. At the end of the test run, stop the 
particulate sampling, and record the final fuel weight, the run time, 
and all final measurement values, including all wood heater individual 
surface temperatures.
    16.1.7 Calculations. Determine the burn rate using the difference 
between the initial and final fuel (wood heater) weights and the 
procedures described in Section 12.4. Complete the other calculations as 
described in Section 12.0.

                             17.0 References

    Same as Method 5G, with the addition of the following:

    1. Radian Corporation. OMNI Environmental Services, Inc., Cumulative 
Probability for a Given Burn Rate Based on Data Generated in the CONEG 
and BPA Studies. Package of materials submitted to the Fifth Session of 
the Regulatory Negotiation Committee, July 16-17, 1986.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

[[Page 573]]



          Table 28-1--Burn Rate Weighted Probabilities for Calculating Weighted Average Emission Rates
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Cumulative                      Cumulative                      Cumulative
     Burn rate  (kg/hr-dry)         probability   Burn rate  (kg/   probability   Burn rate  (kg/   probability
                                        (P)           hr-dry)           (P)           hr-dry)           (P)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.00............................           0.000            1.70           0.840            3.40           0.989
0.05............................           0.002            1.75           0.857            3.45           0.989
0.10............................           0.007            1.80           0.875            3.50           0.990
0.15............................           0.012            1.85           0.882            3.55           0.991
0.20............................           0.016            1.90           0.895            3.60           0.991
0.25............................           0.021            1.95           0.906            3.65           0.992
0.30............................           0.028            2.00           0.912            3.70           0.992
0.35............................           0.033            2.05           0.920            3.75           0.992
0.40............................           0.041            2.10           0.925            3.80           0.993
0.45............................           0.054            2.15           0.932            3.85           0.994
0.50............................           0.065            2.20           0.936            3.90           0.994
0.55............................           0.086            2.25           0.940            3.95           0.994
0.60............................           0.100            2.30           0.945            4.00           0.994
0.65............................           0.121            2.35           0.951            4.05           0.995
0.70............................           0.150            2.40           0.956            4.10           0.995
0.75............................           0.185            2.45           0.959            4.15           0.995
0.80............................           0.220            2.50           0.964            4.20           0.995
0.85............................           0.254            2.55           0.968            4.25           0.995
0.90............................           0.300            2.60           0.972            4.30           0.996
0.95............................           0.328            2.65           0.975            4.35           0.996
1.00............................           0.380            2.70           0.977            4.40           0.996
1.05............................           0.407            2.75           0.979            4.45           0.996
1.10............................           0.460            2.80           0.980            4.50           0.996
1.15............................           0.490            2.85           0.981            4.55           0.996
1.20............................           0.550            2.90           0.982            4.60           0.996
1.25............................           0.572            2.95           0.984            4.65           0.996
1.30............................           0.620            3.00           0.984            4.70           0.996
1.35............................           0.654            3.05           0.985            4.75           0.997
1.40............................           0.695            3.10           0.986            4.80           0.997
1.45............................           0.722            3.15           0.987            4.85           0.997
1.50............................           0.750            3.20           0.987            4.90           0.997
1.55............................           0.779            3.25           0.988            4.95           0.997
1.60............................           0.800            3.30           0.988  <ls-thn-eq>=5.           1.000
                                                                                              00
1.65............................           0.825            3.35           0.989  ..............  ..............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 574]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.430


[[Page 575]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.431


[[Page 576]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.432

  Method 28A--Measurement of Air- to-Fuel Ratio and Mimimum Achievable 
                  Burn Rates for Wood-Fired Appliances

    Note: This method does not include all or the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should also have a thorough knowledge of at 
least the following additional test methods: Method 3, Method 3A, Method 
5H, Method 6C, and Method 28.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte. Particulate matter (PM). No CAS number assigned.

[[Page 577]]

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable for the measurement of 
air-to-fuel ratios and minimum achievable burn rates, for determining 
whether a wood-fired appliance is an affected facility, as specified in 
40 CFR 60.530.
    1.3 Data Quality Objectives. Adherence to the requirements of this 
method will enhance the quality of the data obtained from air pollutant 
sampling methods.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 A gas sample is extracted from a location in the stack of a 
wood-fired appliance while the appliance is operating at a prescribed 
set of conditions. The gas sample is analyzed for carbon dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>), oxygen (O<INF>2</INF>), and carbon monoxide (CO). 
These stack gas components are measured for determining the dry 
molecular weight of the exhaust gas. Total moles of exhaust gas are 
determined stoichiometrically. Air-to-fuel ratio is determined by 
relating the mass of dry combustion air to the mass of dry fuel 
consumed.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as Method 28, Section 3.0, with the addition of the following:
    3.1 Air-to-fuel ratio means the ratio of the mass of dry combustion 
air introduced into the firebox to the mass of dry fuel consumed (grams 
of dry air per gram of dry wood burned).

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Test Facility. Insulated Solid Pack Chimney, Platform Scale and 
Monitor, Test Facility Temperature Monitor, Balance, Moisture Meter, 
Anemometer, Barometer, Draft Gauge, Humidity Gauge, Wood Heater Flue, 
and Test Facility. Same as Method 28, Sections 6.1, 6.2, and 6.4 to 
6.12, respectively.
    6.2 Sampling System. Probe, Condenser, Valve, Pump, Rate Meter, 
Flexible Bag, Pressure Gauge, and Vacuum Gauge. Same as Method 3, 
Sections 6.2.1 to 6.2.8, respectively. Alternatively, the sampling 
system described in Method 5H, Section 6.1 may be used.
    6.3 Exhaust Gas Analysis. Use one or both of the following:
    6.3.1 Orsat Analyzer. Same as Method 3, Section 6.1.3
    6.3.2 Instrumental Analyzers. Same as Method 5H, Sections 6.1.3.4 
and 6.1.3.5, for CO<INF>2</INF> and CO analyzers, except use a CO 
analyzer with a range of 0 to 5 percent and use a CO<INF>2</INF> 
analyzer with a range of 0 to 5 percent. Use an O<INF>2</INF> analyzer 
capable of providing a measure of O<INF>2</INF> in the range of 0 to 25 
percent by volume at least once every 10 minutes.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Test Fuel and Test Fuel Spacers. Same as Method 28, Sections 7.1 
and 7.2, respectively.
    7.2 Cylinder Gases. For each of the three analyzers, use the same 
concentration as specified in Sections 7.2.1, 7.2.2, and 7.2.3 of Method 
6C.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Wood Heater Air Supply Adjustments.
    8.1.1 This section describes how dampers are to be set or adjusted 
and air inlet ports closed or sealed during Method 28A tests. The 
specifications in this section are intended to ensure that affected 
facility determinations are made on the facility configurations that 
could reasonably be expected to be employed by the user. They are also 
intended to prevent circumvention of the standard through the addition 
of an air port that would often be blocked off in actual use. These 
specifications are based on the assumption that consumers will remove 
such items as dampers or other closure mechanism stops if this can be 
done readily with household tools; that consumers will block air inlet 
passages not visible during normal operation of the appliance using 
aluminum tape or parts generally available at retail stores; and that 
consumers will cap off any threaded or flanged air inlets. They also 
assume that air leakage around glass doors, sheet metal joints or 
through inlet grilles visible during normal operation of the appliance 
would not be further blocked or taped off by a consumer.
    8.1.2 It is not the intention of this section to cause an appliance 
that is clearly designed, intended, and, in most normal installations, 
used as a fireplace to be converted into a wood heater for purposes of 
applicability testing. Such a fireplace would be identifiable by such 
features as large or multiple glass doors or panels that are not 
gasketed, relatively unrestricted air inlets intended, in large part, to 
limit smoking and fogging of glass surfaces, and other aesthetic 
features not normally included in wood heaters.
    8.1.3 Adjustable Air Supply Mechanisms. Any commercially available 
flue damper, other adjustment mechanism or other air

[[Page 578]]

inlet port that is designed, intended or otherwise reasonably expected 
to be adjusted or closed by consumers, installers, or dealers and which 
could restrict air into the firebox shall be set so as to achieve 
minimum air into the firebox (i.e., closed off or set in the most closed 
position).
    8.1.3.1 Flue dampers, mechanisms and air inlet ports which could 
reasonably be expected to be adjusted or closed would include:
    8.1.3.1.1 All internal or externally adjustable mechanisms 
(including adjustments that affect the tightness of door fittings) that 
are accessible either before and/or after installation.
    8.1.3.1.2 All mechanisms, other inlet ports, or inlet port stops 
that are identified in the owner's manual or in any dealer literature as 
being adjustable or alterable. For example, an inlet port that could be 
used to provide access to an outside air duct but which is identified as 
being closable through use of additional materials whether or not they 
are supplied with the facility.
    8.1.3.1.3 Any combustion air inlet port or commercially available 
flue damper or mechanism stop, which would readily lend itself to 
closure by consumers who are handy with household tools by the removal 
of parts or the addition of parts generally available at retail stores 
(e.g., addition of a pipe cap or plug, addition of a small metal plate 
to an inlet hole on a nondecorative sheet metal surface, or removal of 
riveted or screwed damper stops).
    8.1.3.1.4 Any flue damper, other adjustment mechanisms or other air 
inlet ports that are found and documented in several (e.g., a number 
sufficient to reasonably conclude that the practice is not unique or 
uncommon) actual installations as having been adjusted to a more closed 
position, or closed by consumers, installers, or dealers.
    8.1.4 Air Supply Adjustments During Test. The test shall be 
performed with all air inlets identified under this section in the 
closed or most closed position or in the configuration which otherwise 
achieves the lowest air inlet (i.e., greatest blockage).

    Note: For the purposes of this section, air flow shall not be 
minimized beyond the point necessary to maintain combustion or beyond 
the point that forces smoke into the room.

    8.1.5 Notwithstanding Section 8.1.1, any flue damper, adjustment 
mechanism, or air inlet port (whether or not equipped with flue dampers 
or adjusting mechanisms) that is visible during normal operation of the 
appliance and which could not reasonably be closed further or blocked 
except through means that would significantly degrade the aesthetics of 
the facility (e.g., through use of duct tape) will not be closed further 
or blocked.
    8.2 Sampling System.
    8.2.1 Sampling Location. Same as Method 5H, Section 8.1.2.
    8.2.2 Sampling System Set Up. Set up the sampling equipment as 
described in Method 3, Section 8.1.
    8.3 Wood Heater Installation, Test Facility Conditions, Wood Heater 
Firebox Volume, and Test Fuel Charge. Same as Method 28, Sections 8.4 
and 8.6 to 8.8, respectively.
    8.4 Pretest Ignition. Same as Method 28, Section 8.11. Set the wood 
heater air supply settings to achieve a burn rate in Category 1 or the 
lowest achievable burn rate (see Section 8.1).
    8.5 Test Run. Same as Method 28, Section 8.12. Begin sample 
collection at the start of the test run as defined in Method 28, Section 
8.12.1.
    8.5.1 Gas Analysis.
    8.5.1.1 If Method 3 is used, collect a minimum of two bag samples 
simultaneously at a constant sampling rate for the duration of the test 
run. A minimum sample volume of 30 liters (1.1 ft<SUP>3</SUP>) per bag 
is recommended.
    8.5.1.2 If instrumental gas concentration measurement procedures are 
used, conduct the gas measurement system performance tests, analyzer 
calibration, and analyzer calibration error check outlined in Method 6C, 
Sections 8.2.3, 8.2.4, 8.5, and 10.0, respectively. Sample at a constant 
rate for the duration of the test run.
    8.5.2 Data Recording. Record wood heater operational data, test 
facility temperature, sample train flow rate, and fuel weight data at 
intervals of no greater than 10 minutes.
    8.5.3 Test Run Completion. Same as Method 28, Section 8.13.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Data Validation. The following quality control procedure is 
suggested to provide a check on the quality of the data.
    9.1.1 Calculate a fuel factor, F<INF>o</INF>, using Equation 28A-1 
in Section 12.2.
    9.1.2 If CO is present in quantities measurable by this method, 
adjust the O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> values before performing the 
calculation for F<INF>o</INF> as shown in Section 12.3 and 12.4.
    9.1.3 Compare the calculated F<INF>o</INF> factor with the expected 
F<INF>o</INF> range for wood (1.000--1.120). Calculated F<INF>o</INF> 
values beyond this acceptable range should be investigated before 
accepting the test results. For example, the strength of the solutions 
in the gas analyzer and the analyzing technique should be checked by 
sampling and analyzing a known concentration, such as air. If no 
detectable or correctable measurement error can be identified, the test 
should be repeated. Alternatively, determine a range of air-to-fuel 
ratio results that could include the correct value by using an 
F<INF>o</INF> value of 1.05 and calculating a potential range of 
CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> values. Acceptance of such results will 
be based on whether the calculated range includes the

[[Page 579]]

exemption limit and the judgment of the Administrator.
    9.2 Method 3 Analyses. Compare the results of the analyses of the 
two bag samples. If all the gas components (O<INF>2</INF>, CO, and 
CO<INF>2</INF>) values for the two analyses agree within 0.5 percent 
(e.g., 6.0 percent O<INF>2</INF> for bag 1 and 6.5 percent O<INF>2</INF> 
for bag 2, agree within 0.5 percent), the results of the bag analyses 
may be averaged for the calculations in Section 12. If the analysis 
results do not agree within 0.5 percent for each component, calculate 
the air-to-fuel ratio using both sets of analyses and report the 
results.

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    11.1 Method 3 Integrated Bag Samples. Within 4 hours after the 
sample collection, analyze each bag sample for percent CO<INF>2</INF>, 
O<INF>2</INF>, and CO using an Orsat analyzer as described in Method 3, 
Section 11.0.
    11.2 Instrumental Analyzers. Average the percent CO<INF>2</INF>, CO, 
and O<INF>2</INF> values for the test run.

                   12.0 Data Analyses and Calculations

    Carry out calculations, retaining at least one extra significant 
figure beyond that of the acquired data. Round off figure after the 
final calculation. Other forms of the equations may be used as long as 
they give equivalent results.
    12.1 Nomenclature.

M<INF>d</INF>=Dry molecular weight, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
N<INF>T</INF>=Total gram-moles of dry exhaust gas per kg of wood burned 
(lb-moles/lb).
%CO<INF>2</INF>=Percent CO<INF>2</INF> by volume (dry basis).
%CO=Percent CO by volume (dry basis).
%N<INF>2</INF>=Percent N<INF>2</INF> by volume (dry basis).
%O<INF>2</INF>=Percent O2 by volume (dry basis).
Y<INF>HC</INF>=Assumed mole fraction of HC (dry as 
CH<INF>4</INF>)=0.0088 for catalytic wood heaters;=0.0132 for 
noncatalytic wood heaters.=0.0080 for pellet-fired wood heaters.
Y<INF>CO</INF>=Measured mole fraction of CO (e.g., 1 percent CO=.01 mole 
fraction), g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
Y<INF>CO2</INF>=Measured mole fraction of CO<INF>CO2</INF> (e.g., 10 
percent CO<INF>2</INF>=.10 mole fraction), g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole).
0.280=Molecular weight of N<INF>2</INF> or CO, divided by 100.
0.320=Molecular weight of O<INF>2</INF> divided by 100.
0.440=Molecular weight of CO<INF>2</INF> divided by 100.
20.9=Percent O<INF>2</INF> by volume in ambient air.
42.5=Gram-moles of carbon in 1 kg of dry wood assuming 51 percent carbon 
by weight dry basis (.0425 lb/lb-mole).
510=Grams of carbon in exhaust gas per kg of wood burned.
1,000=Grams in 1 kg.

    12.2 Fuel Factor. Use Equation 28A-1 to calculate the fuel factor.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.433
    
    12. 3 Adjusted %CO<INF>2</INF>. Use Equation 28A-2 to adjust 
CO<INF>2</INF> values if measurable CO is present.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.434

    12.4 Adjusted %O<INF>2</INF>. Use Equation 28A-3 to adjust 
O<INF>2</INF> value if measurable CO is present.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.435

    12.5 Dry Molecular Weight. Use Equation 28A-4 to calculate the dry 
molecular weight of the stack gas.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.436

    Note: The above equation does not consider argon in air (about 0.9 
percent, molecular weight of 39.9). A negative error of about 0.4 
percent is introduced. Argon may

[[Page 580]]

be included in the analysis using procedures subject to approval of the 
Administrator.

    12.6 Dry Moles of Exhaust Gas. Use Equation 28A-5 to calculate the 
total moles of dry exhaust gas produced per kilogram of dry wood burned.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.437

    12.7 Air-to-Fuel Ratio. Use Equation 28A-6 to calculate the air-to-
fuel ratio on a dry mass basis.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.438

    12.8 Burn Rate. Calculate the fuel burn rate as in Method 28, 
Section 12.4.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Section 16.0 of Method 3 and Section 17 of Method 5G.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Method 29--Determination of Metals Emissions From Stationary Sources

    Note: This method does not include all of the specifications (e.g., 
equipment and supplies) and procedures (e.g., sampling and analytical) 
essential to its performance. Some material is incorporated by reference 
from other methods in this part. Therefore, to obtain reliable results, 
persons using this method should have a thorough knowledge of at least 
the following additional test methods: Method 5 and Method 12.

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Antimony (Sb)...........................................       7440-36-0
Arsenic (As)............................................       7440-38-2
Barium (Ba).............................................       7440-39-3
Beryllium (Be)..........................................       7440-41-7
Cadmium (Cd)............................................       7440-43-9
Chromium (Cr)...........................................       7440-47-3
Cobalt (Co).............................................       7440-48-4
Copper (Cu).............................................       7440-50-8
Lead (Pb)...............................................       7439-92-1
Manganese (Mn)..........................................       7439-96-5
Mercury (Hg)............................................       7439-97-6
Nickel (Ni).............................................       7440-02-0
Phosphorus (P)..........................................       7723-14-0
Selenium (Se)...........................................       7782-49-2
Silver (Ag).............................................       7440-22-4
Thallium (Tl)...........................................       7440-28-0
Zinc (Zn)...............................................       7440-66-6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This method is applicable to the determination of 
metals emissions from stationary sources. This method may be used to 
determine particulate emissions in addition to the metals emissions if 
the prescribed procedures and precautions are followed.
    1.2.1 Hg emissions can be measured, alternatively, using EPA Method 
101A of Appendix B, 40 CFR Part 61. Method 101-A measures only Hg but it 
can be of special interest to sources which need to measure both Hg and 
Mn emissions.

                          2.0 Summary of Method

    2.1 Principle. A stack sample is withdrawn isokinetically from the 
source, particulate emissions are collected in the probe and on a heated 
filter, and gaseous emissions are then collected in an aqueous acidic 
solution of hydrogen peroxide (analyzed for all metals including Hg) and 
an aqueous acidic solution of potassium permanganate (analyzed only for 
Hg). The recovered samples are digested, and appropriate fractions are 
analyzed for Hg by cold vapor atomic absorption spectroscopy (CVAAS) and 
for Sb, As, Ba, Be, Cd, Cr, Co, Cu, Pb, Mn, Ni, P, Se, Ag, Tl, and Zn by 
inductively coupled argon plasma emission spectroscopy (ICAP) or atomic 
absorption spectroscopy (AAS). Graphite furnace atomic absorption 
spectroscopy (GFAAS) is used for analysis of Sb, As, Cd, Co, Pb, Se, and 
Tl if these elements require greater analytical sensitivity than can be 
obtained by ICAP. If one so chooses, AAS may be used for analysis of all 
listed metals if the resulting in-stack method detection limits meet the 
goal of the testing program. Similarly, inductively coupled plasma-mass 
spectroscopy (ICP-MS) may be used for analysis of Sb, As, Ba, Be, Cd, 
Cr, Co, Cu, Pb, Mn, Ni, Ag, Tl and Zn.

                       3.0 Definitions [Reserved]

                            4.0 Interferences

    4.1 Iron (Fe) can be a spectral interference during the analysis of 
As, Cr, and Cd by ICAP. Aluminum (Al) can be a spectral interference 
during the analysis of As and Pb by ICAP. Generally, these interferences 
can be reduced by diluting the analytical sample, but such dilution 
raises the in-stack detection limits. Background and overlap corrections 
may be used to adjust for spectral interferences. Refer to Method 6010 
of Reference 2 in Section 16.0 or the other analytical methods used for 
details on potential interferences to this method. For all GFAAS 
analyses, use matrix modifiers to limit interferences, and matrix match 
all standards.

[[Page 581]]

                               5.0 Safety

    5.1 Disclaimer. This method may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This test method may not address all of the 
safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the 
user of this test method to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to performing this test method.
    5.2 Corrosive Reagents. The following reagents are hazardous. 
Personal protective equipment and safe procedures are useful in 
preventing chemical splashes. If contact occurs, immediately flush with 
copious amounts of water at least 15 minutes. Remove clothing under 
shower and decontaminate. Treat residual chemical burn as thermal burn.
    5.2.1 Nitric Acid (HNO<INF>3</INF>). Highly corrosive to eyes, skin, 
nose, and lungs. Vapors cause bronchitis, pneumonia, or edema of lungs. 
Reaction to inhalation may be delayed as long as 30 hours and still be 
fatal. Provide ventilation to limit exposure. Strong oxidizer. Hazardous 
reaction may occur with organic materials such as solvents.
    5.2.2 Sulfuric Acid (H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>). Rapidly 
destructive to body tissue. Will cause third degree burns. Eye damage 
may result in blindness. Inhalation may be fatal from spasm of the 
larynx, usually within 30 minutes. May cause lung tissue damage with 
edema. 1 mg/m\3\ for 8 hours will cause lung damage or, in higher 
concentrations, death. Provide ventilation to limit inhalation. Reacts 
violently with metals and organics.
    5.2.3 Hydrochloric Acid (HC1). Highly corrosive liquid with toxic 
vapors. Vapors are highly irritating to eyes, skin, nose, and lungs, 
causing severe damage. May cause bronchitis, pneumonia, or edema of 
lungs. Exposure to concentrations of 0.13 to 0.2 percent can be lethal 
to humans in a few minutes. Provide ventilation to limit exposure. 
Reacts with metals, producing hydrogen gas.
    5.2.4 Hydrofluoric Acid (HF). Highly corrosive to eyes, skin, nose, 
throat, and lungs. Reaction to exposure may be delayed by 24 hours or 
more. Provide ventilation to limit exposure.
    5.2.5 Hydrogen Peroxide (H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>). Irritating to 
eyes, skin, nose, and lungs. 30% H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> is a strong 
oxidizing agent. Avoid contact with skin, eyes, and combustible 
material. Wear gloves when handling.
    5.2.6 Potassium Permanganate (KMnO<INF>4</INF>). Caustic, strong 
oxidizer. Avoid bodily contact with.
    5.2.7 Potassium Persulfate. Strong oxidizer. Avoid bodily contact 
with. Keep containers well closed and in a cool place.
    5.3 Reaction Pressure. Due to the potential reaction of the 
potassium permanganate with the acid, there could be pressure buildup in 
the acidic KMnO<INF>4</INF> absorbing solution storage bottle. Therefore 
these bottles shall not be fully filled and shall be vented to relieve 
excess pressure and prevent explosion potentials. Venting is required, 
but not in a manner that will allow contamination of the solution. A No. 
70-72 hole drilled in the container cap and Teflon liner has been used.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Sampling. A schematic of the sampling train is shown in Figure 
29-1. It has general similarities to the Method 5 train.
    6.1.1 Probe Nozzle (Probe Tip) and Borosilicate or Quartz Glass 
Probe Liner. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.1.1.1 and 6.1.1.2, except that 
glass nozzles are required unless alternate tips are constructed of 
materials that are free from contamination and will not interfere with 
the sample. If a probe tip other than glass is used, no correction to 
the sample test results to compensate for the nozzle's effect on the 
sample is allowed. Probe fittings of plastic such as Teflon, 
polypropylene, etc. are recommended instead of metal fittings to prevent 
contamination. If one chooses to do so, a single glass piece consisting 
of a combined probe tip and probe liner may be used.
    6.1.2 Pitot Tube and Differential Pressure Gauge. Same as Method 2, 
Sections 6.1 and 6.2, respectively.
    6.1.3 Filter Holder. Glass, same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.5, 
except use a Teflon filter support or other non-metallic, non-
contaminating support in place of the glass frit.
    6.1.4 Filter Heating System. Same as Method 5, Section 6.1.1.6.
    6.1.5 Condenser. Use the following system for condensing and 
collecting gaseous metals and determining the moisture content of the 
stack gas. The condensing system shall consist of four to seven 
impingers connected in series with leak-free ground glass fittings or 
other leak-free, non-contaminating fittings. Use the first impinger as a 
moisture trap. The second impinger (which is the first HNO<INF>3</INF>/
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> impinger) shall be identical to the first 
impinger in Method 5. The third impinger (which is the second 
HNO<INF>3</INF>/H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> impinger) shall be a 
Greenburg Smith impinger with the standard tip as described for the 
second impinger in Method 5, Section 6.1.1.8. The fourth (empty) 
impinger and the fifth and sixth (both acidified KMnO<INF>4</INF>) 
impingers are the same as the first impinger in Method 5. Place a 
temperature sensor capable of measuring to within 1 [deg]C (2 [deg]F) at 
the outlet of the last impinger. If no Hg analysis is planned, then the 
fourth, fifth, and sixth impingers are not used.
    6.1.6 Metering System, Barometer, and Gas Density Determination 
Equipment. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.1.1.9, 6.1.2, and 6.1.3, 
respectively.
    6.1.7 Teflon Tape. For capping openings and sealing connections, if 
necessary, on the sampling train.

[[Page 582]]

    6.2 Sample Recovery. Same as Method 5, Sections 6.2.1 through 6.2.8 
(Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes or Swabs, Wash Bottles, Sample 
Storage Containers, Petri Dishes, Glass Graduated Cylinder, Plastic 
Storage Containers, Funnel and Rubber Policeman, and Glass Funnel), 
respectively, with the following exceptions and additions:
    6.2.1 Non-metallic Probe-Liner and Probe-Nozzle Brushes or Swabs. 
Use non-metallic probe-liner and probe-nozzle brushes or swabs for 
quantitative recovery of materials collected in the front-half of the 
sampling train.
    6.2.2 Sample Storage Containers. Use glass bottles (see Section 8.1 
of this Method) with Teflon-lined caps that are non-reactive to the 
oxidizing solutions, with capacities of 1000- and 500-ml, for storage of 
acidified KMnO<INF>4</INF>--containing samples and blanks. Glass or 
polyethylene bottles may be used for other sample types.
    6.2.3 Graduated Cylinder. Glass or equivalent.
    6.2.4 Funnel. Glass or equivalent.
    6.2.5 Labels. For identifying samples.
    6.2.6 Polypropylene Tweezers and/or Plastic Gloves. For recovery of 
the filter from the sampling train filter holder.
    6.3 Sample Preparation and Analysis.
    6.3.1 Volumetric Flasks, 100-ml, 250-ml, and 1000-ml. For 
preparation of standards and sample dilutions.
    6.3.2 Graduated Cylinders. For preparation of reagents.
    6.3.3 Parr Bombs or Microwave Pressure Relief Vessels with Capping 
Station (CEM Corporation model or equivalent). For sample digestion.
    6.3.4 Beakers and Watch Glasses. 250-ml beakers, with watch glass 
covers, for sample digestion.
    6.3.5 Ring Stands and Clamps. For securing equipment such as 
filtration apparatus.
    6.3.6 Filter Funnels. For holding filter paper.
    6.3.7 Disposable Pasteur Pipets and Bulbs.
    6.3.8 Volumetric Pipets.
    6.3.9 Analytical Balance. Accurate to within 0.1 mg.
    6.3.10 Microwave or Conventional Oven. For heating samples at fixed 
power levels or temperatures, respectively.
    6.3.11 Hot Plates.
    6.3.12 Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS). Equipped with a 
background corrector.
    6.3.12.1 Graphite Furnace Attachment. With Sb, As, Cd, Co, Pb, Se, 
and Tl hollow cathode lamps (HCLs) or electrodeless discharge lamps 
(EDLs). Same as Reference 2 in Section 16.0. Methods 7041 (Sb), 7060 
(As), 7131 (Cd), 7201 (Co), 7421 (Pb), 7740 (Se), and 7841 (Tl).
    6.3.12.2 Cold Vapor Mercury Attachment. With a mercury HCL or EDL, 
an air recirculation pump, a quartz cell, an aerator apparatus, and a 
heat lamp or desiccator tube. The heat lamp shall be capable of raising 
the temperature at the quartz cell by 10 [deg]C above ambient, so that 
no condensation forms on the wall of the quartz cell. Same as Method 
7470 in Reference 2 in Section 16.0. See Note 2: Section 11.1.3 for 
other acceptable approaches for analysis of Hg in which analytical 
detection limits of 0.002 ng/ml were obtained.
    6.3.13 Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma Spectrometer. With either a 
direct or sequential reader and an alumina torch. Same as EPA Method 
6010 in Reference 2 in Section 16.0.
    6.3.14 Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer.
    Same as EPA Method 6020 in Reference 2 in Section 16.0.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents 
conform to the specifications established by the Committee on Analytical 
Reagents of the American Chemical Society, where such specifications are 
available. Otherwise, use the best available grade.
    7.2 Sampling Reagents.
    7.2.1 Sample Filters. Without organic binders. The filters shall 
contain less than 1.3 [micro]g/in.\2\ of each of the metals to be 
measured. Analytical results provided by filter manufacturers stating 
metals content of the filters are acceptable. However, if no such 
results are available, analyze filter blanks for each target metal prior 
to emission testing. Quartz fiber filters meeting these requirements are 
recommended. However, if glass fiber filters become available which meet 
these requirements, they may be used. Filter efficiencies and 
unreactiveness to sulfur dioxide (SO<INF>2</INF>) or sulfur trioxide 
(SO<INF>3</INF>) shall be as described in Section 7.1.1 of Method 5.
    7.2.2 Water. To conform to ASTM Specification D1193-77 or 91, Type 
II (incorporated by reference--see Sec. 60.17). If necessary, analyze 
the water for all target metals prior to field use. All target metals 
should be less than 1 ng/ml.
    7.2.3 HNO<INF>3</INF>, Concentrated. Baker Instra-analyzed or 
equivalent.
    7.2.4 HCl, Concentrated. Baker Instra-analyzed or equivalent.
    7.2.5 H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>, 30 Percent (V/V).
    7.2.6 KMnO<INF>4</INF>.
    7.2.7 H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>, Concentrated.
    7.2.8 Silica Gel and Crushed Ice. Same as Method 5, Sections 7.1.2 
and 7.1.4, respectively.
    7.3 Pretest Preparation of Sampling Reagents.
    7.3.1 HNO<INF>3</INF>/H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> Absorbing Solution, 
5 Percent HNO<INF>3</INF>/10 Percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>. Add 
carefully with stirring 50 ml of concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> to a 1000-
ml volumetric flask containing approximately 500 ml of water, and then 
add

[[Page 583]]

carefully with stirring 333 ml of 30 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF>. 
Dilute to volume with water. Mix well. This reagent shall contain less 
than 2 ng/ml of each target metal.
    7.3.2 Acidic KMnO<INF>4</INF> Absorbing Solution, 4 Percent 
KMnO<INF>4</INF> (W/V), 10 Percent H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> (V/V). 
Prepare fresh daily. Mix carefully, with stirring, 100 ml of 
concentrated H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> into approximately 800 ml of 
water, and add water with stirring to make a volume of 1 liter: this 
solution is 10 percent H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> (V/V). Dissolve, with 
stirring, 40 g of KMnO<INF>4</INF> into 10 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> (V/V) and add 10 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> (V/V) with stirring to make a volume of 1 
liter. Prepare and store in glass bottles to prevent degradation. This 
reagent shall contain less than 2 ng/ml of Hg.
    Precaution: To prevent autocatalytic decomposition of the 
permanganate solution, filter the solution through Whatman 541 filter 
paper.
    7.3.3 HNO<INF>3</INF>, 0.1 N. Add with stirring 6.3 ml of 
concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> (70 percent) to a flask containing 
approximately 900 ml of water. Dilute to 1000 ml with water. Mix well. 
This reagent shall contain less than 2 ng/ml of each target metal.
    7.3.4 HCl, 8 N. Carefully add with stirring 690 ml of concentrated 
HCl to a flask containing 250 ml of water. Dilute to 1000 ml with water. 
Mix well. This reagent shall contain less than 2 ng/ml of Hg.
    7.4 Glassware Cleaning Reagents.
    7.4.1 HNO<INF>3</INF>, Concentrated. Fisher ACS grade or equivalent.
    7.4.2 Water. To conform to ASTM Specifications D1193, Type II.
    7.4.3 HNO<INF>3</INF>, 10 Percent (V/V). Add with stirring 500 ml of 
concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> to a flask containing approximately 4000 ml 
of water. Dilute to 5000 ml with water. Mix well. This reagent shall 
contain less than 2 ng/ml of each target metal.
    7.5 Sample Digestion and Analysis Reagents. The metals standards, 
except Hg, may also be made from solid chemicals as described in 
Reference 3 in Section 16.0. Refer to References 1, 2, or 5 in Section 
16.0 for additional information on Hg standards. The 1000 [micro]g/ml Hg 
stock solution standard may be made according to Section 7.2.7 of Method 
101A.
    7.5.1 HCl, Concentrated.
    7.5.2 HF, Concentrated.
    7.5.3 HNO<INF>3</INF>, Concentrated. Baker Instra-analyzed or 
equivalent.
    7.5.4 HNO<INF>3</INF>, 50 Percent (V/V). Add with stirring 125 ml of 
concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> to 100 ml of water. Dilute to 250 ml with 
water. Mix well. This reagent shall contain less than 2 ng/ml of each 
target metal.
    7.5.5 HNO<INF>3</INF>, 5 Percent (V/V). Add with stirring 50 ml of 
concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> to 800 ml of water. Dilute to 1000 ml with 
water. Mix well. This reagent shall contain less than 2 ng/ml of each 
target metal.
    7.5.6 Water. To conform to ASTM Specifications D1193, Type II.
    7.5.7 Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride and Sodium Chloride Solution. See 
Reference 2 In Section 16.0 for preparation.
    7.5.8 Stannous Chloride. See Reference 2 in Section 16.0 for 
preparation.
    7.5.9 KMnO<INF>4</INF>, 5 Percent (W/V). See Reference 2 in Section 
16.0 for preparation.
    7.5.10 H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>, Concentrated.
    7.5.11 Potassium Persulfate, 5 Percent (W/V). See Reference 2 in 
Section 16.0 for preparation.
    7.5.12 Nickel Nitrate, Ni(N0<INF>3</INF>) <INF>2</INF> 
6H<INF>2</INF>0.
    7.5.13 Lanthanum Oxide, La<INF>2</INF>0<INF>3</INF>.
    7.5.14 Hg Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.15 Pb Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.16 As Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.17 Cd Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.18 Cr Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.19 Sb Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.20 Ba Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.21 Be Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.22 Co Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.23 Cu Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.24 Mn Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.25 Ni Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.26 P Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.27 Se Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.28 Ag Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.29 Tl Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.30 Zn Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.31 Al Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.32 Fe Standard (AAS Grade), 1000 [micro]g/ml.
    7.5.33 Hg Standards and Quality Control Samples. Prepare fresh 
weekly a 10 [micro]g/ml intermediate Hg standard by adding 5 ml of 1000 
[micro]g/ml Hg stock solution prepared according to Method 101A to a 
500-ml volumetric flask; dilute with stirring to 500 ml by first 
carefully adding 20 ml of 15 percent HNO<INF>3</INF> and then adding 
water to the 500-ml volume. Mix well. Prepare a 200 ng/ml working Hg 
standard solution fresh daily: add 5 ml of the 10 [micro]g/ml 
intermediate standard to a 250-ml volumetric flask, and dilute to 250 ml 
with 5 ml of 4 percent KMnO<INF>4</INF>, 5 ml of 15 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>, and then water. Mix well. Use at least five separate 
aliquots of the working

[[Page 584]]

Hg standard solution and a blank to prepare the standard curve. These 
aliquots and blank shall contain 0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 ml of 
the working standard solution containing 0, 200, 400, 600, 800, and 1000 
ng Hg, respectively. Prepare quality control samples by making a 
separate 10 [micro]g/ml standard and diluting until in the calibration 
range.
    7.5.34 ICAP Standards and Quality Control Samples. Calibration 
standards for ICAP analysis can be combined into four different mixed 
standard solutions as follows:

               Mixed Standard Solutions for ICAP Analysis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Solution                             Elements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I.................................  As, Be, Cd, Mn, Pb, Se, Zn.
II................................  Ba, Co, Cu, Fe.
III...............................  Al, Cr, Ni.
IV................................  Ag, P, Sb, Tl.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Prepare these standards by combining and diluting the appropriate 
volumes of the 1000 [micro]g/ml solutions with 5 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>. A minimum of one standard and a blank can be used to 
form each calibration curve. However, prepare a separate quality control 
sample spiked with known amounts of the target metals in quantities in 
the mid-range of the calibration curve. Suggested standard levels are 25 
[micro]g/ml for Al, Cr and Pb, 15 [micro]g/ml for Fe, and 10 [micro]g/ml 
for the remaining elements. Prepare any standards containing less than 1 
[micro]g/ml of metal on a daily basis. Standards containing greater than 
1 [micro]g/ml of metal should be stable for a minimum of 1 to 2 weeks. 
For ICP-MS, follow Method 6020 in EPA Publication SW-846 Third Edition 
(November 1986) including updates I, II, IIA, IIB and III, as 
incorporated by reference in Sec. 60.17(i).
    7.5.35 GFAAS Standards. Sb, As, Cd, Co, Pb, Se, and Tl. Prepare a 10 
[micro]g/ml standard by adding 1 ml of 1000 [micro]g/ml standard to a 
100-ml volumetric flask. Dilute with stirring to 100 ml with 10 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>. For GFAAS, matrix match the standards. Prepare a 100 
ng/ml standard by adding 1 ml of the 10 [micro]g/ml standard to a 100-ml 
volumetric flask, and dilute to 100 ml with the appropriate matrix 
solution. Prepare other standards by diluting the 100 ng/ml standards. 
Use at least five standards to make up the standard curve. Suggested 
levels are 0, 10, 50, 75, and 100 ng/ml. Prepare quality control samples 
by making a separate 10 [micro]g/ml standard and diluting until it is in 
the range of the samples. Prepare any standards containing less than 1 
[micro]g/ml of metal on a daily basis. Standards containing greater than 
1 [micro]g/ml of metal should be stable for a minimum of 1 to 2 weeks.
    7.5.36 Matrix Modifiers.
    7.5.36.1 Nickel Nitrate, 1 Percent (V/V). Dissolve 4.956 g of 
Ni(N0<INF>3</INF>)<INF>2</INF>[middot]6H<INF>2</INF>0 or other nickel 
compound suitable for preparation of this matrix modifier in 
approximately 50 ml of water in a 100-ml volumetric flask. Dilute to 100 
ml with water.
    7.5.36.2 Nickel Nitrate, 0.1 Percent (V/V). Dilute 10 ml of 1 
percent nickel nitrate solution to 100 ml with water. Inject an equal 
amount of sample and this modifier into the graphite furnace during 
GFAAS analysis for As.
    7.5.36.3 Lanthanum. Carefully dissolve 0.5864 g of 
La<INF>2</INF>0<INF>3</INF> in 10 ml of concentrated HN0<INF>3</INF>, 
and dilute the solution by adding it with stirring to approximately 50 
ml of water. Dilute to 100 ml with water, and mix well. Inject an equal 
amount of sample and this modifier into the graphite furnace during 
GFAAS analysis for Pb.
    7.5.37 Whatman 40 and 541 Filter Papers (or equivalent). For 
filtration of digested samples.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Transport, and Storage

    8.1 Sampling. The complexity of this method is such that, to obtain 
reliable results, both testers and analysts must be trained and 
experienced with the test procedures, including source sampling; reagent 
preparation and handling; sample handling; safety equipment and 
procedures; analytical calculations; reporting; and the specific 
procedural descriptions throughout this method.
    8.1.1 Pretest Preparation. Follow the same general procedure given 
in Method 5, Section 8.1, except that, unless particulate emissions are 
to be determined, the filter need not be desiccated or weighed. First, 
rinse all sampling train glassware with hot tap water and then wash in 
hot soapy water. Next, rinse glassware three times with tap water, 
followed by three additional rinses with water. Then soak all glassware 
in a 10 percent (V/V) nitric acid solution for a minimum of 4 hours, 
rinse three times with water, rinse a final time with acetone, and allow 
to air dry. Cover all glassware openings where contamination can occur 
until the sampling train is assembled for sampling.
    8.1.2 Preliminary Determinations. Same as Method 5, Section 8.1.2.
    8.1.3 Preparation of Sampling Train.
    8.1.3.1 Set up the sampling train as shown in Figure 29-1. Follow 
the same general procedures given in Method 5, Section 8.3, except place 
100 ml of the HNO<INF>3</INF>/H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> solution 
(Section 7.3.1 of this method) in each of the second and third impingers 
as shown in Figure 29-1. Place 100 ml of the acidic KMnO<INF>4</INF> 
absorbing solution (Section 7.3.2 of this method) in each of the fifth 
and sixth impingers as shown in Figure 29-1, and transfer approximately 
200 to 300 g of pre-weighed silica gel from its container to the last 
impinger. Alternatively, the silica gel may be weighed directly in the 
impinger just prior to final train assembly.

[[Page 585]]

    8.1.3.2 Based on the specific source sampling conditions, the use of 
an empty first impinger can be eliminated if the moisture to be 
collected in the impingers will be less than approximately 100 ml.
    8.1.3.3 If Hg analysis will not be performed, the fourth, fifth, and 
sixth impingers as shown in Figure 29-1 are not required.
    8.1.3.4 To insure leak-free sampling train connections and to 
prevent possible sample contamination problems, use Teflon tape or other 
non-contaminating material instead of silicone grease.
    Precaution: Exercise extreme care to prevent contamination within 
the train. Prevent the acidic KMnO<INF>4</INF> from contacting any 
glassware that contains sample material to be analyzed for Mn. Prevent 
acidic H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> from mixing with the acidic 
KMnO<INF>4</INF>.
    8.1.4 Leak-Check Procedures. Follow the leak-check procedures given 
in Method 5, Section 8.4.2 (Pretest Leak-Check), Section 8.4.3 (Leak-
Checks During the Sample Run), and Section 8.4.4 (Post-Test Leak-
Checks).
    8.1.5 Sampling Train Operation. Follow the procedures given in 
Method 5, Section 8.5. When sampling for Hg, use a procedure analogous 
to that described in Section 8.1 of Method 101A, 40 CFR Part 61, 
Appendix B, if necessary to maintain the desired color in the last 
acidified permanganate impinger. For each run, record the data required 
on a data sheet such as the one shown in Figure 5-3 of Method 5.
    8.1.6 Calculation of Percent Isokinetic. Same as Method 5, Section 
12.11.
    8.2 Sample Recovery.
    8.2.1 Begin cleanup procedures as soon as the probe is removed from 
the stack at the end of a sampling period. The probe should be allowed 
to cool prior to sample recovery. When it can be safely handled, wipe 
off all external particulate matter near the tip of the probe nozzle and 
place a rinsed, non-contaminating cap over the probe nozzle to prevent 
losing or gaining particulate matter. Do not cap the probe tip tightly 
while the sampling train is cooling; a vacuum can form in the filter 
holder with the undesired result of drawing liquid from the impingers 
onto the filter.
    8.2.2 Before moving the sampling train to the cleanup site, remove 
the probe from the sampling train and cap the open outlet. Be careful 
not to lose any condensate that might be present. Cap the filter inlet 
where the probe was fastened. Remove the umbilical cord from the last 
impinger and cap the impinger. Cap the filter holder outlet and impinger 
inlet. Use non-contaminating caps, whether ground-glass stoppers, 
plastic caps, serum caps, or Teflon<SUP>[reg]</SUP> tape to close these 
openings.
    8.2.3 Alternatively, the following procedure may be used to 
disassemble the train before the probe and filter holder/oven are 
completely cooled: Initially disconnect the filter holder outlet/
impinger inlet and loosely cap the open ends. Then disconnect the probe 
from the filter holder or cyclone inlet and loosely cap the open ends. 
Cap the probe tip and remove the umbilical cord as previously described.
    8.2.4 Transfer the probe and filter-impinger assembly to a cleanup 
area that is clean and protected from the wind and other potential 
causes of contamination or loss of sample. Inspect the train before and 
during disassembly and note any abnormal conditions. Take special 
precautions to assure that all the items necessary for recovery do not 
contaminate the samples. The sample is recovered and treated as follows 
(see schematic in Figures 29-2a and 29-2b):
    8.2.5 Container No. 1 (Sample Filter). Carefully remove the filter 
from the filter holder and place it in its labeled petri dish container. 
To handle the filter, use either acid-washed polypropylene or Teflon 
coated tweezers or clean, disposable surgical gloves rinsed with water 
and dried. If it is necessary to fold the filter, make certain the 
particulate cake is inside the fold. Carefully transfer the filter and 
any particulate matter or filter fibers that adhere to the filter holder 
gasket to the petri dish by using a dry (acid-cleaned) nylon bristle 
brush. Do not use any metal-containing materials when recovering this 
train. Seal the labeled petri dish.
    8.2.6 Container No. 2 (Acetone Rinse). Perform this procedure only 
if a determination of particulate emissions is to be made. 
Quantitatively recover particulate matter and any condensate from the 
probe nozzle, probe fitting, probe liner, and front half of the filter 
holder by washing these components with a total of 100 ml of acetone, 
while simultaneously taking great care to see that no dust on the 
outside of the probe or other surfaces gets in the sample. The use of 
exactly 100 ml is necessary for the subsequent blank correction 
procedures. Distilled water may be used instead of acetone when approved 
by the Administrator and shall be used when specified by the 
Administrator; in these cases, save a water blank and follow the 
Administrator's directions on analysis.
    8.2.6.1 Carefully remove the probe nozzle, and clean the inside 
surface by rinsing with acetone from a wash bottle while brushing with a 
non-metallic brush. Brush until the acetone rinse shows no visible 
particles, then make a final rinse of the inside surface with acetone.
    8.2.6.2 Brush and rinse the sample exposed inside parts of the probe 
fitting with acetone in a similar way until no visible particles remain. 
Rinse the probe liner with acetone by tilting and rotating the probe 
while squirting acetone into its upper end so that all inside surfaces 
will be wetted with acetone. Allow the acetone to drain from the lower 
end into the sample container. A funnel may be used to aid in 
transferring liquid washings

[[Page 586]]

to the container. Follow the acetone rinse with a non-metallic probe 
brush. Hold the probe in an inclined position, squirt acetone into the 
upper end as the probe brush is being pushed with a twisting action 
three times through the probe. Hold a sample container underneath the 
lower end of the probe, and catch any acetone and particulate matter 
which is brushed through the probe until no visible particulate matter 
is carried out with the acetone or until none remains in the probe liner 
on visual inspection. Rinse the brush with acetone, and quantitatively 
collect these washings in the sample container. After the brushing, make 
a final acetone rinse of the probe as described above.
    8.2.6.3 It is recommended that two people clean the probe to 
minimize sample losses. Between sampling runs, keep brushes clean and 
protected from contamination. Clean the inside of the front-half of the 
filter holder by rubbing the surfaces with a non-metallic brush and 
rinsing with acetone. Rinse each surface three times or more if needed 
to remove visible particulate. Make a final rinse of the brush and 
filter holder. After all acetone washings and particulate matter have 
been collected in the sample container, tighten the lid so that acetone 
will not leak out when shipped to the laboratory. Mark the height of the 
fluid level to determine whether or not leakage occurred during 
transport. Clearly label the container to identify its contents.
    8.2.7 Container No. 3 (Probe Rinse). Keep the probe assembly clean 
and free from contamination during the probe rinse. Rinse the probe 
nozzle and fitting, probe liner, and front-half of the filter holder 
thoroughly with a total of 100 ml of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>, and place 
the wash into a sample storage container. Perform the rinses as 
applicable and generally as described in Method 12, Section 8.7.1. 
Record the volume of the rinses. Mark the height of the fluid level on 
the outside of the storage container and use this mark to determine if 
leakage occurs during transport. Seal the container, and clearly label 
the contents. Finally, rinse the nozzle, probe liner, and front-half of 
the filter holder with water followed by acetone, and discard these 
rinses.

    Note: The use of a total of exactly 100 ml is necessary for the 
subsequent blank correction procedures.

    8.2.8 Container No. 4 (Impingers 1 through 3, Moisture Knockout 
Impinger, when used, HNO<INF>3</INF>/H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> 
Impingers Contents and Rinses). Due to the potentially large quantity of 
liquid involved, the tester may place the impinger solutions from 
impingers 1 through 3 in more than one container, if necessary. Measure 
the liquid in the first three impingers to within 0.5 ml using a 
graduated cylinder. Record the volume. This information is required to 
calculate the moisture content of the sampled flue gas. Clean each of 
the first three impingers, the filter support, the back half of the 
filter housing, and connecting glassware by thoroughly rinsing with 100 
ml of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> using the procedure as applicable in Method 
12, Section 8.7.3.

    Note: The use of exactly 100 ml of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> rinse is 
necessary for the subsequent blank correction procedures. Combine the 
rinses and impinger solutions, measure and record the final total 
volume. Mark the height of the fluid level, seal the container, and 
clearly label the contents.

    8.2.9 Container Nos. 5A (0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF>), 5B 
(KMnO<INF>4</INF>/H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF> absorbing solution), and 
5C (8 N HCl rinse and dilution).
    8.2.9.1 When sampling for Hg, pour all the liquid from the impinger 
(normally impinger No. 4) that immediately preceded the two permanganate 
impingers into a graduated cylinder and measure the volume to within 0.5 
ml. This information is required to calculate the moisture content of 
the sampled flue gas. Place the liquid in Container No. 5A. Rinse the 
impinger with exactly 100 ml of 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> and place this 
rinse in Container No. 5A.
    8.2.9.2 Pour all the liquid from the two permanganate impingers into 
a graduated cylinder and measure the volume to within 0.5 ml. This 
information is required to calculate the moisture content of the sampled 
flue gas. Place this acidic KMnO<INF>4</INF> solution into Container No. 
5B. Using a total of exactly 100 ml of fresh acidified KMnO<INF>4</INF> 
solution for all rinses (approximately 33 ml per rinse), rinse the two 
permanganate impingers and connecting glassware a minimum of three 
times. Pour the rinses into Container No. 5B, carefully assuring 
transfer of all loose precipitated materials from the two impingers. 
Similarly, using 100 ml total of water, rinse the permanganate impingers 
and connecting glass a minimum of three times, and pour the rinses into 
Container 5B, carefully assuring transfer of any loose precipitated 
material. Mark the height of the fluid level, and clearly label the 
contents. Read the Precaution: in Section 7.3.2.

    Note: Due to the potential reaction of KMnO<INF>4</INF> with acid, 
pressure buildup can occur in the sample storage bottles. Do not fill 
these bottles completely and take precautions to relieve excess 
pressure. A No. 70-72 hole drilled in the container cap and Teflon liner 
has been used successfully.

    8.2.9.3 If no visible deposits remain after the water rinse, no 
further rinse is necessary. However, if deposits remain on the impinger 
surfaces, wash them with 25 ml of 8 N HCl, and place the wash in a 
separate sample container labeled No. 5C containing 200 ml of water. 
First, place 200 ml of water in the container. Then wash the impinger 
walls and stem with the HCl by turning the

[[Page 587]]

impinger on its side and rotating it so that the HCl contacts all inside 
surfaces. Use a total of only 25 ml of 8 N HCl for rinsing both 
permanganate impingers combined. Rinse the first impinger, then pour the 
actual rinse used for the first impinger into the second impinger for 
its rinse. Finally, pour the 25 ml of 8 N HCl rinse carefully into the 
container. Mark the height of the fluid level on the outside of the 
container to determine if leakage occurs during transport.
    8.2.10 Container No. 6 (Silica Gel). Note the color of the 
indicating silica gel to determine whether it has been completely spent 
and make a notation of its condition. Transfer the silica gel from its 
impinger to its original container and seal it. The tester may use a 
funnel to pour the silica gel and a rubber policeman to remove the 
silica gel from the impinger. The small amount of particles that might 
adhere to the impinger wall need not be removed. Do not use water or 
other liquids to transfer the silica gel since weight gained in the 
silica gel impinger is used for moisture calculations. Alternatively, if 
a balance is available in the field, record the weight of the spent 
silica gel (or silica gel plus impinger) to the nearest 0.5 g.
    8.2.11 Container No. 7 (Acetone Blank). If particulate emissions are 
to be determined, at least once during each field test, place a 100-ml 
portion of the acetone used in the sample recovery process into a 
container labeled No. 7. Seal the container.
    8.2.12 Container No. 8A (0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> Blank). At least once 
during each field test, place 300 ml of the 0.1 N HNO<INF>3</INF> 
solution used in the sample recovery process into a container labeled 
No. 8A. Seal the container.
    8.2.13 Container No. 8B (Water Blank). At least once during each 
field test, place 100 ml of the water used in the sample recovery 
process into a container labeled No. 8B. Seal the container.
    8.2.14 Container No. 9 (5 Percent HNO<INF>3</INF>/10 Percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> Blank). At least once during each field test, 
place 200 ml of the 5 Percent HNO<INF>3</INF>/10 Percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> solution used as the nitric acid impinger 
reagent into a container labeled No. 9. Seal the container.
    8.2.15 Container No. 10 (Acidified KMnO<INF>4</INF> Blank). At least 
once during each field test, place 100 ml of the acidified 
KMnO<INF>4</INF> solution used as the impinger solution and in the 
sample recovery process into a container labeled No. 10. Prepare the 
container as described in Section 8.2.9.2. Read the Precaution: in 
Section 7.3.2 and read the NOTE in Section 8.2.9.2.
    8.2.16 Container No. 11 (8 N HCl Blank). At least once during each 
field test, place 200 ml of water into a sample container labeled No. 
11. Then carefully add with stirring 25 ml of 8 N HCl. Mix well and seal 
the container.
    8.2.17 Container No. 12 (Sample Filter Blank). Once during each 
field test, place into a petri dish labeled No. 12 three unused blank 
filters from the same lot as the sampling filters. Seal the petri dish.
    8.3 Sample Preparation. Note the level of the liquid in each of the 
containers and determine if any sample was lost during shipment. If a 
noticeable amount of leakage has occurred, either void the sample or use 
methods, subject to the approval of the Administrator, to correct the 
final results. A diagram illustrating sample preparation and analysis 
procedures for each of the sample train components is shown in Figure 
29-3.
    8.3.1 Container No. 1 (Sample Filter).
    8.3.1.1 If particulate emissions are being determined, first 
desiccate the filter and filter catch without added heat (do not heat 
the filters to speed the drying) and weigh to a constant weight as 
described in Section 11.2.1 of Method 5.
    8.3.1.2 Following this procedure, or initially, if particulate 
emissions are not being determined in addition to metals analysis, 
divide the filter with its filter catch into portions containing 
approximately 0.5 g each. Place the pieces in the analyst's choice of 
either individual microwave pressure relief vessels or Parr Bombs. Add 6 
ml of concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> and 4 ml of concentrated HF to each 
vessel. For microwave heating, microwave the samples for approximately 
12 to 15 minutes total heating time as follows: heat for 2 to 3 minutes, 
then turn off the microwave for 2 to 3 minutes, then heat for 2 to 3 
minutes, etc., continue this alternation until the 12 to 15 minutes 
total heating time are completed (this procedure should comprise 
approximately 24 to 30 minutes at 600 watts). Microwave heating times 
are approximate and are dependent upon the number of samples being 
digested simultaneously. Sufficient heating is evidenced by sorbent 
reflux within the vessel. For conventional heating, heat the Parr Bombs 
at 140 [deg]C (285 [deg]F) for 6 hours. Then cool the samples to room 
temperature, and combine with the acid digested probe rinse as required 
in Section 8.3.3.
    8.3.1.3 If the sampling train includes an optional glass cyclone in 
front of the filter, prepare and digest the cyclone catch by the 
procedures described in Section 8.3.1.2 and then combine the digestate 
with the digested filter sample.
    8.3.2 Container No. 2 (Acetone Rinse). Note the level of liquid in 
the container and confirm on the analysis sheet whether or not leakage 
occurred during transport. If a noticeable amount of leakage has 
occurred, either void the sample or use methods, subject to the approval 
of the Administrator, to correct the final results. Measure the liquid 
in this container either volumetrically within 1 ml or gravimetrically 
within 0.5 g. Transfer the contents to an acid-cleaned, tared 250-ml 
beaker and evaporate to dryness at ambient temperature and pressure. If 
particulate

[[Page 588]]

emissions are being determined, desiccate for 24 hours without added 
heat, weigh to a constant weight according to the procedures described 
in Section 11.2.1 of Method 5, and report the results to the nearest 0.1 
mg. Redissolve the residue with 10 ml of concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF>. 
Quantitatively combine the resultant sample, including all liquid and 
any particulate matter, with Container No. 3 before beginning Section 
8.3.3.
    8.3.3 Container No. 3 (Probe Rinse). Verify that the pH of this 
sample is 2 or lower. If it is not, acidify the sample by careful 
addition with stirring of concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> to pH 2. Use 
water to rinse the sample into a beaker, and cover the beaker with a 
ribbed watch glass. Reduce the sample volume to approximately 20 ml by 
heating on a hot plate at a temperature just below boiling. Digest the 
sample in microwave vessels or Parr Bombs by quantitatively transferring 
the sample to the vessel or bomb, carefully adding the 6 ml of 
concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF>, 4 ml of concentrated HF, and then 
continuing to follow the procedures described in Section 8.3.1.2. Then 
combine the resultant sample directly with the acid digested portions of 
the filter prepared previously in Section 8.3.1.2. The resultant 
combined sample is referred to as ``Sample Fraction 1''. Filter the 
combined sample using Whatman 541 filter paper. Dilute to 300 ml (or the 
appropriate volume for the expected metals concentration) with water. 
This diluted sample is ``Analytical Fraction 1''. Measure and record the 
volume of Analytical Fraction 1 to within 0.1 ml. Quantitatively remove 
a 50-ml aliquot and label as ``Analytical Fraction 1B''. Label the 
remaining 250-ml portion as ``Analytical Fraction 1A''. Analytical 
Fraction 1A is used for ICAP or AAS analysis for all desired metals 
except Hg. Analytical Fraction 1B is used for the determination of 
front-half Hg.
    8.3.4 Container No. 4 (Impingers 1-3). Measure and record the total 
volume of this sample to within 0.5 ml and label it ``Sample Fraction 
2''. Remove a 75- to 100-ml aliquot for Hg analysis and label the 
aliquot ``Analytical Fraction 2B''. Label the remaining portion of 
Container No. 4 as ``Sample Fraction 2A''. Sample Fraction 2A defines 
the volume of Analytical Fraction 2A prior to digestion. All of Sample 
Fraction 2A is digested to produce ``Analytical Fraction 2A''. 
Analytical Fraction 2A defines the volume of Sample Fraction 2A after 
its digestion and the volume of Analytical Fraction 2A is normally 150 
ml. Analytical Fraction 2A is analyzed for all metals except Hg. Verify 
that the pH of Sample Fraction 2A is 2 or lower. If necessary, use 
concentrated HNO<INF>3</INF> by careful addition and stirring to lower 
Sample Fraction 2A to pH 2. Use water to rinse Sample Fraction 2A into a 
beaker and then cover the beaker with a ribbed watchglass. Reduce Sample 
Fraction 2A to approximately 20 ml by heating on a hot plate at a 
temperature just below boiling. Then follow either of the digestion 
procedures described in Sections 8.3.4.1 or 8.3.4.2.
    8.3.4.1 Conventional Digestion Procedure. Add 30 ml of 50 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF>, and heat for 30 minutes on a hot plate to just below 
boiling. Add 10 ml of 3 percent H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> and heat for 
10 more minutes. Add 50 ml of hot water, and heat the sample for an 
additional 20 minutes. Cool, filter the sample, and dilute to 150 ml (or 
the appropriate volume for the expected metals concentrations) with 
water. This dilution produces Analytical Fraction 2A. Measure and record 
the volume to within 0.1 ml.
    8.3.4.2 Microwave Digestion Procedure. Add 10 ml of 50 percent 
HNO<INF>3</INF> and heat for 6 minutes total heating time in 
alternations of 1 to 2 minutes at 600 Watts followed by 1 to 2 minutes 
with no power, etc., similar to the procedure described in Section 
8.3.1. Allow the sample to cool. Add 10 ml of 3 percent 
H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> and heat for 2 more minutes. Add 50 ml of hot 
water, and heat for an additional 5 minutes. Cool, filter the sample, 
and dilute to 150 ml (or the appropriate volume for the expected metals 
concentrations) with water. This dilution produces Analytical Fraction 
2A. Measure and record the volume to within 0.1 ml.

    Note: All microwave heating times given are approximate and are 
dependent upon the number of samples being digested at a time. Heating 
times as given above have been found acceptable for simultaneous 
digestion of up to 12 individual samples. Sufficient heating is 
evidenced by solvent reflux within the vessel.

    8.3.5 Container No. 5A (Impinger 4), Container Nos. 5B and 5C 
(Impingers 5 and 6). Keep the samples in Containers Nos. 5A, 5B, and 5C 
separate from each other. Measure and record the volume of 5A to within 
0.5 ml. Label the contents of Container No. 5A to be Analytical Fraction 
3A. To remove any brown MnO<INF>2</INF> precipitate from the contents of 
Container No. 5B, filter its contents through Whatman 40 filter paper 
into a 500 ml volumetric flask and dilute to volume with water. Save the 
filter for digestion of the brown MnO<INF>2</INF> precipitate. Label the 
500 ml filtrate from Container No. 5B to be Analytical Fraction 3B. 
Analyze Analytical Fraction 3B for Hg within 48 hours of the filtration 
step. Place the saved filter, which was used to remove the brown 
MnO<INF>2</INF> precipitate, into an appropriately sized vented 
container, which will allow release of any gases including chlorine 
formed when the filter is digested. In a laboratory hood which will 
remove any gas produced by the digestion of the MnO<INF>2</INF>, add 25 
ml of 8 N HCl to the filter and allow to digest for a minimum of 24 
hours at room temperature. Filter the contents of Container No. 5C 
through a Whatman 40 filter into a 500-ml volumetric flask. Then filter

[[Page 589]]

the result of the digestion of the brown MnO<INF>2</INF> from Container 
No. 5B through a Whatman 40 filter into the same 500-ml volumetric 
flask, and dilute and mix well to volume with water. Discard the Whatman 
40 filter. Mark this combined 500-ml dilute HCl solution as Analytical 
Fraction 3C.
    8.3.6 Container No. 6 (Silica Gel). Weigh the spent silica gel (or 
silica gel plus impinger) to the nearest 0.5 g using a balance.

                           9.0 Quality Control

    9.1 Field Reagent Blanks, if analyzed. Perform the digestion and 
analysis of the blanks in Container Nos. 7 through 12 that were produced 
in Sections 8.2.11 through 8.2.17, respectively. For Hg field reagent 
blanks, use a 10 ml aliquot for digestion and analysis.
    9.1.1 Digest and analyze one of the filters from Container No. 12 
per Section 8.3.1, 100 ml from Container No. 7 per Section 8.3.2, and 
100 ml from Container No. 8A per Section 8.3.3. This step produces 
blanks for Analytical Fractions 1A and 1B.
    9.1.2 Combine 100 ml of Container No. 8A with 200 ml from Container 
No. 9, and digest and analyze the resultant volume per Section 8.3.4. 
This step produces blanks for Analytical Fractions 2A and 2B.
    9.1.3 Digest and analyze a 100-ml portion of Container No. 8A to 
produce a blank for Analytical Fraction 3A.
    9.1.4 Combine 100 ml from Container No. 10 with 33 ml from Container 
No. 8B to produce a blank for Analytical Fraction 3B. Filter the 
resultant 133 ml as described for Container No. 5B in Section 8.3.5, 
except do not dilute the 133 ml. Analyze this blank for Hg within 48 hr 
of the filtration step, and use 400 ml as the blank volume when 
calculating the blank mass value. Use the actual volumes of the other 
analytical blanks when calculating their mass values.
    9.1.5 Digest the filter that was used to remove any brown 
MnO<INF>2</INF> precipitate from the blank for Analytical Fraction 3B by 
the same procedure as described in Section 8.3.5 for the similar sample 
filter. Filter the digestate and the contents of Container No. 11 
through Whatman 40 paper into a 500-ml volumetric flask, and dilute to 
volume with water. These steps produce a blank for Analytical Fraction 
3C.
    9.1.6 Analyze the blanks for Analytical Fraction Blanks 1A and 2A 
per Section 11.1.1 and/or Section 11.1.2. Analyze the blanks for 
Analytical Fractions 1B, 2B, 3A, 3B, and 3C per Section 11.1.3. Analysis 
of the blank for Analytical Fraction 1A produces the front-half reagent 
blank correction values for the desired metals except for Hg; Analysis 
of the blank for Analytical Fraction 1B produces the front-half reagent 
blank correction value for Hg. Analysis of the blank for Analytical 
Fraction 2A produces the back-half reagent blank correction values for 
all of the desired metals except for Hg, while separate analyses of the 
blanks for Analytical Fractions 2B, 3A, 3B, and 3C produce the back-half 
reagent blank correction value for Hg.
    9.2 Quality Control Samples. Analyze the following quality control 
samples.
    9.2.1 ICAP and ICP-MS Analysis. Follow the respective quality 
control descriptions in Section 8 of Methods 6010 and 6020 in EPA 
Publication SW-846 Third Edition (November 1986) including updates I, 
II, IIA, IIB and III, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 60.17(i). 
For the purposes of a source test that consists of three sample runs, 
modify those requirements to include the following: two instrument check 
standard runs, two calibration blank runs, one interference check sample 
at the beginning of the analysis (analyze by Method of Standard 
Additions unless within 25 percent), one quality control sample to check 
the accuracy of the calibration standards (required to be within 25 
percent of calibration), and one duplicate analysis (required to be 
within 20 percent of average or repeat all analyses).
    9.2.2 Direct Aspiration AAS and/or GFAAS Analysis for Sb, As, Ba, 
Be, Cd, Cu, Cr, Co, Pb, Ni, Mn, Hg, P, Se, Ag, Tl, and Zn. Analyze all 
samples in duplicate. Perform a matrix spike on at least one front-half 
sample and one back-half sample, or one combined sample. If recoveries 
of less than 75 percent or greater than 125 percent are obtained for the 
matrix spike, analyze each sample by the Method of Standard Additions. 
Analyze a quality control sample to check the accuracy of the 
calibration standards. If the results are not within 20 percent, repeat 
the calibration.
    9.2.3 CVAAS Analysis for Hg. Analyze all samples in duplicate. 
Analyze a quality control sample to check the accuracy of the 
calibration standards (if not within 15 percent, repeat calibration). 
Perform a matrix spike on one sample (if not within 25 percent, analyze 
all samples by the Method of Standard Additions). Additional information 
on quality control can be obtained from Method 7470 in EPA Publication 
SW-846 Third Edition (November 1986) including updates I, II, IIA, IIB 
and III, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 60.17(i), or in Standard 
Methods for Water and Wastewater Method 303F.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    Note: Maintain a laboratory log of all calibrations.

    10.1 Sampling Train Calibration. Calibrate the sampling train 
components according to the indicated sections of Method 5: Probe Nozzle 
(Section 10.1); Pitot Tube (Section 10.2); Metering System (Section 
10.3); Probe Heater (Section 10.4); Temperature Sensors (Section 10.5); 
Leak-Check of the Metering System (Section 8.4.1); and Barometer 
(Section 10.6).

[[Page 590]]

    10.2 Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma Spectrometer Calibration. 
Prepare standards as outlined in Section 7.5. Profile and calibrate the 
instrument according to the manufacturer's recommended procedures using 
those standards. Check the calibration once per hour. If the instrument 
does not reproduce the standard concentrations within 10 percent, 
perform the complete calibration procedures. Perform ICP-MS analysis by 
following Method 6020 in EPA Publication SW-846 Third Edition (November 
1986) including updates I, II, IIA, IIB and III, as incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 60.17(i).
    10.3 Atomic Absorption Spectrometer--Direct Aspiration AAS, GFAAS, 
and CVAAS analyses. Prepare the standards as outlined in Section 7.5 and 
use them to calibrate the spectrometer. Calibration procedures are also 
outlined in the EPA methods referred to in Table 29-2 and in Method 7470 
in EPA Publication SW-846 Third Edition (November 1986) including 
updates I, II, IIA, IIB and III, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 
60.17(i), or in Standard Methods for Water and Wastewater Method 303F 
(for Hg). Run each standard curve in duplicate and use the mean values 
to calculate the calibration line. Recalibrate the instrument 
approximately once every 10 to 12 samples.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Sample Analysis. For each sampling train sample run, seven 
individual analytical samples are generated; two for all desired metals 
except Hg, and five for Hg. A schematic identifying each sample 
container and the prescribed analytical preparation and analysis scheme 
is shown in Figure 29-3. The first two analytical samples, labeled 
Analytical Fractions 1A and 1B, consist of the digested samples from the 
front-half of the train. Analytical Fraction 1A is for ICAP, ICP-MS or 
AAS analysis as described in Sections 11.1.1 and 11.1.2, respectively. 
Analytical Fraction 1B is for front-half Hg analysis as described in 
Section 11.1.3. The contents of the back-half of the train are used to 
prepare the third through seventh analytical samples. The third and 
fourth analytical samples, labeled Analytical Fractions 2A and 2B, 
contain the samples from the moisture removal impinger No. 1, if used, 
and HNO<INF>3</INF>/H<INF>2</INF>O<INF>2</INF> impingers Nos. 2 and 3. 
Analytical Fraction 2A is for ICAP, ICP-MS or AAS analysis for target 
metals, except Hg. Analytical Fraction 2B is for analysis for Hg. The 
fifth through seventh analytical samples, labeled Analytical Fractions 
3A, 3B, and 3C, consist of the impinger contents and rinses from the 
empty impinger No. 4 and the H<INF>2</INF>SO<INF>4</INF>/
KMnO<INF>4</INF> Impingers Nos. 5 and 6. These analytical samples are 
for analysis for Hg as described in Section 11.1.3. The total back-half 
Hg catch is determined from the sum of Analytical Fractions 2B, 3A, 3B, 
and 3C. Analytical Fractions 1A and 2A can be combined proportionally 
prior to analysis.
    11.1.1 ICAP and ICP-MS Analysis. Analyze Analytical Fractions 1A and 
2A by ICAP using Method 6010 or Method 200.7 (40 CFR 136, Appendix C). 
Calibrate the ICAP, and set up an analysis program as described in 
Method 6010 or Method 200.7. Follow the quality control procedures 
described in Section 9.2.1. Recommended wavelengths for analysis are as 
shown in Table 29-2. These wavelengths represent the best combination of 
specificity and potential detection limit. Other wavelengths may be 
substituted if they can provide the needed specificity and detection 
limit, and are treated with the same corrective techniques for spectral 
interference. Initially, analyze all samples for the target metals 
(except Hg) plus Fe and Al. If Fe and Al are present, the sample might 
have to be diluted so that each of these elements is at a concentration 
of less than 50 ppm so as to reduce their spectral interferences on As, 
Cd, Cr, and Pb. Perform ICP-MS analysis by following Method 6020 in EPA 
Publication SW-846 Third Edition (November 1986) including updates I, 
II, IIA, IIB and III, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 60.17(i).

    Note: When analyzing samples in a HF matrix, an alumina torch should 
be used; since all front-half samples will contain HF, use an alumina 
torch.

    11.1.2 AAS by Direct Aspiration and/or GFAAS. If analysis of metals 
in Analytical Fractions 1A and 2A by using GFAAS or direct aspiration 
AAS is needed, use Table 29-3 to determine which techniques and 
procedures to apply for each target metal. Use Table 29-3, if necessary, 
to determine techniques for minimization of interferences. Calibrate the 
instrument according to Section 10.3 and follow the quality control 
procedures specified in Section 9.2.2.
    11.1.3 CVAAS Hg analysis. Analyze Analytical Fractions 1B, 2B, 3A, 
3B, and 3C separately for Hg using CVAAS following the method outlined 
in Method 7470 in EPA Publication SW-846 Third Edition (November 1986) 
including updates I, II, IIA, IIB and III, as incorporated by reference 
in Sec. 60.17(i), or in Standard Methods for Water and Wastewater 
Analysis, 15th Edition, Method 303F, or, optionally using Note No. 2 at 
the end of this section. Set up the calibration curve (zero to 1000 ng) 
as described in Method 7470 or similar to Method 303F using 300-ml BOD 
bottles instead of Erlenmeyers. Perform the following for each Hg 
analysis. From each original sample, select and record an aliquot in the 
size range from 1 ml to 10 ml. If no prior knowledge of the expected 
amount of Hg in the sample exists, a 5 ml aliquot is suggested for the 
first dilution to 100 ml (see Note No. 1 at end of this section). The 
total amount of Hg in the aliquot shall be less than 1 [micro]g and 
within the range (zero to 1000

[[Page 591]]

ng) of the calibration curve. Place the sample aliquot into a separate 
300-ml BOD bottle, and add enough water to make a total volume of 100 
ml. Next add to it sequentially the sample digestion solutions and 
perform the sample preparation described in the procedures of Method 
7470 or Method 303F. (See Note No. 2 at the end of this section). If the 
maximum readings are off-scale (because Hg in the aliquot exceeded the 
calibration range; including the situation where only a 1-ml aliquot of 
the original sample was digested), then dilute the original sample (or a 
portion of it) with 0.15 percent HNO<INF>3</INF> (1.5 ml concentrated 
HNO<INF>3</INF> per liter aqueous solution) so that when a 1- to 10-ml 
aliquot of the ``0.15 HNO<INF>3</INF> percent dilution of the original 
sample'' is digested and analyzed by the procedures described above, it 
will yield an analysis within the range of the calibration curve.

    Note No. 1: When Hg levels in the sample fractions are below the in-
stack detection limit given in Table 29-1, select a 10 ml aliquot for 
digestion and analysis as described.
    Note No. 2: Optionally, Hg can be analyzed by using the CVAAS 
analytical procedures given by some instrument manufacturer's 
directions. These include calibration and quality control procedures for 
the Leeman Model PS200, the Perkin Elmer FIAS systems, and similar 
models, if available, of other instrument manufacturers. For digestion 
and analyses by these instruments, perform the following two steps: (1), 
Digest the sample aliquot through the addition of the aqueous 
hydroxylamine hydrochloride/sodium chloride solution the same as 
described in this section: (The Leeman, Perkin Elmer, and similar 
instruments described in this note add automatically the necessary 
stannous chloride solution during the automated analysis of Hg.); (2), 
Upon completion of the digestion described in (1), analyze the sample 
according to the instrument manufacturer's directions. This approach 
allows multiple (including duplicate) automated analyses of a digested 
sample aliquot.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    12.1 Nomenclature.

A=Analytical detection limit, [micro]g/ml.
B=Liquid volume of digested sample prior to aliquotting for analysis, 
ml.
C=Stack sample gas volume, dsm\3\.
C<INF>a1</INF>=Concentration of metal in Analytical Fraction 1A as read 
from the standard curve, [micro]g/ml.
C<INF>a2</INF>=Concentration of metal in Analytical Fraction 2A as read 
from the standard curve, ([micro]g/ml).
C<INF>s</INF>=Concentration of a metal in the stack gas, mg/dscm.
D=In-stack detection limit, [micro]g/m\3\.
F<INF>a</INF>=Aliquot factor, volume of Sample Fraction 2 divided by 
volume of Sample Fraction 2A (see Section 8.3.4.)
F<INF>d</INF>=Dilution factor (F<INF>d</INF>=the inverse of the 
fractional portion of the concentrated sample in the solution actually 
used in the instrument to produce the reading C<INF>a1</INF>. For 
example, if a 2 ml aliquot of Analytical Fraction 1A is diluted to 10 ml 
to place it in the calibration range, F<INF>d</INF>=5).
Hg<INF>bh</INF>=Total mass of Hg collected in the back-half of the 
sampling train, [micro]g.
Hg<INF>bh2</INF>=Total mass of Hg collected in Sample Fraction 2, 
[micro]g.
Hg<INF>bh3(A,B,C)</INF>=Total mass of Hg collected separately in 
Fraction 3A, 3B, or 3C, [micro]g.
Hg<INF>bhb</INF>=Blank correction value for mass of Hg detected in back-
half field reagent blanks, [micro]g.
Hg<INF>fh</INF>=Total mass of Hg collected in the front-half of the 
sampling train (Sample Fraction 1), [micro]g.
Hg<INF>fhb</INF>=Blank correction value for mass of Hg detected in 
front-half field reagent blank, [micro]g.
Hg<INF>t</INF>=Total mass of Hg collected in the sampling train, 
[micro]g.
M<INF>bh</INF>=Total mass of each metal (except Hg) collected in the 
back-half of the sampling train (Sample Fraction 2), [micro]g.
M<INF>bhb</INF>=Blank correction value for mass of metal detected in 
back-half field reagent blank, [micro]g.
M<INF>fh</INF>=Total mass of each metal (except Hg) collected in the 
front half of the sampling train (Sample Fraction 1), [micro]g.
M<INF>fhb</INF>=Blank correction value for mass of metal detected in 
front-half field reagent blank, [micro]g.
M<INF>t</INF>=Total mass of each metal (separately stated for each 
metal) collected in the sampling train, [micro]g.
M<INF>t</INF>=Total mass of that metal collected in the sampling train, 
[micro]g; (substitute Hg<INF>t</INF> for M<INF>t</INF> for the 
H<INF>g</INF> calculation).
Q<INF>bh2</INF>=Quantity of Hg, [micro]g, TOTAL in the ALIQUOT of 
Analytical Fraction 2B selected for digestion and analysis . NOTE: For 
example, if a 10 ml aliquot of Analytical Fraction 2B is taken and 
digested and analyzed (according to Section 11.1.3 and its NOTES Nos. 1 
and 2), then calculate and use the total amount of Hg in the 10 ml 
aliquot for Q<INF>bh2</INF>.
Q<INF>bh3(A,B,C)</INF>=Quantity of Hg, [micro]g, TOTAL, separately, in 
the ALIQUOT of Analytical Fraction 3A, 3B, or 3C selected for digestion 
and analysis (see NOTES in Sections 12.7.1 and 12.7.2 describing the 
quantity ``Q'' and calculate similarly).
Q<INF>fh</INF>=Quantity of Hg, [micro]g, TOTAL in the ALIQUOT of 
Analytical Fraction 1B selected for digestion and analysis. NOTE: For 
example, if a 10 ml aliquot of Analytical Fraction 1B is taken and 
digested and analyzed (according to Section 11.1.3 and its NOTES Nos. 1

[[Page 592]]

and 2), then calculate and use the total amount of Hg in the 10 ml 
aliquot for Q<INF>fh</INF>.
V<INF>a</INF>=Total volume of digested sample solution (Analytical 
Fraction 2A), ml (see Section 8.3.4.1 or 8.3.4.2, as applicable).
V<INF>f1B</INF>=Volume of aliquot of Analytical Fraction 1B analyzed, 
ml. NOTE: For example, if a 1 ml aliquot of Analytical Fraction 1B was 
diluted to 50 ml with 0.15 percent HNO<INF>3</INF> as described in 
Section 11.1.3 to bring it into the proper analytical range, and then 1 
ml of that 50-ml was digested according to Section 11.1.3 and analyzed, 
V<INF>f1B</INF> would be 0.02 ml.
V<INF>f2B</INF>=Volume of Analytical Fraction 2B analyzed, ml. NOTE: For 
example, if 1 ml of Analytical Fraction 2B was diluted to 10 ml with 
0.15 percent HNO<INF>3</INF> as described in Section 11.1.3 to bring it 
into the proper analytical range, and then 5 ml of that 10 ml was 
analyzed, V<INF>f2B</INF> would be 0.5 ml.
V<INF>f3(A,B,C)</INF>=Volume, separately, of Analytical Fraction 3A, 3B, 
or 3C analyzed, ml (see previous notes in Sections 12.7.1 and 12.7.2, 
describing the quantity ``V'' and calculate similarly).
V<INF>m(std)</INF>=Volume of gas sample as measured by the dry gas 
meter, corrected to dry standard conditions, dscm.
V<INF>soln,1</INF>=Total volume of digested sample solution (Analytical 
Fraction 1), ml.
V<INF>soln,1</INF>=Total volume of Analytical Fraction 1, ml.
V<INF>soln,2</INF>=Total volume of Sample Fraction 2, ml.
    V<INF>soln,3(A,B,C)</INF>=Total volume, separately, of Analytical 
Fraction 3A, 3B, or 3C, ml.
K<INF>4</INF>=10<SUP>-</SUP>\3\ mg/[micro]g.

    12.2 Dry Gas Volume. Using the data from this test, calculate 
V<INF>m(std)</INF>, the dry gas sample volume at standard conditions as 
outlined in Section 12.3 of Method 5.
    12.3 Volume of Water Vapor and Moisture Content. Using the total 
volume of condensate collected during the source sampling, calculate the 
volume of water vapor V<INF>w(std)</INF> and the moisture content 
B<INF>ws</INF> of the stack gas. Use Equations 5-2 and 5-3 of Method 5.
    12.4 Stack Gas Velocity. Using the data from this test and Equation 
2-9 of Method 2, calculate the average stack gas velocity.
    12.5 In-Stack Detection Limits. Calculate the in-stack method 
detection limits shown in Table 29-4 using the conditions described in 
Section 13.3.1 as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.439

    12.6 Metals (Except Hg) in Source Sample.
    12.6.1 Analytical Fraction 1A, Front-Half, Metals (except Hg). 
Calculate separately the amount of each metal collected in Sample 
Fraction 1 of the sampling train using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.440

    Note: If Analytical Fractions 1A and 2A are combined, use 
proportional aliquots. Then make appropriate changes in Equations 29-2 
through 29-4 to reflect this approach.

    12.6.2 Analytical Fraction 2A, Back-Half, Metals (except Hg). 
Calculate separately the amount of each metal collected in Fraction 2 of 
the sampling train using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.441

    12.6.3 Total Train, Metals (except Hg). Calculate the total amount 
of each of the quantified metals collected in the sampling train as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.442

    Note: If the measured blank value for the front half 
(M<INF>fhb</INF>) is in the range 0.0 to ``A'' [micro]g (where ``A'' 
[micro]g equals the value determined by multiplying 1.4 [micro]g/in.2 
times the actual area in in.2 of the sample filter), use M<INF>fhb</INF> 
to correct the emission sample value (M<INF>fh)</INF>; if 
M<INF>fhb</INF> exceeds ``A'' [micro]g, use the greater of I or II:
    I. ``A'' [micro]g.
    II. The lesser of (a) M<INF>fhb</INF>, or (b) 5 percent of 
M<INF>fh</INF>. If the measured blank value for the back-half 
(M<INF>bhb</INF>) is in the range 0.0 to 1 [micro]g, use M<INF>bhb</INF> 
to correct the emission sample value (M<INF>bh</INF>); if 
M<INF>bhb</INF> exceeds 1 [micro]g, use the greater of I or II:
    I. 1 [micro]g.
    II. The lesser of (a) M<INF>bhb</INF>, or (b) 5 percent of 
M<INF>bh</INF>.

    12.7 Hg in Source Sample.
    12.7.1 Analytical Fraction 1B; Front-Half Hg. Calculate the amount 
ofHg collected in the front-half, Sample Fraction 1, of the sampling 
train by using Equation 29-5:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.443

    12.7.2 Analytical Fractions 2B, 3A, 3B, and 3C; Back Half Hg.
    12.7.2.1 Calculate the amount of Hg collected in Sample Fraction 2 
by using Equation 29-6:

[[Page 593]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.444

    12.7.2.2 Calculate each of the back-half Hg values for Analytical 
Fractions 3A, 3B, and 3C by using Equation 29-7:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.445

    12.7.2.3 Calculate the total amount of Hg collected in the back-half 
of the sampling train by using Equation 29-8:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.446

    12.7.3 Total Train Hg Catch. Calculate the total amount of Hg 
collected in the sampling train by using Equation 29-9:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.447

    Note: If the total of the measured blank values (Hg<INF>fhb</INF> + 
Hg<INF>bhb</INF>) is in the range of 0.0 to 0.6 [micro]g, then use the 
total to correct the sample value (Hg<INF>fh</INF> + Hg<INF>bh</INF>); 
if it exceeds 0.6 [micro]g, use the greater of I. or II:
    I. 0.6 [micro]g.
    II. The lesser of (a) (Hg<INF>fhb</INF> + Hg<INF>bhb</INF>), or (b) 
5 percent of the sample value (Hg<INF>fh</INF> + Hg<INF>bh</INF>).

    12.8 Individual Metal Concentrations in Stack Gas. Calculate the 
concentration of each metal in the stack gas (dry basis, adjusted to 
standard conditions) by using Equation 29-10:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.448

    12.9 Isokinetic Variation and Acceptable Results. Same as Method 5, 
Sections 12.11 and 12.12, respectively.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Range. For the analysis described and for similar analyses, the 
ICAP response is linear over several orders of magnitude. Samples 
containing metal concentrations in the nanograms per ml (ng/ml) to 
micrograms per ml ([micro]g/ml) range in the final analytical solution 
can be analyzed using this method. Samples containing greater than 
approximately 50 [micro]g/ml As, Cr, or Pb should be diluted to that 
level or lower for final analysis. Samples containing greater than 
approximately 20 [micro]g/ml of Cd should be diluted to that level 
before analysis.
    13.2 Analytical Detection Limits.

    Note: See Section 13.3 for the description of in-stack detection 
limits.

    13.2.1 ICAP analytical detection limits for the sample solutions 
(based on SW-846, Method 6010) are approximately as follows: Sb (32 ng/
ml), As (53 ng/ml), Ba (2 ng/ml), Be (0.3 ng/ml), Cd (4 ng/ml), Cr (7 
ng/ml), Co (7 ng/ml), Cu (6 ng/ml), Pb (42 ng/ml), Mn (2 ng/ml), Ni (15 
ng/ml), P (75 ng/ml), Se (75 ng/ml), Ag (7 ng/ml), Tl (40 ng/ml), and Zn 
(2 ng/ml). ICP-MS analytical detection limits (based on SW-846, Method 
6020) are lower generally by a factor of ten or more. Be is lower by a 
factor of three. The actual sample analytical detection limits are 
sample dependent and may vary due to the sample matrix.
    13.2.2 The analytical detection limits for analysis by direct 
aspiration AAS (based on SW-846, Method 7000 series) are approximately 
as follows: Sb (200 ng/ml), As (2 ng/ml), Ba (100 ng/ml), Be (5 ng/ml), 
Cd (5 ng/ml), Cr (50 ng/ml), Co (50 ng/ml), Cu (20 ng/ml), Pb (100 ng/
ml), Mn (10 ng/ml), Ni (40 ng/ml), Se (2 ng/ml), Ag (10 ng/ml), Tl (100 
ng/ml), and Zn (5 ng/ml).
    13.2.3 The detection limit for Hg by CVAAS (on the resultant volume 
of the digestion of the aliquots taken for Hg analyses)

[[Page 594]]

can be approximately 0.02 to 0.2 ng/ml, depending upon the type of CVAAS 
analytical instrument used. 13.2.4 The use of GFAAS can enhance the 
detection limits compared to direct aspiration AAS as follows: Sb (3 ng/
ml), As (1 ng/ml), Be (0.2 ng/ml), Cd (0.1 ng/ml), Cr (1 ng/ml), Co (1 
ng/ml), Pb (1 ng/ml), Se (2 ng/ml), and Tl (1 ng/ml).
    13.3 In-stack Detection Limits.
    13.3.1 For test planning purposes in-stack detection limits can be 
developed by using the following information: (1) The procedures 
described in this method, (2) the analytical detection limits described 
in Section 13.2 and in SW-846,(3) the normal volumes of 300 ml 
(Analytical Fraction 1) for the front-half and 150 ml (Analytical 
Fraction 2A) for the back-half samples, and (4) a stack gas sample 
volume of 1.25 m<SUP>3</SUP>. The resultant in-stack method detection 
limits for the above set of conditions are presented in Table 29-1 and 
were calculated by using Eq. 29-1 shown in Section 12.5.
    13.3.2 To ensure optimum precision/resolution in the analyses, the 
target concentrations of metals in the analytical solutions should be at 
least ten times their respective analytical detection limits. Under 
certain conditions, and with greater care in the analytical procedure, 
these concentrations can be as low as approximately three times the 
respective analytical detection limits without seriously impairing the 
precision of the analyses. On at least one sample run in the source 
test, and for each metal analyzed, perform either repetitive analyses, 
Method of Standard Additions, serial dilution, or matrix spike addition, 
etc., to document the quality of the data.
    13.3.3 Actual in-stack method detection limits are based on actual 
source sampling parameters and analytical results as described above. If 
required, the method in-stack detection limits can be improved over 
those shown in Table 29-1 for a specific test by either increasing the 
sampled stack gas volume, reducing the total volume of the digested 
samples, improving the analytical detection limits, or any combination 
of the three. For extremely low levels of Hg only, the aliquot size 
selected for digestion and analysis can be increased to as much as 10 
ml, thus improving the in-stack detection limit by a factor of ten 
compared to a 1 ml aliquot size.
    13.3.3.1 A nominal one hour sampling run will collect a stack gas 
sampling volume of about 1.25 m<SUP>3</SUP>. If the sampling time is 
increased to four hours and 5 m<SUP>3</SUP> are collected, the in-stack 
method detection limits would be improved by a factor of four compared 
to the values shown in Table 29-1.
    13.3.3.2 The in-stack detection limits assume that all of the sample 
is digested and the final liquid volumes for analysis are the normal 
values of 300 ml for Analytical Fraction 1, and 150 ml for Analytical 
Fraction 2A. If the volume of Analytical Fraction 1 is reduced from 300 
to 30 ml, the in-stack detection limits for that fraction of the sample 
would be improved by a factor of ten. If the volume of Analytical 
Fraction 2A is reduced from 150 to 25 ml, the in-stack detection limits 
for that fraction of the sample would be improved by a factor of six. 
Matrix effect checks are necessary on sample analyses and typically are 
of much greater significance for samples that have been concentrated to 
less than the normal original sample volume. Reduction of Analytical 
Fractions 1 and 2A to volumes of less than 30 and 25 ml, respectively, 
could interfere with the redissolving of the residue and could increase 
interference by other compounds to an intolerable level.
    13.3.3.3 When both of the modifications described in Sections 
13.3.3.1 and 13.3.3.2 are used simultaneously on one sample, the 
resultant improvements are multiplicative. For example, an increase in 
stack gas volume by a factor of four and a reduction in the total liquid 
sample digested volume of both Analytical Fractions 1 and 2A by a factor 
of six would result in an improvement by a factor of twenty-four of the 
in-stack method detection limit.
    13.4 Precision. The precision (relative standard deviation) for each 
metal detected in a method development test performed at a sewage sludge 
incinerator were found to be as follows:

Sb (12.7 percent), As (13.5 percent), Ba (20.6 percent), Cd (11.5 
percent), Cr (11.2 percent), Cu (11.5 percent), Pb (11.6 percent), P 
(14.6 percent), Se (15.3 percent), Tl (12.3 percent), and Zn (11.8 
percent). The precision for Ni was 7.7 percent for another test 
conducted at a source simulator. Be, Mn, and Ag were not detected in the 
tests. However, based on the analytical detection limits of the ICAP for 
these metals, their precisions could be similar to those for the other 
metals when detected at similar levels.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. Method 303F in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water 
Wastewater, 15th Edition, 1980. Available from the American Public 
Health Association, 1015 18th Street N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036.
    2. EPA Methods 6010, 6020, 7000, 7041, 7060, 7131, 7421, 7470, 7740, 
and 7841, Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste: Physical/Chemical 
Methods. SW-846, Third Edition, November 1986, with updates I, II, IIA, 
IIB and III. Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, U. S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC 20460.

[[Page 595]]

    3. EPA Method 200.7, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 
136, Appendix C. July 1, 1987.
    4. EPA Methods 1 through 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, 
Part 60, Appendix A, July 1, 1991.
    5. EPA Method 101A, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 61, 
Appendix B, July 1, 1991.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

 Table 29-1--In Stack Method Detection Limits (ug/m3) for the Front-Half, the Back Half, and the Total Sampling
                                       Train Using ICAP, GFAAS, and CVAAS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Front-half:                     Back-half:
                      Metal                          probe and      Back-half:    impringers  4-    Total train
                                                      filter       impinters 1-3        6 a
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Antimony........................................     1 7.7 (0.7)     1 3.8 (0.4)  ..............    1 11.5 (1.1)
Arsenic.........................................    1 12.7 (0.3)     1 6.4 (0.1)  ..............    1 19.1 (0.4)
Barium..........................................             0.5             0.3  ..............             0.8
Beryllium.......................................   1 0.07 (0.05)   1 0.04 (0.03)  ..............   1 0.11 (0.08)
Cadmium.........................................    1 1.0 (0.02)    1 0.5 (0.01)  ..............    1 1.5 (0.03)
Chromium........................................     1 1.7 (0.2)     1 0.8 (0.1)  ..............     1 2.5 (0.3)
Cobalt..........................................     1 1.7 (0.2)     1 0.8 (0.1)  ..............     1 2.5 (0.3)
Copper..........................................             1.4             0.7  ..............             2.1
Lead............................................    1 10.1 (0.2)     1 5.0 (0.1)  ..............    1 15.1 (0.3)
Manganese.......................................     1 0.5 (0.2)     1 0.2 (0.1)  ..............     1 0.7 (0.3)
Mercury.........................................          2 0.06           2 0.3           2 0.2          2 0.56
Nickel..........................................             3.6             1.8  ..............             5.4
Phosphorus......................................              18               9  ..............              27
Selenium........................................      1 18 (0.5)       1 9 (0.3)  ..............      1 27 (0.8)
Silver..........................................             1.7       0.9 (0.7)  ..............             2.6
Thallium........................................     1 9.6 (0.2)     1 4.8 (0.1)  ..............    1 14.4 (0.3)
Zinc............................................             0.5             0.3  ..............            0.8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ Mercury analysis only.
\1\ Detection limit when analyzed by ICAP or GFAAS as shown in parentheses (see Section 11.1.2).
\2\ Detection limit when anaylzed by CVAAS, estimated for Back-half and Total Train. See Sections 13.2 and
  11.1.3. Note: Actual method in-stack detection limits may vary from these values, as described in Section
  13.3.3.


          Table 29-2--Recommended Wavelengths for ICAP Analysis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Wavelength
                         Analyte                               (nm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aluminum (Al)...........................................         308.215
Antimony (Sb)...........................................         206.833
Arsenic (As)............................................         193.696
Barium (Ba).............................................         455.403
Beryllium (Be)..........................................         313.042
Cadmium (Cd)............................................         226.502
Chromium (Cr)...........................................         267.716
Cobalt (Co).............................................         228.616
Copper (Cu).............................................         328.754
Iron (Fe)...............................................         259.940
Lead (Pb)...............................................         220.353
Manganese (Mn)..........................................         257.610
Nickel (Ni).............................................         231.604
Phosphorus (P)..........................................         214.914
Selenium (Se)...........................................         196.026
Silver (Ag).............................................         328.068
Thallium (T1)...........................................         190,864
Zinc (Zn)...............................................         213,856
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 596]]


          Table 29-3--Applicable Techniques, Methods and Minimization of Interferences for AAS Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                   Interferences
      Metal              Technique        SW-846 \1\   Wavelength ----------------------------------------------
                                         Methods No.      (nm)            Cause               Minimization
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fe...............  Aspiration..........         7380        248.3  Contamination......  Great care taken to
                                                                                         avoid contamination.
Pb...............  Aspiration..........         7420        283.3  217.0 nm alternate.  Background correction
                                                                                         required.
Pb...............  Furnace.............         7421        283.3  Poor recoveries....  Matrix modifier, add 10
                                                                                         [micro]l of phosphorus
                                                                                         acid to 1 ml of
                                                                                         prepared sample in
                                                                                         sampler cup.
Mn...............  Aspiration..........         7460        279.5  403.1 nm alternate.  Background correction
                                                                                         required.
Ni...............  Aspiration..........         7520        232.0  352.4 nm alternate   Background correction
                                                                    Fe, Co, and Cr.      required. Matrix
                                                                   Nonlinear response.   matching or nitrous-
                                                                                         oxide/acetylene flame
                                                                                        Sample dilution or use
                                                                                         352.3 nm line
Se...............  Furnace.............         7740        196.0  Volatility.........  Spike samples and
                                                                                         reference materials and
                                                                                         add nickel nitrate to
                                                                                         minimize
                                                                                         volatilization.
                                                                   Adsorption &         Background correction is
                                                                    scatter.             required and Zeeman
                                                                                         background correction
                                                                                         can be useful.
Ag...............  Aspiration..........         7760        328.1  Adsorption &         Background correction is
                                                                    scatter AgCl         required. Avoid
                                                                    insoluble.           hydrochloric acid
                                                                                         unless silver is in
                                                                                         solution as a chloride
                                                                                         complex. Sample and
                                                                                         standards monitored for
                                                                                         aspiration rate.
Tl...............  Aspiration..........         7840        276.8                       Background correction is
                                                                                         required. Hydrochloric
                                                                                         acid should not be
                                                                                         used.
Tl...............  Furnace.............         7841        276.8  Hydrochloric acid    Background correction is
                                                                    or chloride.         required. Verify that
                                                                                         losses are not
                                                                                         occurring for
                                                                                         volatilization by
                                                                                         spiked samples or
                                                                                         standard addition;
                                                                                         Palladium is a suitable
                                                                                         matrix modifier. 4
Zn...............  Aspiration..........         7950        213.9  High Si, Cu, & P     Strontium removes Cu and
                                                                    Contamination.       phosphate.
                                                                                        Great care taken to
                                                                                         avoid contamination.
Sb...............  Aspiration..........         7040        217.6  1000 mg/ml Pb, Ni,   Use secondary wavelength
                                                                    Cu, or acid.         of 231.1 nm; match
                                                                                         sample & standards acid
                                                                                         concentration or use
                                                                                         nitrous oxide/acetylene
                                                                                         flame.
Sb...............  Furnace.............         7041        217.6  High Pb............  Secondary wavelength or
                                                                                         Zeeman correction.
As...............  Furnace.............         7060        193.7  Arsenic              Spike samples and add
                                                                    Volatilization       nickel nitrate solution
                                                                    Aluminum.            to digestates prior to
                                                                                         analysis. Use Zeeman
                                                                                         background correction.
Ba...............  Aspiration..........         7080        553.6
                                                                   Calcium............
                                                                   Barium Ionization..  High hollow cathode
                                                                                         current and narrow band
                                                                                         set.
                                                                                        2 ml of KCl per 100 m1
                                                                                         of sample.
Be...............  Aspiration..........         7090        234.9  500 ppm Al. High Mg  Add 0.1% fluoride.
                                                                    and Si.
Be...............  Furnace.............         7091        234.9  Be in optical path.  Optimize parameters to
                                                                                         minimize effects.
Cd...............  Aspiration..........         7130        228.8  Absorption and       Background correction is
                                                                    light scattering.    required.
Cd...............  Furnace.............         7131        228.8  As above...........  As above.
                                                                   Excess Chloride....  Ammonium phosphate used
                                                                   ...................   as a matrix modifier.
                                                                   Pipet Tips.........  Use cadmium-free tips.
 

[[Page 597]]

 
Cr...............  Aspiration..........         7190        357.9  Alkali metal.......  KCl ionization
                                                                                         suppressant in samples
                                                                                         and standards--Consult
                                                                                         mfgs' literature.
Co...............  Furnace.............         7201        240.7  Excess chloride....  Use Method of Standard
                                                                                         Additions.
Cr...............  Furnace.............         7191        357.9  200 mg/L Ca and P..  All calcium nitrate for
                                                                                         a know constant effect
                                                                                         and to eliminate effect
                                                                                         of phosphate.
Cu...............  Aspiration..........         7210        324.7  Absorption and       Consult manufacturer's
                                                                    Scatter.             manual.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Refer to EPA publication SW-846 (Reference 2 in Section 16.0).


[[Page 598]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.449


[[Page 599]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.450


[[Page 600]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.451


[[Page 601]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.452


[36 FR 24877, Dec. 23, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting part 60, 
appendix A-8, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 602]]

            Appendix B to Part 60--Performance Specifications

Performance Specification 1--Specifications and test procedures for 
continuous opacity monitoring systems in stationary sources
Performance Specification 2--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems 
in Stationary Sources
Performance Specification 3--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems 
in Stationary Sources
Performance Specification 4--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Carbon Monoxide Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources
Performance Specification 4A--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Carbon Monoxide Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources
Performance Specification 4B--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Carbon Monoxide and Oxygen Continuous Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources
Performance Specification 5--Specifications and Test Procedures for TRS 
Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources
Performance Specification 6--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Continuous Emission Rate Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources
Performance Specification 7--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Hydrogen Sulfide Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources
Performance Specification 8--Performance Specifications for Volatile 
Organic Compound Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources
Performance Specification 8A--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Total Hydrocarbon Continuous Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources
Performance Specification 9--Specifications and Test Procedures for Gas 
Chromatographic Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources
Performance Specification 15--Performance Specification for Extractive 
FTIR Continuous Emissions Monitor Systems in Stationary Sources

  Performance Specification 1--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
       Continuous Opacity Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources

 1.0 What Is the Purpose and Applicability of Performance Specification 
                                   1?

    Performance Specification 1 (PS-1) provides (1) requirements for the 
design, performance, and installation of a continuous opacity monitoring 
system (COMS) and (2) data computation procedures for evaluating the 
acceptability of a COMS. It specifies activities for two groups (1) the 
owner or operator and (2) the opacity monitor manufacturer.
    1.1 Measurement Parameter. PS-1 covers the instrumental measurement 
of opacity caused by attenuation of projected light due to absorption 
and scatter of the light by particulate matter in the effluent gas 
stream.
    1.2 What COMS must comply with PS-1? If you are an owner or operator 
of a facility with a COMS as a result of this Part, then PS-1 applies to 
your COMS if one of the following is true:
    (1) Your facility has a new COMS installed after February 6, 2001; 
or
    (2) Your COMS is replaced, relocated, or substantially refurbished 
(in the opinion of the regulatory authority) after February 6, 2001; or
    (3) Your COMS was installed before February 6, 2001 and is 
specifically required by regulatory action other than the promulgation 
of PS-1 to be recertified.
    If you are an opacity monitor manufacturer, then paragraph 8.2 
applies to you.
    1.3 Does PS-1 apply to a facility with an applicable opacity limit 
less than 10 percent? If you are an owner or operator of a facility with 
a COMS as a result of this Part and the applicable opacity limit is less 
than 10 percent, then PS-1 applies to your COMS as described in section 
1.2; taking into account (through statistical procedures or otherwise) 
the uncertainties associated with opacity measurements, and following 
the conditions for attenuators selection for low opacity applications as 
outlined in Section 8.1(3)(ii). At your option, you, the source owner or 
operator, may select to establish a reduced full scale range of no less 
than 50 percent opacity instead of the 80 percent as prescribed in 
section 3.5, if the applicable opacity limit for your facility is less 
than 10 percent. The EPA recognizes that reducing the range of the 
analyzer to 50 percent does not necessarily result in any measurable 
improvement in measurement accuracy at opacity levels less than 10 
percent; however, it may allow improved chart recorder interpretation.
    1.4 What data uncertainty issues apply to COMS data? The measurement 
uncertainties associated with COMS data result from several design and 
performance factors including limitations on the availability of 
calibration attenuators for opacities less than about 6 percent (3 
percent for single-pass instruments), calibration error tolerances, zero 
and upscale drift tolerances, and allowance for dust compensation that 
are significant relative to low opacity levels. The full scale 
requirements of this PS may also contribute to measurement uncertainty 
for opacity measurements where the applicable limits are below 10 
percent opacity.

[[Page 603]]

              2.0 What Are the Basic Requirements of PS-1?

    PS-1 requires (1) opacity monitor manufacturers comply with a 
comprehensive series of design and performance specifications and test 
procedures to certify opacity monitoring equipment before shipment to 
the end user, (2) the owner or operator to follow installation 
guidelines, and (3) the owner or operator to conduct a set of field 
performance tests that confirm the acceptability of the COMS after it is 
installed.
    2.1 ASTM D 6216-98 is the reference for design specifications, 
manufacturer's performance specifications, and test procedures. The 
opacity monitor manufacturer must periodically select and test an 
opacity monitor, that is representative of a group of monitors produced 
during a specified period or lot, for conformance with the design 
specifications in ASTM D 6216-98. The opacity monitor manufacturer must 
test each opacity monitor for conformance with the manufacturer's 
performance specifications in ASTM D 6216-98.
    2.2 Section 8.1(2) provides guidance for locating an opacity monitor 
in vertical and horizontal ducts. You are encouraged to seek approval 
for the opacity monitor location from the appropriate regulatory 
authority prior to installation.
    2.3 After the COMS is installed and calibrated, the owner or 
operator must test the COMS for conformance with the field performance 
specifications in PS-1.

               3.0 What Special Definitions Apply to PS-1?

    3.1 All definitions and discussions from section 3 of ASTM D 6216-98 
are applicable to PS-1.
    3.2 Centroid Area. A concentric area that is geometrically similar 
to the stack or duct cross-section and is no greater than 1 percent of 
the stack or duct cross-sectional area.
    3.3 Data Recorder. That portion of the installed COMS that provides 
a permanent record of the opacity monitor output in terms of opacity. 
The data recorder may include automatic data reduction capabilities.
    3.4 External Audit Device. The inherent design, equipment, or 
accommodation of the opacity monitor allowing the independent assessment 
of the COMS's calibration and operation.
    3.5 Full Scale. The maximum data display output of the COMS. For 
purposes of recordkeeping and reporting, full scale will be greater than 
80 percent opacity.
    3.6 Operational Test Period. A period of time (168 hours) during 
which the COMS is expected to operate within the established performance 
specifications without any unscheduled maintenance, repair, or 
adjustment.
    3.7 Primary Attenuators. Those devices (glass or grid filter that 
reduce the transmission of light) calibrated according to procedures in 
section 7.1.
    3.8 Secondary Attenuators. Those devices (glass or grid filter that 
reduce the transmission of light) calibrated against primary attenuators 
according to procedures in section 7.2.
    3.9 System Response Time. The amount of time the COMS takes to 
display 95 percent of a step change in opacity on the COMS data 
recorder.

                    4.0 Interferences. Water Droplets

 5.0 What Do I Need To Know To Ensure the Safety of Persons Using PS-1?

    The procedures required under PS-1 may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. PS-1 does not purport to address all of the 
safety problems associated with these procedures. Before performing 
these procedures, you must establish appropriate safety and health 
practices, and you must determine the applicable regulatory limitations. 
You should consult the COMS user's manual for specific precautions to 
take.

               6.0 What Equipment and Supplies Do I Need?

    6.1 Continuous Opacity Monitoring System. You, as owner or operator, 
are responsible for purchasing an opacity monitor that meets the 
specifications of ASTM D 6216-98, including a suitable data recorder or 
automated data acquisition handling system. Example data recorders 
include an analog strip chart recorder or more appropriately an 
electronic data acquisition and reporting system with an input signal 
range compatible with the analyzer output.
    6.2 Calibration Attenuators. You, as owner or operator, are 
responsible for purchasing a minimum of three calibration attenuators 
that meet the requirements of PS-1. Calibration attenuators are optical 
filters with neutral spectral characteristics. Calibration attenuators 
must meet the requirements in section 7 and must be of sufficient size 
to attenuate the entire light beam received by the detector of the COMS. 
For transmissometers operating over a narrow bandwidth (e.g., laser), a 
calibration attenuator's value is determined for the actual operating 
wavelengths of the transmissometer. Some filters may not be uniform 
across the face. If errors result in the daily calibration drift or 
calibration error test, you may want to examine the across-face 
uniformity of the filter.
    6.3 Calibration Spectrophotometer. Whoever calibrates the 
attenuators must have a spectrophotometer that meets the following 
minimum design specifications:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Parameter                          Specification
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wavelength range..........................  300-800 nm.
Detector angle of view....................  <10[deg].

[[Page 604]]

 
Accuracy..................................  <0.5% transmittance, NIST
                                             traceable calibration.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

               7.0 What Reagents and Standards Do I Need?

    You will need to use attenuators (i.e., neutral density filters) to 
check the daily calibration drift and calibration error of a COMS. 
Attenuators are designated as either primary or secondary based on how 
they are calibrated.
    7.1 Attenuators are designated primary in one of two ways:
    (1) They are calibrated by NIST; or
    (2) They are calibrated on a 6-month frequency through the 
assignment of a luminous transmittance value in the following manner:
    (i) Use a spectrophotometer meeting the specifications of section 
6.3 to calibrate the required filters. Verify the spectrophotometer 
calibration through use of a NIST 930D Standard Reference Material 
(SRM). A SRM 930D consists of three neutral density glass filters and a 
blank, each mounted in a cuvette. The wavelengths and temperature to be 
used in the calibration are listed on the NIST certificate that 
accompanies the reported values. Determine and record a transmittance of 
the SRM values at the NIST wavelengths (three filters at five 
wavelengths each for a total of 15 determinations). Calculate a percent 
difference between the NIST certified values and the spectrophotometer 
response. At least 12 of the 15 differences (in percent) must be within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 percent of the NIST SRM values. No difference 
can be greater than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 percent. Recalibrate the 
SRM or service the spectrophotometer if the calibration results fail the 
criteria.
    (ii) Scan the filter to be tested and the NIST blank from wavelength 
380 to 780 nm, and record the spectrophotometer percent transmittance 
responses at 10 nm intervals. Test in this sequence: blank filter, 
tested filter, tested filter rotated 90 degrees in the plane of the 
filter, blank filter. Calculate the average transmittance at each 10 nm 
interval. If any pair of the tested filter transmittance values (for the 
same filter and wavelength) differ by more than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 percent, rescan the tested filter. If the filter 
fails to achieve this tolerance, do not use the filter in the 
calibration tests of the COMS.
    (iii) Correct the tested filter transmittance values by dividing the 
average tested filter transmittance by the average blank filter 
transmittance at each 10 nm interval.
    (iv) Calculate the weighted (to the response of the human eye), 
tested filter transmittance by multiplying the transmittance value by 
the corresponding response factor shown in table 1-1, to obtain the 
Source C Human Eye Response.
    (v) Recalibrate the primary attenuators semi-annually if they are 
used for the required calibration error test. Recalibrate the primary 
attenuators annually if they are used only for calibration of secondary 
attenuators.
    7.2 Attenuators are designated secondary if the filter calibration 
is done using a laboratory-based transmissometer. Conduct the secondary 
attenuator calibration using a laboratory-based transmissometer 
calibrated as follows:
    (i) Use at least three primary filters of nominal luminous 
transmittance 50, 70 and 90 percent, calibrated as specified in section 
7.1(2)(i), to calibrate the laboratory-based transmissometer. Determine 
and record the slope of the calibration line using linear regression 
through zero opacity. The slope of the calibration line must be between 
0.99 and 1.01, and the laboratory-based transmissometer reading for each 
primary filter must not deviate by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
percent from the linear regression line. If the calibration of the 
laboratory-based transmissometer yields a slope or individual readings 
outside the specified ranges, secondary filter calibrations cannot be 
performed. Determine the source of the variations (either 
transmissometer performance or changes in the primary filters) and 
repeat the transmissometer calibration before proceeding with the 
attenuator calibration.
    (ii) Immediately following the laboratory-based transmissometer 
calibration, insert the secondary attenuators and determine and record 
the percent effective opacity value per secondary attenuator from the 
calibration curve (linear regression line).
    (iii) Recalibrate the secondary attenuators semi-annually if they 
are used for the required calibration error test.

    8.0 What Performance Procedures Are Required To Comply With PS-1?

    Procedures to verify the performance of the COMS are divided into 
those completed by the owner or operator and those completed by the 
opacity monitor manufacturer.
    8.1 What procedures must I follow as the Owner or Operator?
    (1) You must purchase an opacity monitor that complies with ASTM D 
6216-98 and obtain a certificate of conformance from the opacity monitor 
manufacturer.
    (2) You must install the opacity monitor at a location where the 
opacity measurements are representative of the total emissions from the 
affected facility. You must meet this requirement by choosing a 
measurement location and a light beam path as follows:
    (i) Measurement Location. Select a measurement location that is (1) 
at least 4 duct diameters downstream from all particulate control 
equipment or flow disturbance, (2) at least 2 duct diameters upstream of 
a flow disturbance, (3) where condensed water vapor

[[Page 605]]

is not present, and (4) accessible in order to permit maintenance.
    (ii) Light Beam Path. Select a light beam path that passes through 
the centroidal area of the stack or duct. Also, you must follow these 
additional requirements or modifications for these measurement 
locations:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
If your measurement location                          Then use a light
          is in a:                   And is:         beam path that is:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Straight vertical section  Less than 4           In the plane defined
 of stack or duct.             equivalent            by the upstream
                               diameters             bend (see figure 1-
                               downstream from a     1).
                               bend.
2. Straight vertical section  Less than 4           In the plane defined
 of stack or duct.             equivalent            by the downstream
                               diameters upstream    bend (see figure 1-
                               from a bend.          2).
3. Straight vertical section  Less than 4           In the plane defined
 of stack or duct.             equivalent            by the upstream
                               diameters             bend (see figure 1-
                               downstream and is     3).
                               also less than 1
                               diameter upstream
                               from a bend.
4. Horizontal section of      At least 4            In the horizontal
 stack or duct.                equivalent            plane that is
                               diameters             between \1/3\ and
                               downstream from a     \1/2\ the distance
                               vertical bend.        up the vertical
                                                     axis from the
                                                     bottom of the duct
                                                     (see figure 1-4).
5. Horizontal section of      Less than 4           In the horizontal
 duct.                         equivalent            plane that is
                               diameters             between \1/2\ and
                               downstream from a     \2/3\ the distance
                               vertical bend.        up the vertical
                                                     axis from the
                                                     bottom of the duct
                                                     for upward flow in
                                                     the vertical
                                                     section, and is
                                                     between \1/3\ and
                                                     \1/2\ the distance
                                                     up the vertical
                                                     axis from the
                                                     bottom of the duct
                                                     for downward flow
                                                     (figure 1-5).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Alternative Locations and Light Beam Paths. You may select 
locations and light beam paths, other than those cited above, if you 
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Administrator or delegated 
agent, that the average opacity measured at the alternative location or 
path is equivalent to the opacity as measured at a location meeting the 
criteria of sections 8.1(2)(i) and 8.1(2)(ii). The opacity at the 
alternative location is considered equivalent if (1) the average opacity 
value measured at the alternative location is within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent of the average opacity value measured at the 
location meeting the installation criteria, and (2) the difference 
between any two average opacity values is less than 2 percent opacity 
(absolute). You use the following procedure to conduct this 
demonstration: simultaneously measure the opacities at the two locations 
or paths for a minimum period of time (e.g., 180-minutes) covering the 
range of normal operating conditions and compare the results. The 
opacities of the two locations or paths may be measured at different 
times, but must represent the same process operating conditions. You may 
use alternative procedures for determining acceptable locations if those 
procedures are approved by the Administrator.
    (3) Field Audit Performance Tests. After you install the COMS, you 
must perform the following procedures and tests on the COMS.
    (i) Optical Alignment Assessment. Verify and record that all 
alignment indicator devices show proper alignment. A clear indication of 
alignment is one that is objectively apparent relative to reference 
marks or conditions.
    (ii) Calibration Error Check. Conduct a three-point calibration 
error test using three calibration attenuators that produce outlet 
pathlength corrected, single-pass opacity values shown in ASTM D 6216-
98, section 7.5. If your applicable limit is less than 10 percent 
opacity, use attenuators as described in ASTM D 6216-98, section 7.5 for 
applicable standards of 10 to 19 percent opacity. Confirm the external 
audit device produces the proper zero value on the COMS data recorder. 
Separately, insert each calibration attenuators (low, mid, and high-
level) into the external audit device. While inserting each attenuator, 
(1) ensure that the entire light beam passes through the attenuator, (2) 
minimize interference from reflected light, and (3) leave the attenuator 
in place for at least two times the shortest recording interval on the 
COMS data recorder. Make a total of five nonconsecutive readings for 
each attenuator. At the end of the test, correlate each attenuator 
insertion to the corresponding value from the data recorder. Subtract 
the single-pass calibration attenuator values corrected to the stack 
exit conditions from the COMS responses. Calculate the arithmetic mean 
difference, standard deviation, and confidence coefficient of the five 
measurements value using equations 1-3, 1-4, and 1-5. Calculate the 
calibration error as the sum of the absolute value of the mean 
difference and the 95 percent confidence coefficient for each of the 
three test attenuators using equation 1-6. Report the calibration error 
test results for each of the three attenuators.
    (iii) System Response Time Check. Using a high-level calibration 
attenuator, alternately insert the filter five times and remove it from 
the external audit device. For each filter insertion and removal, 
measure the amount of time required for the COMS to display 95 percent 
of the step change in opacity on the COMS data recorder. For the

[[Page 606]]

upscale response time, measure the time from insertion to display of 95 
percent of the final, steady upscale reading. For the downscale response 
time, measure the time from removal to display 5 percent of the initial 
upscale reading. Calculate the mean of the five upscale response time 
measurements and the mean of the five downscale response time 
measurements. Report both the upscale and downscale response times.
    (iv) Averaging Period Calculation and Recording Check. After the 
calibration error check, conduct a check of the averaging period 
calculation (e.g., 6-minute integrated average). Consecutively insert 
each of the calibration error check attenuators (low, mid, and high-
level) into the external audit device for a period of two times the 
averaging period plus 1 minute (e.g., 13 minutes for a 6-minute 
averaging period). Compare the path length corrected opacity value of 
each attenuator to the valid average value calculated by the COMS data 
recording device for that attenuator.
    (4) Operational Test Period. Before conducting the operational 
testing, you must have successfully completed the field audit tests 
described in sections 8.1(3)(i) through 8.1(3)(iv). Then, you operate 
the COMS for an initial 168-hour test period while the source is 
operating under normal operating conditions. If normal operations 
contain routine source shutdowns, include the source's down periods in 
the 168-hour operational test period. However, you must ensure that the 
following minimum source operating time is included in the operational 
test period: (1) For a batch operation, the operational test period must 
include at least one full cycle of batch operation during the 168-hour 
period unless the batch operation is longer than 168 hours or (2) for 
continuous operating processes, the unit must be operating for at least 
50 percent of the 168-hour period. Except during times of instrument 
zero and upscale calibration drift checks, you must analyze the effluent 
gas for opacity and produce a permanent record of the COMS output. 
During this period, you may not perform unscheduled maintenance, repair, 
or adjustment to the COMS. Automatic zero and calibration adjustments 
(i.e., intrinsic adjustments), made by the COMS without operator 
intervention or initiation, are allowable at any time. At the end of the 
operational test period, verify and record that the COMS optical 
alignment is still correct. If the test period is interrupted because of 
COMS failure, record the time when the failure occurred. After the 
failure is corrected, you restart the 168-hour period and tests from the 
beginning (0-hour). During the operational test period, perform the 
following test procedures:
    (i) Zero Calibration Drift Test. At the outset of the 168-hour 
operational test period and at each 24-hour interval, the automatic 
calibration check system must initiate the simulated zero device to 
allow the zero drift to be determined. Record the COMS response to the 
simulated zero device. After each 24-hour period, subtract the COMS zero 
reading from the nominal value of the simulated zero device to calculate 
the 24-hour zero drift (ZD). At the end of the 168-hour period, 
calculate the arithmetic mean, standard deviation, and confidence 
coefficient of the 24-hour ZDs using equations 1-3, 1-4, and 1-5. 
Calculate the sum of the absolute value of the mean and the absolute 
value of the confidence coefficient using equation 1-6, and report this 
value as the 24-hour ZD error.
    (ii) Upscale Calibration Drift Test. At each 24-hour interval after 
the simulated zero device value has been checked, check and record the 
COMS response to the upscale calibration device. After each 24-hour 
period, subtract the COMS upscale reading from the nominal value of the 
upscale calibration device to calculate the 24-hour calibration drift 
(CD). At the end of the 168-hour period, calculate the arithmetic mean, 
standard deviation, and confidence coefficient of the 24-hour CD using 
equations 1-3, 1-4, and 1-5. Calculate the sum of the absolute value of 
the mean and the absolute value of the confidence coefficient using 
equation 1-6, and report this value as the 24-hour CD error.
    (5) Retesting. If the COMS fails to meet the specifications for the 
tests conducted under the operational test period, make the necessary 
corrections and restart the operational test period. Depending on the 
opinion of the enforcing agency, you may have to repeat some or all of 
the field audit tests.
    8.2 What are the responsibilities of the Opacity Monitor 
Manufacturer?
    You, the manufacturer, must carry out the following activities:
    (1) Conduct the verification procedures for design specifications in 
section 6 of ASTM D 6216-98.
    (2) Conduct the verification procedures for performance 
specifications in section 7 of ASTM D 6216-98.
    (3) Provide to the owner or operator, a report of the opacity 
monitor's conformance to the design and performance specifications 
required in sections 6 and 7 of ASTM D 6216-98 in accordance with the 
reporting requirements of section 9 in ASTM D 6216-98.

         9.0 What quality control measures are required by PS-1?

    Opacity monitor manufacturers must initiate a quality program 
following the requirements of ASTM D 6216-98, section 8. The quality 
program must include (1) a quality system and (2) a corrective action 
program.

[[Page 607]]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                  11.0 Analytical Procedure [Reserved]

               12.0 What Calculations Are Needed for PS-1?

    12.1 Desired Attenuator Values. Calculate the desired attenuator 
value corrected to the emission outlet pathlength as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.008

Where:

OP<INF>1</INF>=Nominal opacity value of required low-, mid-, or high-
range calibration attenuators.
OP<INF>2</INF>=Desired attenuator opacity value from ASTM D 6216-98, 
section 7.5 at the opacity limit required by the applicable subpart.
L<INF>1</INF>=Monitoring pathlength.
L<INF>2</INF>=Emission outlet pathlength.
    12.2 Luminous Transmittance Value of a Filter. Calculate the 
luminous transmittance of a filter as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.009

Where:

LT=Luminous transmittance
T<INF>i</INF>=Weighted tested filter transmittance.
    12.3 Arithmetic Mean. Calculate the arithmetic mean of a data set as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.010

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.011

    12.4 Standard Deviation. Calculate the standard deviation as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.012

Where:

S<INF>d</INF>=Standard deviation of a data set.

    12.5 Confidence Coefficient. Calculate the 2.5 percent error 
confidence coefficient (one-tailed) as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.013

Where:

CC=Confidence coefficient
t<INF>0.975</INF>=t - value (see table 1-2).

    12.6 Calibration Error. Calculate the error (calibration error, zero 
drift error, and calibration drift error) as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.014

Where:

Er=Error.

    12.7 Conversion of Opacity Values for Monitor Pathlength to Emission 
Outlet Pathlength. When the monitor pathlength is different from the 
emission outlet pathlength, use either of the following equations to 
convert from one basis to the other (this conversion may be 
automatically calculated by the monitoring system):
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.016

Where:

Op<INF>1</INF>=Opacity of the effluent based upon L<INF>1</INF>.
Op<INF>2</INF>=Opacity of the effluent based upon L<INF>2</INF>.
L<INF>1</INF>=Monitor pathlength.
L<INF>2</INF>=Emission outlet pathlength.
OD<INF>1</INF>=Optical density of the effluent based upon L<INF>1</INF>.
OD<INF>2</INF>=Optical density of the effluent based upon L<INF>2</INF>.


[[Page 608]]


    12.8 Mean Response Wavelength. Calculate the mean of the effective 
spectral response curve from the individual responses at the specified 
wavelength values as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.017

Where:

L=mean of the effective spectral response curve
L<INF>i</INF>=The specified wavelength at which the response 
g<INF>i</INF> is calculated at 20 nm intervals.
g<INF>i</INF>=The individual response value at L<INF>i</INF>.

  13.0 What Specifications Does a COMS Have To Meet for Certification?

    A COMS must meet the following design, manufacturer's performance, 
and field audit performance specifications:
    13.1 Design Specifications. The opacity monitoring equipment must 
comply with the design specifications of ASTM D 6216-98.
    13.2 Manufacturer's Performance Specifications. The opacity monitor 
must comply with the manufacturer's performance specifications of ASTM D 
6216-98.
    13.3 Field Audit Performance Specifications. The installed COMS must 
comply with the following performance specifications:
    (1) Optical Alignment. Objectively indicate proper alignment 
relative to reference marks (e.g., bull's-eye) or conditions.
    (2) Calibration Error. The calibration error must be <=3 percent 
opacity for each of the three calibration attenuators.
    (3) System Response Time. The COMS upscale and downscale response 
times must be <=10 seconds as measured at the COMS data recorder.
    (4) Averaging Period Calculation and Recording. The COMS data 
recorder must average and record each calibration attenuator value to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent opacity of the certified value of 
the attenuator.
    (5) Operational Test Period. The COMS must be able to measure and 
record opacity and to perform daily calibration drift assessments for 
168 hours without unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment.
    (6) Zero and Upscale Calibration Drift Error. The COMS zero and 
upscale calibration drift error must not exceed 2 percent opacity over a 
24 hour period.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

           16.0 Which references are relevant to this method?

    1. Experimental Statistics. Department of Commerce. National Bureau 
of Standards Handbook 91. Paragraph 3-3.1.4. 1963. 3-31 p.
    2. Performance Specifications for Stationary Source Monitoring 
Systems for Gases and Visible Emissions, EPA-650/2-74-013, January 1974, 
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC.
    3. Koontz, E.C., Walton, J. Quality Assurance Programs for Visible 
Emission Evaluations. Tennessee Division of Air Pollution Control. 
Nashville, TN. 78th Meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association. 
Detroit, MI. June 16-21, 1985.
    4. Evaluation of Opacity CEMS Reliability and Quality Assurance 
Procedures. Volume 1. U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research 
Triangle Park, NC. EPA-340/1-86-009a.
    5. Nimeroff, I. ``Colorimetry Precision Measurement and 
Calibration.'' NBS Special Publication 300. Volume 9. June 1972.
    6. Technical Assistance Document: Performance Audit Procedures for 
Opacity Monitors. U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research 
Triangle Park, NC. EPA-600/8-87-025. April 1987.
    7. Technical Assistance Document: Performance Audit Procedures for 
Opacity Monitors. U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research 
Triangle Park, NC. EPA-450/4-92-010. April 1992.
    8. ASTM D 6216-98: Standard Practice for Opacity Monitor 
Manufacturers to Certify Conformance with Design and Performance 
Specifications. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). April 
1998.

       17.0 What tables and diagrams are relevant to this method?

    17.1 Reference Tables.

                                 Table 1-1--Source C, Human Eye Response Factor
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Wavelength  nanometers          Weighting  factor \a\    Wavelength  nanometers   Weighting  factor \a\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
380..................................                        0                      590                     6627
390..................................                        0                      600                     5316
400..................................                        2                      610                     4176
410..................................                        9                      620                     3153
420..................................                       37                      630                     2190
430..................................                      122                      640                     1443
440..................................                      262                      650                      886
450..................................                      443                      660                      504

[[Page 609]]

 
460..................................                      694                      670                      259
470..................................                     1058                      680                      134
480..................................                     1618                      690                       62
490..................................                     2358                      700                       29
500..................................                     3401                      720                       14
510..................................                     4833                      720                        6
520..................................                     6462                      730                        3
530..................................                     7934                      740                        2
540..................................                     9194                      750                        1
550..................................                     9832                      760                        1
560..................................                     9841                      770                        0
570..................................                     9147                      780                        0
580..................................                     7992  .......................  .......................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Total of weighting factors=100,000.


                                              Table 1-2 \T\ Values
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     n \a\                        \t\ 0.975      n \a\      \t\ 0.975      n \a\      \t\ 0.975
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2..............................................       12.706            7        2.447           12        2.201
3..............................................        4.303            8        2.365           13        2.179
4..............................................        3.182            9        2.306           14        2.160
5..............................................        2.776           10        2.262           15        2.145
6..............................................        2.571           11        2.228           16       2.131
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ The values in this table are already corrected for n-1 degrees of freedom. Use n equal to the number of
  individual values.

    17.2 Diagrams.

[[Page 610]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.018


[[Page 611]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.019


[[Page 612]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.020


[[Page 613]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10AU00.021


[[Page 614]]



  Performance Specification 2--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems 
                          in Stationary Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Analyte                             CAS Nos.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)................................           7449-09-5
Nitrogen Oxides (NOX)...............................   10102-44-0 (NO2),
                                                         10024-97-2 (NO)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is for evaluating the acceptability of 
SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> continuous emission monitoring systems 
(CEMS) at the time of installation or soon after and whenever specified 
in the regulations. The CEMS may include, for certain stationary 
sources, a diluent (O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF>) monitor.
    1.2.2 This specification is not designed to evaluate the installed 
CEMS performance over an extended period of time nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and other auxiliary procedures to assess 
the CEMS performance. The source owner or operator is responsible to 
calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS properly. The Administrator 
may require, under Section 114 of the Act, the operator to conduct CEMS 
performance evaluations at other times besides the initial test to 
evaluate the CEMS performance. See 40 CFR Part 60, Sec. 60.13(c).

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    Procedures for measuring CEMS relative accuracy and calibration 
drift are outlined. CEMS installation and measurement location 
specifications, equipment specifications, performance specifications, 
and data reduction procedures are included. Conformance of the CEMS with 
the Performance Specification is determined.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Calibration Drift (CD) means the difference in the CEMS output 
readings from the established reference value after a stated period of 
operation during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment 
took place.
    3.2 Centroidal Area means a concentric area that is geometrically 
similar to the stack or duct cross section and is no greater than l 
percent of the stack or duct cross-sectional area.
    3.3 Continuous Emission Monitoring System means the total equipment 
required for the determination of a gas concentration or emission rate. 
The sample interface, pollutant analyzer, diluent analyzer, and data 
recorder are the major subsystems of the CEMS.
    3.4 Data Recorder means that portion of the CEMS that provides a 
permanent record of the analyzer output. The data recorder may include 
automatic data reduction capabilities.
    3.5 Diluent Analyzer means that portion of the CEMS that senses the 
diluent gas (i.e., CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF>) and generates an 
output proportional to the gas concentration.
    3.6 Path CEMS means a CEMS that measures the gas concentration along 
a path greater than 10 percent of the equivalent diameter of the stack 
or duct cross section.
    3.7 Point CEMS means a CEMS that measures the gas concentration 
either at a single point or along a path equal to or less than 10 
percent of the equivalent diameter of the stack or duct cross section.
    3.8 Pollutant Analyzer means that portion of the CEMS that senses 
the pollutant gas and generates an output proportional to the gas 
concentration.
    3.9 Relative Accuracy (RA) means the absolute mean difference 
between the gas concentration or emission rate determined by the CEMS 
and the value determined by the reference method (RM), plus the 2.5 
percent error confidence coefficient of a series of tests, divided by 
the mean of the RM tests or the applicable emission limit.
    3.10 Sample Interface means that portion of the CEMS used for one or 
more of the following: sample acquisition, sample delivery, sample 
conditioning, or protection of the monitor from the effects of the stack 
effluent.
    3.11 Span Value means the concentration specified for the affected 
source category in an applicable subpart of the regulations that is used 
to set the calibration gas concentration and in determining calibration 
drift.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    The procedures required under this performance specification may 
involve hazardous materials, operations, and equipment. This performance 
specification may not address all of the safety problems associated with 
these procedures. It is the responsibility of the user to establish 
appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicable 
regulatory limitations prior to performing these procedures. The CEMS 
user's manual and materials recommended by the reference method should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 CEMS Equipment Specifications.
    6.1.1 Data Recorder Scale. The CEMS data recorder output range must 
include zero and a high-level value. The high-level value is chosen by 
the source owner or operator and is defined as follows:
    6.1.1.1 For a CEMS intended to measure an uncontrolled emission 
(e.g., SO<INF>2</INF> measurements at the inlet of a flue gas

[[Page 615]]

desulfurization unit), the high-level value should be between 1.25 and 2 
times the maximum potential emission level over the appropriate 
averaging time, unless otherwise specified in an applicable subpart of 
the regulations.
    6.1.1.2 For a CEMS installed to measure controlled emissions or 
emissions that are in compliance with an applicable regulation, the 
high-level value between 1.5 times the pollutant concentration 
corresponding to the emission standard level and the span value given in 
the applicable regulations is adequate.
    6.1.1.3 Alternative high-level values may be used, provided the 
source can measure emissions which exceed the full-scale limit in 
accordance with the requirements of applicable regulations.
    6.1.1.4 If an analog data recorder is used, the data recorder output 
must be established so that the high-level value would read between 90 
and 100 percent of the data recorder full scale. (This scale requirement 
may not be applicable to digital data recorders.) The zero and high 
level calibration gas, optical filter, or cell values should be used to 
establish the data recorder scale.
    6.1.2 The CEMS design should also allow the determination of 
calibration drift at the zero and high-level values. If this is not 
possible or practical, the design must allow these determinations to be 
conducted at a low-level value (zero to 20 percent of the high-level 
value) and at a value between 50 and 100 percent of the high-level 
value. In special cases, the Administrator may approve a single-point 
calibration-drift determination.
    6.2 Other equipment and supplies, as needed by the applicable 
reference method(s) (see Section 8.4.2 of this Performance 
Specification), may be required.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Reference Gases, Gas Cells, or Optical Filters. As specified by 
the CEMS manufacturer for calibration of the CEMS (these need not be 
certified).
    7.2 Reagents and Standards. May be required as needed by the 
applicable reference method(s) (see Section 8.4.2 of this Performance 
Specification).

              8.0 Performance Specification Test Procedure

    8.1 Installation and Measurement Location Specifications.
    8.1.1 CEMS Installation. Install the CEMS at an accessible location 
where the pollutant concentration or emission rate measurements are 
directly representative or can be corrected so as to be representative 
of the total emissions from the affected facility or at the measurement 
location cross section. Then select representative measurement points or 
paths for monitoring in locations that the CEMS will pass the RA test 
(see Section 8.4). If the cause of failure to meet the RA test is 
determined to be the measurement location and a satisfactory correction 
technique cannot be established, the Administrator may require the CEMS 
to be relocated. Suggested measurement locations and points or paths 
that are most likely to provide data that will meet the RA requirements 
are listed below.
    8.1.2 CEMS Measurement Location. It is suggested that the 
measurement location be (1) at least two equivalent diameters downstream 
from the nearest control device, the point of pollutant generation, or 
other point at which a change in the pollutant concentration or emission 
rate may occur and (2) at least a half equivalent diameter upstream from 
the effluent exhaust or control device.
    8.1.2.1 Point CEMS. It is suggested that the measurement point be 
(1) no less than 1.0 meter (3.3 ft) from the stack or duct wall or (2) 
within or centrally located over the centroidal area of the stack or 
duct cross section.
    8.1.2.2 Path CEMS. It is suggested that the effective measurement 
path (1) be totally within the inner area bounded by a line 1.0 meter 
(3.3 ft) from the stack or duct wall, or (2) have at least 70 percent of 
the path within the inner 50 percent of the stack or duct cross-
sectional area, or (3) be centrally located over any part of the 
centroidal area.
    8.1.3 Reference Method Measurement Location and Traverse Points.
    8.1.3.1 Select, as appropriate, an accessible RM measurement point 
at least two equivalent diameters downstream from the nearest control 
device, the point of pollutant generation, or other point at which a 
change in the pollutant concentration or emission rate may occur, and at 
least a half equivalent diameter upstream from the effluent exhaust or 
control device. When pollutant concentration changes are due solely to 
diluent leakage (e.g., air heater leakages) and pollutants and diluents 
are simultaneously measured at the same location, a half diameter may be 
used in lieu of two equivalent diameters. The CEMS and RM locations need 
not be the same.
    8.1.3.2 Select traverse points that assure acquisition of 
representative samples over the stack or duct cross section. The minimum 
requirements are as follows: Establish a ``measurement line'' that 
passes through the centroidal area and in the direction of any expected 
stratification. If this line interferes with the CEMS measurements, 
displace the line up to 30 cm (12 in.) (or 5 percent of the equivalent 
diameter of the cross section, whichever is less) from the centroidal 
area. Locate three traverse points at 16.7, 50.0, and 83.3 percent of 
the measurement line. If the measurement line is longer than 2.4 meters

[[Page 616]]

(7.8 ft) and pollutant stratification is not expected, the three 
traverse points may be located on the line at 0.4, 1.2, and 2.0 meters 
from the stack or duct wall. This option must not be used after wet 
scrubbers or at points where two streams with different pollutant 
concentrations are combined. If stratification is suspected, the 
following procedure is suggested. For rectangular ducts, locate at least 
nine sample points in the cross section such that sample points are the 
centroids of similarly-shaped, equal area divisions of the cross 
section. Measure the pollutant concentration, and, if applicable, the 
diluent concentration at each point using appropriate reference methods 
or other appropriate instrument methods that give responses relative to 
pollutant concentrations. Then calculate the mean value for all sample 
points. For circular ducts, conduct a 12-point traverse (i.e., six 
points on each of the two perpendicular diameters) locating the sample 
points as described in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A, Method 1. Perform the 
measurements and calculations as described above. Determine if the mean 
pollutant concentration is more than 10% different from any single 
point. If so, the cross section is considered to be stratified, and the 
tester may not use the alternative traverse point locations (...0.4, 
1.2, and 2.0 meters from the stack or duct wall.) but must use the three 
traverse points at 16.7, 50.0, and 83.3 percent of the entire 
measurement line. Other traverse points may be selected, provided that 
they can be shown to the satisfaction of the Administrator to provide a 
representative sample over the stack or duct cross section. Conduct all 
necessary RM tests within 3 cm (1.2 in.) of the traverse points, but no 
closer than 3 cm (1.2 in.) to the stack or duct wall.
    8.2 Pretest Preparation. Install the CEMS, prepare the RM test site 
according to the specifications in Section 8.1, and prepare the CEMS for 
operation according to the manufacturer's written instructions.
    8.3 Calibration Drift Test Procedure.
    8.3.1 CD Test Period. While the affected facility is operating at 
more than 50 percent of normal load, or as specified in an applicable 
subpart, determine the magnitude of the CD once each day (at 24-hour 
intervals) for 7 consecutive days according to the procedure given in 
Sections 8.3.2 through 8.3.4.
    8.3.2 The purpose of the CD measurement is to verify the ability of 
the CEMS to conform to the established CEMS calibration used for 
determining the emission concentration or emission rate. Therefore, if 
periodic automatic or manual adjustments are made to the CEMS zero and 
calibration settings, conduct the CD test immediately before these 
adjustments, or conduct it in such a way that the CD can be determined.
    8.3.3 Conduct the CD test at the two points specified in Section 
6.1.2. Introduce to the CEMS the reference gases, gas cells, or optical 
filters (these need not be certified). Record the CEMS response and 
subtract this value from the reference value (see example data sheet in 
Figure 2-1).
    8.4 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure.
    8.4.1 RA Test Period. Conduct the RA test according to the procedure 
given in Sections 8.4.2 through 8.4.6 while the affected facility is 
operating at more than 50 percent of normal load, or as specified in an 
applicable subpart. The RA test may be conducted during the CD test 
period.
    8.4.2 Reference Methods. Unless otherwise specified in an applicable 
subpart of the regulations, Methods 3B, 4, 6, and 7, or their approved 
alternatives, are the reference methods for diluent (O<INF>2</INF> and 
CO<INF>2</INF>), moisture, SO<INF>2</INF>, and NO<INF>X</INF>, 
respectively.
    8.4.3 Sampling Strategy for RM Tests. Conduct the RM tests in such a 
way that they will yield results representative of the emissions from 
the source and can be correlated to the CEMS data. It is preferable to 
conduct the diluent (if applicable), moisture (if needed), and pollutant 
measurements simultaneously. However, diluent and moisture measurements 
that are taken within an hour of the pollutant measurements may be used 
to calculate dry pollutant concentration and emission rates. In order to 
correlate the CEMS and RM data properly, note the beginning and end of 
each RM test period of each run (including the exact time of day) on the 
CEMS chart recordings or other permanent record of output. Use the 
following strategies for the RM tests:
    8.4.3.1 For integrated samples (e.g., Methods 6 and Method 4), make 
a sample traverse of at least 21 minutes, sampling for an equal time at 
each traverse point (see Section 8.1.3.2 for discussion of traverse 
points.
    8.4.3.2 For grab samples (e.g., Method 7), take one sample at each 
traverse point, scheduling the grab samples so that they are taken 
simultaneously (within a 3-minute period) or at an equal interval of 
time apart over the span of time the CEM pollutant is measured. A test 
run for grab samples must be made up of at least three separate 
measurements.

    Note: At times, CEMS RA tests are conducted during new source 
performance standards performance tests. In these cases, RM results 
obtained during CEMS RA tests may be used to determine compliance as 
long as the source and test conditions are consistent with the 
applicable regulations.

    8.4.4 Number of RM Tests. Conduct a minimum of nine sets of all 
necessary RM test runs.

    Note: More than nine sets of RM tests may be performed. If this 
option is chosen, a maximum of three sets of the test results may be 
rejected so long as the total number of test results used to determine 
the RA is greater than or equal to nine. However, all data

[[Page 617]]

must be reported, including the rejected data.

    8.4.5 Correlation of RM and CEMS Data. Correlate the CEMS and the RM 
test data as to the time and duration by first determining from the CEMS 
final output (the one used for reporting) the integrated average 
pollutant concentration or emission rate for each pollutant RM test 
period. Consider system response time, if important, and confirm that 
the pair of results are on a consistent moisture, temperature, and 
diluent concentration basis. Then, compare each integrated CEMS value 
against the corresponding average RM value. Use the following guidelines 
to make these comparisons.
    8.4.5.1 If the RM has an integrated sampling technique, make a 
direct comparison of the RM results and CEMS integrated average value.
    8.4.5.2 If the RM has a grab sampling technique, first average the 
results from all grab samples taken during the test run, and then 
compare this average value against the integrated value obtained from 
the CEMS chart recording or output during the run. If the pollutant 
concentration is varying with time over the run, the arithmetic average 
of the CEMS value recorded at the time of each grab sample may be used.
    8.4.6 Calculate the mean difference between the RM and CEMS values 
in the units of the emission standard, the standard deviation, the 
confidence coefficient, and the relative accuracy according to the 
procedures in Section 12.0.
    8.5 Reporting. At a minimum (check with the appropriate regional 
office, State, or Local agency for additional requirements, if any), 
summarize in tabular form the results of the CD tests and the RA tests 
or alternative RA procedure, as appropriate. Include all data sheets, 
calculations, charts (records of CEMS responses), cylinder gas 
concentration certifications, and calibration cell response 
certifications (if applicable) necessary to confirm that the performance 
of the CEMS met the performance specifications.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this Performance 
Specification (see Section 8.0). Refer to the RM for specific analytical 
procedures.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Summarize the results on a data sheet similar to that shown in 
Figure 2-2 (in Section 18.0).
    12.1 All data from the RM and CEMS must be on a consistent dry basis 
and, as applicable, on a consistent diluent basis and in the units of 
the emission standard. Correct the RM and CEMS data for moisture and 
diluent as follows:
    12.1.1 Moisture Correction (as applicable). Correct each wet RM run 
for moisture with the corresponding Method 4 data; correct each wet CEMS 
run using the corresponding CEMS moisture monitor date using Equation 2-
1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.453

    12.1.2 Correction to Units of Standard (as applicable). Correct each 
dry RM run to the units of the emission standard with the corresponding 
Method 3B data; correct each dry CEMS run using the corresponding CEMS 
diluent monitor data as follows:
    12.1.2.1 Correct to Diluent Basis. The following is an example of 
concentration (ppm) correction to 7% oxygen.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.454

    The following is an example of mass/gross calorific value (lbs/
million Btu) correction.

lbs/MMBtu=Conc<INF>(dry)</INF> (F-factor) (20.9/20.9-%0<INF>2</INF>)

    12.2 Arithmetic Mean. Calculate the arithmetic mean of the 
difference, d, of a data set as follows:

[[Page 618]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.455

Where:

n=Number of data points.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.456

    12.3 Standard Deviation. Calculate the standard deviation, 
S<INF>d</INF>, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.457

    12.4 Confidence Coefficient. Calculate the 2.5 percent error 
confidence coefficient (one-tailed), CC, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.458

Where:

t<INF>0.975</INF>=t-value (see Table 2-1).

    12.5 Relative Accuracy. Calculate the RA of a set of data as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.459

Where:

[verbar]d[verbar]=Absolute value of the mean differences (from Equation 
2-3).
[verbar]CC[verbar]=Absolute value of the confidence coefficient (from 
Equation 2-3).
RM=Average RM value. In cases where the average emissions for the test 
are less than 50 percent of the applicable standard, substitute the 
emission standard value in the denominator of Eq. 2-6 in place of RM. In 
all other cases, use RM.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift Performance Specification. The CEMS 
calibration must not drift or deviate from the reference value of the 
gas cylinder, gas cell, or optical filter by more than 2.5 percent of 
the span value. If the CEMS includes pollutant and diluent monitors, the 
CD must be determined separately for each in terms of concentrations 
(See Performance Specification 3 for the diluent specifications), and 
none of the CDs may exceed the specification.
    13.2 Relative Accuracy Performance Specification. The RA of the CEMS 
must be no greater than 20 percent when RM is used in the denominator of 
Eq. 2-6 (average emissions during test are greater than 50 percent of 
the emission standard) or 10 percent when the applicable emission 
standard is used in the denominator of Eq. 2-6 (average emissions during 
test are less than 50 percent of the emission standard).
    13.3 For instruments that use common components to measure more than 
one effluent gas constituent, all channels must simultaneously pass the 
RA requirement, unless it can be demonstrated that any adjustments made 
to one channel did not affect the others.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    Paragraphs 60.13(j)(1) and (2) of 40 CFR part 60 contain criteria 
for which the reference method procedure for determining relative 
accuracy (see Section 8.4 of this Performance Specification) may be 
waived and the following procedure substituted.
    16.1 Conduct a complete CEMS status check following the 
manufacturer's written instructions. The check should include operation 
of the light source, signal receiver, timing mechanism functions, data 
acquisition and data reduction functions, data recorders, mechanically 
operated functions (mirror movements, zero pipe operation, calibration 
gas valve operations, etc.), sample filters, sample line heaters, 
moisture traps, and other related functions of the CEMS, as applicable. 
All parts of the CEMS shall be functioning properly before proceeding to 
the alternative RA procedure.
    16.2 Alternative RA Procedure.
    16.2.1 Challenge each monitor (both pollutant and diluent, if 
applicable) with cylinder gases of known concentrations or calibration 
cells that produce known responses at two measurement points within the 
ranges shown in Table 2-2 (Section 18).

[[Page 619]]

    16.2.2 Use a separate cylinder gas (for point CEMS only) or 
calibration cell (for path CEMS or where compressed gas cylinders can 
not be used) for measurement points 1 and 2. Challenge the CEMS and 
record the responses three times at each measurement point. The 
Administrator may allow dilution of cylinder gas using the performance 
criteria in Test Method 205, 40 CFR Part 51, Appendix M. Use the average 
of the three responses in determining relative accuracy.
    16.2.3 Operate each monitor in its normal sampling mode as nearly as 
possible. When using cylinder gases, pass the cylinder gas through all 
filters, scrubbers, conditioners, and other monitor components used 
during normal sampling and as much of the sampling probe as practical. 
When using calibration cells, the CEMS components used in the normal 
sampling mode should not be by-passed during the RA determination. These 
include light sources, lenses, detectors, and reference cells. The CEMS 
should be challenged at each measurement point for a sufficient period 
of time to assure adsorption-desorption reactions on the CEMS surfaces 
have stabilized.
    16.2.4 Use cylinder gases that have been certified by comparison to 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) gaseous standard 
reference material (SRM) or NIST/EPA approved gas manufacturer's 
certified reference material (CRM) (See Reference 2 in Section 17.0) 
following EPA Traceability Protocol Number 1 (See Reference 3 in Section 
17.0). As an alternative to Protocol Number 1 gases, CRM's may be used 
directly as alternative RA cylinder gases. A list of gas manufacturers 
that have prepared approved CRM's is available from EPA at the address 
shown in Reference 2. Procedures for preparation of CRM's are described 
in Reference 2.
    16.2.5 Use calibration cells certified by the manufacturer to 
produce a known response in the CEMS. The cell certification procedure 
shall include determination of CEMS response produced by the calibration 
cell in direct comparison with measurement of gases of known 
concentration. This can be accomplished using SRM or CRM gases in a 
laboratory source simulator or through extended tests using reference 
methods at the CEMS location in the exhaust stack. These procedures are 
discussed in Reference 4 in Section 17.0. The calibration cell 
certification procedure is subject to approval of the Administrator.
    16.3 The differences between the known concentrations of the 
cylinder gases and the concentrations indicated by the CEMS are used to 
assess the accuracy of the CEMS. The calculations and limits of 
acceptable relative accuracy are as follows:
    16.3.1 For pollutant CEMS:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.460
    
Where:

d=Average difference between responses and the concentration/responses 
(see Section 16.2.2).
AC=The known concentration/response of the cylinder gas or calibration 
cell.

16.3.2 For diluent CEMS:

RA=[verbar]d[verbar] <= O.7 percent O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF>, as 
applicable.

    Note: Waiver of the relative accuracy test in favor of the 
alternative RA procedure does not preclude the requirements to complete 
the CD tests nor any other requirements specified in an applicable 
subpart for reporting CEMS data and performing CEMS drift checks or 
audits.

                             17.0 References

    1. Department of Commerce. Experimental Statistics. Handbook 91. 
Washington, D.C. p. 3-31, paragraphs 3-3.1.4.
    2. ``A Procedure for Establishing Traceability of Gas Mixtures to 
Certain National Bureau of Standards Standard Reference Materials.'' 
Joint publication by NBS and EPA. EPA 600/7-81-010. Available from U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Quality Assurance Division (MD-77), 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711.
    3. ``Traceability Protocol for Establishing True Concentrations of 
Gases Used for Calibration and Audits of Continuous Source Emission 
Monitors. (Protocol Number 1).'' June 1978. Protocol Number 1 is 
included in the Quality Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement 
Systems, Volume III, Stationary Source Specific Methods. EPA-600/4-77-
027b. August 1977.
    4. ``Gaseous Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems--Performance 
Specification Guidelines for SO<INF>2</INF>, NO<INF>X</INF>, 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, and TRS.'' EPA-450/3-82-026. Available 
from the U.S.

[[Page 620]]

EPA, Emission Measurement Center, Emission Monitoring and Data Analysis 
Division (MD-19), Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

               Figure 2-1. Calibration Drift Determination

                                               Table 2-1--t-Values
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       na                           t0.975         na         t0.975         na         t0.975
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2..............................................       12.706            7        2.447           12        2.201
3..............................................        4.303            8        2.365           13        2.179
4..............................................        3.182            9        2.306           14        2.160
5..............................................        2.776           10        2.262           15        2.145
6..............................................        2.571           11        2.228           16       2.131
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a The values in this table are already corrected for n-1 degrees of freedom. Use n equal to the number of
  individual values.


                                          Table 2-2--Measurement Range
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                               Diluent monitor for
          Measurement point               Pollutant monitor    -------------------------------------------------
                                                                          CO2                       O2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1....................................  20-30% of span value...  5-8% by volume.........  4-6% by volume.
2....................................  50-60% of span value...  10-14% by volume.......  8-12% by volume.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Calibration value                                              Percent of span value (C-
                                      Day      Date and time           (C)           Monitor value (M)     Difference (C-M)       M)/span value x 100
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low-level.......................  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
High-level......................  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
                                  ..........  ...............  ...................  ...................  ...................  ..........................
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                                                                                                      Figure 2-2. Relative Accuracy Determination.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             SO2                                                      NOXb                                        CO2 or O2a                                         SO2a                                                   NOXa
            Run No.               Date and time   ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           RM                CEMS               Diff                RM                CEMS               Diff                RM                CEMS                RM                CEMS               Diff               RM               CEMS              Diff
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             ppmc
                                                          ppmc                           %c                 %c                                         mass/GCV
                                                        mass/GCV
-------------------------------
1.............................
-------------------------------
2.............................
-------------------------------
3.............................
-------------------------------
4.............................
-------------------------------
5.............................
-------------------------------
6.............................
-------------------------------
7.............................
-------------------------------
8.............................
-------------------------------
9.............................
-------------------------------
10............................
-------------------------------
11............................
-------------------------------
12............................
-------------------------------

[[Page 621]]

 
Average
Confidence Interval
Accuracy
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a For steam generators.
b Average of three samples.
c Make sure that RM and CEMS data are on a consistent basis, either wet or dry.

  Performance Specification 3--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems 
                          in Stationary Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Analytes                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)....................................        124-38-9
Oxygen (O2).............................................       7782-44-7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is for evaluating acceptability of 
O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> continuous emission monitoring systems 
(CEMS) at the time of installation or soon after and whenever specified 
in an applicable subpart of the regulations. This specification applies 
to O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF> monitors that are not included under 
Performance Specification 2 (PS 2).
    1.2.2 This specification is not designed to evaluate the installed 
CEMS performance over an extended period of time, nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and other auxiliary procedures to assess 
the CEMS performance. The source owner or operator, is responsible to 
calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS properly. The Administrator 
may require, under Section 114 of the Act, the operator to conduct CEMS 
performance evaluations at other times besides the initial test to 
evaluate the CEMS performance. See 40 CFR part 60, Section 60.13(c).
    1.2.3 The definitions, installation and measurement location 
specifications, calculations and data analysis, and references are the 
same as in PS 2, Sections 3, 8.1, 12, and 17, respectively, and also 
apply to O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> CEMS under this specification. 
The performance and equipment specifications and the relative accuracy 
(RA) test procedures for O<INF>2</INF> and CO<INF>2</INF> CEMS do not 
differ from those for SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> CEMS (see PS 2), 
except as noted below.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    The RA and calibration drift (CD) tests are conducted to determine 
conformance of the CEMS to the specification.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as in Section 3.0 of PS 2.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    This performance specification may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This performance specification may not 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicable regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this performance specification. The CEMS users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedures.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of PS2.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of PS2.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure. Sampling Strategy for 
reference method (RM) Tests, Correlation of RM and CEMS Data, and Number 
of RM Tests. Same as PS 2, Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.5, and 8.4.4, 
respectively.
    8.2 Reference Method. Unless otherwise specified in an applicable 
subpart of the regulations, Method 3B or other approved alternative is 
the RM for O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF>.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analyses are concurrent for this performance 
specification (see Section 8). Refer to the RM for specific analytical 
procedures.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Summarize the results on a data sheet similar to that shown in 
Figure 2.2 of PS2. Calculate the arithmetic difference between

[[Page 622]]

the RM and the CEMS output for each run. The average difference of the 
nine (or more) data sets constitute the RA.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift Performance Specification. The CEMS 
calibration must not drift by more than 0.5 percent O<INF>2</INF> or 
CO<INF>2</INF> from the reference value of the gas, gas cell, or optical 
filter.
    13.2 CEMS Relative Accuracy Performance Specification. The RA of the 
CEMS must be no greater than 1.0 percent O<INF>2</INF> or 
CO<INF>2</INF>.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as in Section 17.0 of PS 2.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Performance Specification 4--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
  Carbon Monoxide Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
                                 Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon Monoxide (CO)...................................        630-08-0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is for evaluating the acceptability of 
carbon monoxide (CO) continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) at 
the time of installation or soon after and whenever specified in an 
applicable subpart of the regulations. This specification was developed 
primarily for CEMS having span values of 1,000 ppmv CO.
    1.2.2 This specification is not designed to evaluate the installed 
CEMS performance over an extended period of time nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and other auxiliary procedures to assess 
CEMS performance. The source owner or operator, is responsible to 
calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS. The Administrator may 
require, under Section 114 of the Act, the source owner or operator to 
conduct CEMS performance evaluations at other times besides the initial 
test to evaluate the CEMS performance. See 40 CFR part 60, Section 
60.13(c).
    1.2.3 The definitions, performance specification test procedures, 
calculations, and data analysis procedures for determining calibration 
drift (CD) and relative accuracy (RA) of Performance Specification 2 (PS 
2), Sections 3, 8.0, and 12, respectively, apply to this specification.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    The CD and RA tests are conducted to determine conformance of the 
CEMS to the specification.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as in Section 3.0 of PS 2.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    This performance specification may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This performance specification may not 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicable regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this performance specification. The CEMS users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedures.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of PS 2.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of PS 2.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure. Sampling Strategy for 
reference method (RM) Tests, Number of RM Tests, and Correlation of RM 
and CEMS Data are the same as PS 2, Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.4, and 8.4.5, 
respectively.
    8.2 Reference Methods. Unless otherwise specified in an applicable 
subpart of the regulation, Method 10, 10A, 10B or other approved 
alternative are the RM for this PS. When evaluating nondispersive 
infrared CEMS using Method 10 as the RM, the alternative interference 
trap specified in Section 16.0 of Method 10 shall be used.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this performance 
specification (see Section 8.0). Refer to the RM for specific analytical 
procedures.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Same as Section 12.0 of PS 2.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift. The CEMS calibration must not drift or 
deviate from the reference value of the calibration gas, gas cell,

[[Page 623]]

or optical filter by more than 5 percent of the established span value 
for 6 out of 7 test days (e.g., the established span value is 1000 ppm 
for Subpart J affected facilities).
    13.2 Relative Accuracy. The RA of the CEMS must be no greater than 
10 percent when the average RM value is used to calculate RA or 5 
percent when the applicable emission standard is used to calculate RA.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                 16.0 Alternative Procedures [Reserved]

                             17.0 References

    1. Ferguson, B.B., R.E. Lester, and W.J. Mitchell. Field Evaluation 
of Carbon Monoxide and Hydrogen Sulfide Continuous Emission Monitors at 
an Oil Refinery. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle 
Park, N.C. Publication No. EPA-600/4-82-054. August 1982. 100 p.
    2. ``Gaseous Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems--Performance 
Specification Guidelines for SO<INF>2</INF>, NO<INF>X</INF>, 
CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, and TRS.'' EPA-450/3-82-026. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Technical Support Division (MD-19), 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.
    3. Repp, M. Evaluation of Continuous Monitors for Carbon Monoxide in 
Stationary Sources. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research 
Triangle Park, N.C. Publication No. EPA-600/2-77-063. March 1977. 155 p.
    4. Smith, F., D.E. Wagoner, and R.P. Donovan. Guidelines for 
Development of a Quality Assurance Program: Volume VIII--Determination 
of CO Emissions from Stationary Sources by NDIR Spectrometry. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, N.C. 
Publication No. EPA-650/4-74-005-h. February 1975. 96 p.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

    Same as Section 18.0 of PS 2.

  Performance Specification 4A--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
  Carbon Monoxide Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
                                 Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon Monoxide (CO)...................................        630-80-0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is for evaluating the acceptability of 
carbon monoxide (CO) continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) at 
the time of installation or soon after and whenever specified in an 
applicable subpart of the regulations. This specification was developed 
primarily for CEMS that comply with low emission standards (less than 
200 ppmv).
    1.2.2 This specification is not designed to evaluate the installed 
CEMS performance over an extended period of time nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and other auxiliary procedures to assess 
CEMS performance. The source owner or operator is responsible to 
calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS. The Administrator may 
require, under Section 114 of the Act, the source owner or operator to 
conduct CEMS performance evaluations at other times besides the initial 
test to evaluate CEMS performance. See 40 CFR Part 60, Section 60.13(c).
    1.2.3 The definitions, performance specification, test procedures, 
calculations and data analysis procedures for determining calibration 
drifts (CD) and relative accuracy (RA), of Performance Specification 2 
(PS 2), Sections 3, 8.0, and 12, respectively, apply to this 
specification.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    The CD and RA tests are conducted to determine conformance of the 
CEMS to the specification.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as in Section 3.0 of PS 2.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    This performance specification may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This performance specification may not 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicable regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this performance specification. The CEMS users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedures.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of PS 2 with the following additions.
    6.1 Data Recorder Scale.
    6.1.1 This specification is the same as Section 6.1 of PS 2. The 
CEMS shall be capable of measuring emission levels under normal 
conditions and under periods of short-duration peaks of high 
concentrations. This dual-range capability may be met using two separate 
analyzers (one for each range) or by using dual-range units which have 
the capability of measuring both levels with a single unit. In the 
latter case, when the reading goes above the full-scale measurement 
value of the lower range, the higher-range operation shall be started 
automatically. The

[[Page 624]]

CEMS recorder range must include zero and a high-level value. Under 
applications of consistent low emissions, a single-range analyzer is 
allowed provided normal and spike emissions can be quantified. In this 
case, set an appropriate high-level value to include all emissions.
    6.1.2 For the low-range scale of dual-range units, the high-level 
value shall be between 1.5 times the pollutant concentration 
corresponding to the emission standard level and the span value. For the 
high-range scale, the high-level value shall be set at 2000 ppm, as a 
minimum, and the range shall include the level of the span value. There 
shall be no concentration gap between the low-and high-range scales.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of PS 2.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure. Sampling Strategy for 
reference method (RM) Tests, Number of RM Tests, and Correlation of RM 
and CEMS Data are the same as PS 2, Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.4, and 8.4.5, 
respectively.
    8.2 Reference Methods. Unless otherwise specified in an applicable 
subpart of the regulation, Methods 10, 10A, 10B, or other approved 
alternative is the RM for this PS. When evaluating nondispersive 
infrared CEMS using Method 10 as the RM, the alternative interference 
trap specified in Section 16.0 of Method 10 shall be used.
    8.3 Response Time Test Procedure. The response time test applies to 
all types of CEMS, but will generally have significance only for 
extractive systems.
    8.3.1 Introduce zero gas into the analyzer. When the system output 
has stabilized (no change greater than 1 percent of full scale for 30 
sec), introduce an upscale calibration gas and wait for a stable value. 
Record the time (upscale response time) required to reach 95 percent of 
the final stable value. Next, reintroduce the zero gas and wait for a 
stable reading before recording the response time (downscale response 
time). Repeat the entire procedure three times and determine the mean 
upscale and downscale response times. The slower or longer of the two 
means is the system response time.
    8.4 Interference Check. The CEMS must be shown to be free from the 
effects of any interferences.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this performance 
specification (see Section 8.0). Refer to the RM for specific analytical 
procedures.

    12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis. Same as Section 12.0 of PS 2

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift. The CEMS calibration must not drift or 
deviate from the reference value of the calibration gas, gas cell, or 
optical filter by more than 5 percent of the established span value for 
6 out of 7 test days.
    13.2 Relative Accuracy. The RA of the CEMS must be no greater than 
10 percent when the average RM value is used to calculate RA, 5 percent 
when the applicable emission standard is used to calculate RA, or within 
5 ppmv when the RA is calculated as the absolute average difference 
between the RM and CEMS plus the 2.5 percent confidence coefficient.
    13.3 Response Time. The CEMS response time shall not exceed 1.5 min 
to achieve 95 percent of the final stable value.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    16.1 Under conditions where the average CO emissions are less than 
10 percent of the standard and this is verified by Method 10, a cylinder 
gas audit may be performed in place of the RA test to determine 
compliance with these limits. In this case, the cylinder gas shall 
contain CO in 12 percent carbon dioxide as an interference check. If 
this option is exercised, Method 10 must be used to verify that emission 
levels are less than 10 percent of the standard.

                             17.0 References

    Same as Section 17 of PS 4.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

    Same as Section 18.0 of PS 2.

  Performance Specification 4B--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
 Carbon Monoxide and Oxygen Continuous Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
                                 Sources

                     a. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. a. This specification is to be used for 
evaluating the acceptability of carbon monoxide (CO) and oxygen 
(O<INF>2</INF>) continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) at the 
time of or soon after installation and whenever specified in the 
regulations. The CEMS may include, for certain stationary sources, (a) 
flow monitoring equipment to allow measurement of the dry volume of 
stack effluent sampled, and (b) an automatic sampling system.

[[Page 625]]

    b. This specification is not designed to evaluate the installed 
CEMS' performance over an extended period of time nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and auxiliary procedures to assess the 
CEMS' performance. The source owner or operator, however, is responsible 
to properly calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS. To evaluate the 
CEMS' performance, the Administrator may require, under section 114 of 
the Act, the operator to conduct CEMS performance evaluations at times 
other than the initial test.
    c. The definitions, installation and measurement location 
specifications, test procedures, data reduction procedures, reporting 
requirements, and bibliography are the same as in PS 3 (for 
O<INF>2</INF>) and PS 4A (for CO) except as otherwise noted below.
    1.2 Principle. Installation and measurement location specifications, 
performance specifications, test procedures, and data reduction 
procedures are included in this specification. Reference method tests, 
calibration error tests, calibration drift tests, and interferant tests 
are conducted to determine conformance of the CEMS with the 
specification.

                             b. Definitions

    2.1 Continuous Emission Monitoring System (CEMS). This definition is 
the same as PS 2 Section 2.1 with the following addition. A continuous 
monitor is one in which the sample to be analyzed passes the measurement 
section of the analyzer without interruption.
    2.2 Response Time. The time interval between the start of a step 
change in the system input and when the pollutant analyzer output 
reaches 95 percent of the final value.
    2.3 Calibration Error (CE). The difference between the concentration 
indicated by the CEMS and the known concentration generated by a 
calibration source when the entire CEMS, including the sampling 
interface is challenged. A CE test procedure is performed to document 
the accuracy and linearity of the CEMS over the entire measurement 
range.

         3. Installation and Measurement Location Specifications

    3.1 The CEMS Installation and Measurement Location. This 
specification is the same as PS 2 Section 3.1 with the following 
additions. Both the CO and O<INF>2</INF> monitors should be installed at 
the same general location. If this is not possible, they may be 
installed at different locations if the effluent gases at both sample 
locations are not stratified and there is no in-leakage of air between 
sampling locations.
    3.1.1 Measurement Location. Same as PS 2 Section 3.1.1.
    3.1.2 Point CEMS. The measurement point should be within or 
centrally located over the centroidal area of the stack or duct cross 
section.
    3.1.3 Path CEMS. The effective measurement path should: (1) Have at 
least 70 percent of the path within the inner 50 percent of the stack or 
duct cross sectional area, or (2) be centrally located over any part of 
the centroidal area.
    3.2 Reference Method (RM) Measurement Location and Traverse Points. 
This specification is the same as PS 2 Section 3.2 with the following 
additions. When pollutant concentration changes are due solely to 
diluent leakage and CO and O<INF>2</INF> are simultaneously measured at 
the same location, one half diameter may be used in place of two 
equivalent diameters.
    3.3 Stratification Test Procedure. Stratification is defined as the 
difference in excess of 10 percent between the average concentration in 
the duct or stack and the concentration at any point more than 1.0 meter 
from the duct or stack wall. To determine whether effluent 
stratification exists, a dual probe system should be used to determine 
the average effluent concentration while measurements at each traverse 
point are being made. One probe, located at the stack or duct centroid, 
is used as a stationary reference point to indicate change in the 
effluent concentration over time. The second probe is used for sampling 
at the traverse points specified in Method 1 (40 CFR part 60 appendix 
A). The monitoring system samples sequentially at the reference and 
traverse points throughout the testing period for five minutes at each 
point.

               d. Performance and Equipment Specifications

    4.1 Data Recorder Scale. For O<INF>2</INF>, same as specified in PS 
3, except that the span must be 25 percent. The span of the 
O<INF>2</INF> may be higher if the O<INF>2</INF> concentration at the 
sampling point can be greater than 25 percent. For CO, same as specified 
in PS 4A, except that the low-range span must be 200 ppm and the high 
range span must be 3000 ppm. In addition, the scale for both CEMS must 
record all readings within a measurement range with a resolution of 0.5 
percent.
    4.2 Calibration Drift. For O<INF>2</INF>, same as specified in PS 3. 
For CO, the same as specified in PS 4A except that the CEMS calibration 
must not drift from the reference value of the calibration standard by 
more than 3 percent of the span value on either the high or low range.
    4.3 Relative Accuracy (RA). For O<INF>2</INF>, same as specified in 
PS 3. For CO, the same as specified in PS 4A.
    4.4 Calibration Error (CE). The mean difference between the CEMS and 
reference values at all three test points (see Table I) must be no 
greater than 5 percent of span value for CO monitors and 0.5 percent for 
O<INF>2</INF> monitors.

[[Page 626]]

    4.5 Response Time. The response time for the CO or O<INF>2</INF> 
monitor must not exceed 2 minutes.

               e. Performance Specification Test Procedure

    5.1 Calibration Error Test and Response Time Test Periods. Conduct 
the CE and response time tests during the CD test period.

     F. The CEMS Calibration Drift and Response Time Test Procedures

    The response time test procedure is given in PS 4A, and must be 
carried out for both the CO and O<INF>2</INF> monitors.
    7. Relative Accuracy and Calibration Error Test Procedures
    7.1 Calibration Error Test Procedure. Challenge each monitor (both 
low and high range CO and O<INF>2</INF>) with zero gas and EPA Protocol 
1 cylinder gases at three measurement points within the ranges specified 
in Table I.

             Table I. Calibration Error Concentration Ranges
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      CO Low
         Measurement point             range       CO High      O2 (%)
                                       (ppm)     range (ppm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.................................    0-40        0-600           0-2
2.................................   60-80      900-1200         8-10
3.................................  140-160     2100-2400       14-16
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Operate each monitor in its normal sampling mode as nearly as possible. 
The calibration gas must be injected into the sample system as close to 
the sampling probe outlet as practical and should pass through all CEMS 
components used during normal sampling. Challenge the CEMS three non-
consecutive times at each measurement point and record the responses. 
The duration of each gas injection should be sufficient to ensure that 
the CEMS surfaces are conditioned.
    7.1.1 Calculations. Summarize the results on a data sheet. Average 
the differences between the instrument response and the certified 
cylinder gas value for each gas. Calculate the CE results according to:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.010

where d is the mean difference between the CEMS response and the known 
reference concentration and FS is the span value.

    7.2 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure. Follow the RA test procedures 
in PS 3 (for O<INF>2</INF>) section 3 and PS 4A (for CO) section 4.
    7.3 Alternative RA Procedure. Under some operating conditions, it 
may not be possible to obtain meaningful results using the RA test 
procedure. This includes conditions where consistent, very low CO 
emission or low CO emissions interrupted periodically by short duration, 
high level spikes are observed. It may be appropriate in these 
circumstances to waive the RA test and substitute the following 
procedure.
    Conduct a complete CEMS status check following the manufacturer's 
written instructions. The check should include operation of the light 
source, signal receiver, timing mechanism functions, data acquisition 
and data reduction functions, data recorders, mechanically operated 
functions, sample filters, sample line heaters, moisture traps, and 
other related functions of the CEMS, as applicable. All parts of the 
CEMS must be functioning properly before the RA requirement can be 
waived. The instrument must also successfully passed the CE and CD 
specifications. Substitution of the alternate procedure requires 
approval of the Regional Administrator.
    8. Bibliography
    1. 40 CFR Part 266, Appendix IX, Section 2, ``Performance 
Specifications for Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems.''

Performance Specification 5--Specifications and Test Procedures for TRS 
      Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Reduced Sulfur (TRS).............................              NA
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability. This specification is for evaluating the 
applicability of TRS continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) at 
the time of installation or soon after and whenever specified in an 
applicable subpart of the regulations. The CEMS may include oxygen 
monitors which are subject to Performance Specification 3 (PS 3).
    1.3 The definitions, performance specification, test procedures, 
calculations and data analysis procedures for determining calibration 
drifts (CD) and relative accuracy (RA) of PS 2, Sections 3.0, 8.0, and 
12.0, respectively, apply to this specification.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    The CD and RA tests are conducted to determine conformance of the 
CEMS to the specification.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as in Section 3.0 of PS 2.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    This performance specification may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This performance specification may not 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate

[[Page 627]]

safety and health practices and determine the applicable regulatory 
limitations prior to performing this performance specification. The CEMS 
users manual should be consulted for specific precautions to be taken 
with regard to the analytical procedures.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of PS 2.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of PS 2.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure. Sampling Strategy for 
reference method (RM) Tests, Number of RM Tests, and Correlation of RM 
and CEMS Data are the same as PS 2, Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.4, and 8.4.5, 
respectively.

    Note: For Method 16, a sample is made up of at least three separate 
injects equally space over time. For Method 16A, a sample is collected 
for at least 1 hour.

    8.2 Reference Methods. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable 
subpart of the regulations, Method 16, Method 16A, 16B or other approved 
alternative is the RM for TRS.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this performance 
specification (see Section 8.0). Refer to the reference method for 
specific analytical procedures.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Same as Section 12.0 of PS 2.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift. The CEMS detector calibration must not drift 
or deviate from the reference value of the calibration gas by more than 
5 percent of the established span value for 6 out of 7 test days. This 
corresponds to 1.5 ppm drift for Subpart BB sources where the span value 
is 30 ppm. If the CEMS includes pollutant and diluent monitors, the CD 
must be determined separately for each in terms of concentrations (see 
PS 3 for the diluent specifications).
    13.2 Relative Accuracy. The RA of the CEMS must be no greater than 
20 percent when the average RM value is used to calculate RA or 10 
percent when the applicable emission standard is used to calculate RA.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                 16.0 Alternative Procedures [Reserved]

                             17.0 References

    1. Department of Commerce. Experimental Statistics, National Bureau 
of Standards, Handbook 91. 1963. Paragraphs 3-3.1.4, p. 3-31.
    2. A Guide to the Design, Maintenance and Operation of TRS 
Monitoring Systems. National Council for Air and Stream Improvement 
Technical Bulletin No. 89. September 1977.
    3. Observation of Field Performance of TRS Monitors on a Kraft 
Recovery Furnace. National Council for Air and Stream Improvement 
Technical Bulletin No. 91. January 1978.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

    Same as Section 18.0 of PS 2.

  Performance Specification 6--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
    Continuous Emission Rate Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Applicability. This specification is used for evaluating the 
acceptability of continuous emission rate monitoring systems (CERMSs).
    1.2 The installation and measurement location specifications, 
performance specification test procedure, calculations, and data 
analysis procedures, of Performance Specifications (PS 2), Sections 8.0 
and 12, respectively, apply to this specification.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    The calibration drift (CD) and relative accuracy (RA) tests are 
conducted to determine conformance of the CERMS to the specification.

                             3.0 Definitions

    The definitions are the same as in Section 3 of PS 2, except this 
specification refers to the continuous emission rate monitoring system 
rather than the continuous emission monitoring system. The following 
definitions are added:
    3.1 Continuous Emission Rate Monitoring System (CERMS). The total 
equipment required for the determining and recording the pollutant mass 
emission rate (in terms of mass per unit of time).
    3.2 Flow Rate Sensor. That portion of the CERMS that senses the 
volumetric flow rate and generates an output proportional to that flow 
rate. The flow rate sensor shall have provisions to check the CD for 
each flow rate

[[Page 628]]

parameter that it measures individually (e.g., velocity, pressure).

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    This performance specification may involve hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. This performance specification may not 
address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicable regulatory limitations prior to 
performing this performance specification. The CERMS users manual should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken with regard to the 
analytical procedures.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    Same as Section 6.0 of PS 2.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of PS 2.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Calibration Drift Test Procedure.
    8.1.1 The CD measurements are to verify the ability of the CERMS to 
conform to the established CERMS calibrations used for determining the 
emission rate. Therefore, if periodic automatic or manual adjustments 
are made to the CERMS zero and calibration settings, conduct the CD 
tests immediately before these adjustments, or conduct them in such a 
way that CD can be determined.
    8.1.2 Conduct the CD tests for pollutant concentration at the two 
values specified in Section 6.1.2 of PS 2. For other parameters that are 
selectively measured by the CERMS (e.g., velocity, pressure, flow rate), 
use two analogous values (e.g., Low: 0-20% of full scale, High: 50-100% 
of full scale). Introduce to the CERMS the reference signals (these need 
not be certified). Record the CERMS response to each and subtract this 
value from the respective reference value (see example data sheet in 
Figure 6-1).
    8.2 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure.
    8.2.1 Sampling Strategy for reference method (RM) Tests, Correlation 
of RM and CERMS Data, and Number of RM Tests are the same as PS 2, 
Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.5, and 8.4.4, respectively. Summarize the results on 
a data sheet. An example is shown in Figure 6-1. The RA test may be 
conducted during the CD test period.
    8.2.2 Reference Methods. Unless otherwise specified in the 
applicable subpart of the regulations, the RM for the pollutant gas is 
the Appendix A method that is cited for compliance test purposes, or its 
approved alternatives. Methods 2, 2A, 2B, 2C, or 2D, as applicable, are 
the RMs for the determination of volumetric flow rate.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Same as Section 11.0 of PS 2.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Same as Section 12.0 of PS 2.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift. Since the CERMS includes analyzers for 
several measurements, the CD shall be determined separately for each 
analyzer in terms of its specific measurement. The calibration for each 
analyzer associated with the measurement of flow rate shall not drift or 
deviate from each reference value of flow rate by more than 3 percent of 
the respective high-level value. The CD specification for each analyzer 
for which other PSs have been established (e.g., PS 2 for SO<INF>2</INF> 
and NO<INF>X</INF>), shall be the same as in the applicable PS.
    13.2 CERMS Relative Accuracy. The RA of the CERMS shall be no 
greater than 20 percent of the mean value of the RM's test data in terms 
of the units of the emission standard, or 10 percent of the applicable 
standard, whichever is greater.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 Alternative Procedures

    Same as in Section 16.0 of PS 2.

                             17.0 References

    1. Brooks, E.F., E.C. Beder, C.A. Flegal, D.J. Luciani, and R. 
Williams. Continuous Measurement of Total Gas Flow Rate from Stationary 
Sources. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina. Publication No. EPA-650/2-75-020. February 1975. 248 p.

         18.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Emission rate (kg/hr)a
                                            --------------------------------------------------------------------
      Run No.             Date and time                                                      Difference  (RMs-
                                                     CERMS                   RMs                   CERMS)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1                                                                                          .....................
--------------------

[[Page 629]]

 
2                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
3                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
4                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
5                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
6                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
7                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
8                                                                                          .....................
--------------------
9                                                                                          .....................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ The RMs and CERMS data as corrected to a consistent basis (i.e., moisture, temperature, and pressure
  conditions).

                Figure 6-1--Emission Rate Determinations

  Performance Specification 7--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
 Hydrogen Sulfide Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
                                 Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hydrogen Sulfide........................................       7783-06-4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is to be used for evaluating the 
acceptability of hydrogen sulfide (H<INF>2</INF>S) continuous emission 
monitoring systems (CEMS) at the time of or soon after installation and 
whenever specified in an applicable subpart of the regulations.
    1.2.2 This specification is not designed to evaluate the installed 
CEMS performance over an extended period of time nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and other auxiliary procedures to assess 
CEMS performance. The source owner or operator, however, is responsible 
to calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS. To evaluate CEMS 
performance, the Administrator may require, under Section 114 of the 
Act, the source owner or operator to conduct CEMS performance 
evaluations at other times besides the initial test. See Section 
60.13(c).

                               2.0 Summary

    Calibration drift (CD) and relative accuracy (RA) tests are 
conducted to determine that the CEMS conforms to the specification.

                             3.0 Definitions

    Same as Section 3.0 of PS 2.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    The procedures required under this performance specification may 
involve hazardous materials, operations, and equipment. This performance 
specification may not address all of the safety problems associated with 
these procedures. It is the responsibility of the user to establish 
appropriate safety problems associated with these procedures. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the application regulatory limitations prior to 
performing these procedures. The CEMS user's manual and materials 
recommended by the reference method should be consulted for specific 
precautions to be taken.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Instrument Zero and Span. This specification is the same as 
Section 6.1 of PS 2.
    6.2 Calibration Drift. The CEMS calibration must not drift or 
deviate from the reference value of the calibration gas or reference 
source by more than 5 percent of the established span value for 6 out of 
7 test days (e.g., the established span value is 300 ppm for Subpart J 
fuel gas combustion devices).
    6.3 Relative Accuracy. The RA of the CEMS must be no greater than 20 
percent when the average reference method (RM) value is used to 
calculate RA or 10 percent when the applicable emission standard is used 
to calculate RA.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    Same as Section 7.0 of PS 2.

      8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport.

    8.1 Installation and Measurement Location Specification. Same as 
Section 8.1 of PS 2.

[[Page 630]]

    8.2 Pretest Preparation. Same as Section 8.2 of PS 2.
    8.3 Calibration Drift Test Procedure. Same as Section 8.3 of PS 2.
    8.4 Relative Accuracy Test Procedure.
    8.4.1 Sampling Strategy for RM Tests, Correlation of RM and CEMS 
Data, and Number of RM Tests. These are the same as that in PS 2, 
Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.5, and 8.4.4, respectively.
    8.4.2 Reference Methods. Unless otherwise specified in an applicable 
subpart of the regulation, Method 11 is the RM for this PS.
    8.5 Reporting. Same as Section 8.5 of PS 2.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

            10.0 Calibration and Standardizations [Reserved]

                       11.0 Analytical Procedures

    Sample Collection and analysis are concurrent for this PS (see 
Section 8.0). Refer to the RM for specific analytical procedures.

                   12.0 Data Analysis and Calculations

    Same as Section 12.0 of PS 2.

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    1. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Standards of Performance 
for New Stationary Sources; Appendix B; Performance Specifications 2 and 
3 for SO<INF>2</INF>, NO<INF>X</INF>, CO<INF>2</INF>, and O<INF>2</INF> 
Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems; Final Rule. 48 CFR 23608. 
Washington, D.C. U.S. Government Printing Office. May 25, 1983.
    2. U.S. Government Printing Office. Gaseous Continuous Emission 
Monitoring Systems--Performance Specification Guidelines for 
SO<INF>2</INF>, NO<INF>X</INF>, CO<INF>2</INF>, O<INF>2</INF>, and TRS. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Washington, D.C. EPA-450/3-82-026. 
October 1982. 26 p.
    3. Maines, G.D., W.C. Kelly (Scott Environmental Technology, Inc.), 
and J.B. Homolya. Evaluation of Monitors for Measuring H<INF>2</INF>S in 
Refinery Gas. Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Research Triangle Park, N.C. Contract No. 68-02-2707. 1978. 60 p.
    4. Ferguson, B.B., R.E. Lester (Harmon Engineering and Testing), and 
W.J. Mitchell. Field Evaluation of Carbon Monoxide and Hydrogen Sulfide 
Continuous Emission Monitors at an Oil Refinery. Prepared for the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, N.C. 
Publication No. EPA-600/4-82-054. August 1982. 100 p.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

    Same as Section 18.0 of PS 2.

  Performance Specification 8--Performance Specifications for Volatile 
 Organic Compound Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
                                 Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes. Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs).
    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is to be used for evaluating a continuous 
emission monitoring system (CEMS) that measures a mixture of VOC's and 
generates a single combined response value. The VOC detection principle 
may be flame ionization (FI), photoionization (PI), non-dispersive 
infrared absorption (NDIR), or any other detection principle that is 
appropriate for the VOC species present in the emission gases and that 
meets this performance specification. The performance specification 
includes procedures to evaluate the acceptability of the CEMS at the 
time of or soon after its installation and whenever specified in 
emission regulations or permits. This specification is not designed to 
evaluate the installed CEMS performance over an extended period of time, 
nor does it identify specific calibration techniques and other auxiliary 
procedures to assess the CEMS performance. The source owner or operator, 
however, is responsible to calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS 
properly. To evaluate the CEMS performance, the Administrator may 
require, under Section 114 of the Act, the operator to conduct CEMS 
performance evaluations in addition to the initial test. See Section 
60.13(c).
    1.2.2 In most emission circumstances, most VOC monitors can provide 
only a relative measure of the total mass or volume concentration of a 
mixture of organic gases, rather than an accurate quantification. This 
problem is removed when an emission standard is based on a total VOC 
measurement as obtained with a particular detection principle. In those 
situations where a true mass or volume VOC concentration is needed, the 
problem can be mitigated by using the VOC CEMS as a relative indicator 
of total VOC concentration if statistical analysis indicates that a 
sufficient margin of compliance exists for this approach to be 
acceptable. Otherwise, consideration can be given to calibrating the 
CEMS with a mixture of the same VOC's in the same proportions as they 
actually occur in the measured source. In those circumstances where only 
one organic species is present in the source, or where equal incremental 
amounts of each of the organic species present generate equal CEMS

[[Page 631]]

responses, the latter choice can be more easily achieved.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    2.1 Calibration drift and relative accuracy tests are conducted to 
determine adherence of the CEMS with specifications given for those 
items. The performance specifications include criteria for installation 
and measurement location, equipment and performance, and procedures for 
testing and data reduction.

                            3.0 Definitions.

    Same as Section 3.0 of PS 2.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    The procedures required under this performance specification may 
involve hazardous materials, operations, and equipment. This performance 
specification may not address all of the safety problems associated with 
these procedures. It is the responsibility of the user to establish 
appropriate safety problems associated with these procedures. It is the 
responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the application regulatory limitations prior to 
performing these procedures. The CEMS user's manual and materials 
recommended by the reference method should be consulted for specific 
precautions to be taken.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 VOC CEMS Selection. When possible, select a VOC CEMS with the 
detection principle of the reference method specified in the regulation 
or permit (usually either FI, NDIR, or PI). Otherwise, use knowledge of 
the source process chemistry, previous emission studies, or gas 
chromatographic analysis of the source gas to select an appropriate VOC 
CEMS. Exercise extreme caution in choosing and installing any CEMS in an 
area with explosive hazard potential.
    6.2 Data Recorder Scale. Same as Section 6.1 of PS 2.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Installation and Measurement Location Specifications. Same as 
Section 8.1 of PS 2.
    8.2 Pretest Preparation. Same as Section 8.2 of PS 2.
    8.3 Reference Method (RM). Use the method specified in the 
applicable regulation or permit, or any approved alternative, as the RM.
    8.4 Sampling Strategy for RM Tests, Correlation of RM and CEMS Data, 
and Number of RM Tests. Follow PS 2, Sections 8.4.3, 8.4.5, and 8.4.4, 
respectively.
    8.5 Reporting. Same as Section 8.5 of PS 2.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

             10.0 Calibration and Standardization [Reserved]

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this PS (see 
Section 8.0). Refer to the RM for specific analytical procedures.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    Same as Section 12.0 of PS 2.

                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Drift. The CEMS calibration must not drift by more 
than 2.5 percent of the span value.
    13.2 CEMS Relative Accuracy. Unless stated otherwise in the 
regulation or permit, the RA of the CEMS must not be greater than 20 
percent of the mean value of the RM test data in terms of the units of 
the emission standard, or 10 percent of the applicable standard, 
whichever is greater.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                             16.0 References

    Same as Section 17.0 of PS 2.

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Performance Specification 8A--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
  Total Hydrocarbon Continuous Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. These performance specifications apply to 
hydrocarbon (HC) continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) installed 
on stationary sources. The specifications include procedures which are 
intended to be used to evaluate the acceptability of the CEMS at the 
time of its installation or whenever specified in regulations or 
permits. The procedures are not designed to evaluate CEMS performance 
over an extended period of time. The source owner or operator is 
responsible for the proper calibration, maintenance, and operation of 
the CEMS at all times.
    1.2 Principle. A gas sample is extracted from the source through a 
heated sample line and heated filter to a flame ionization detector 
(FID). Results are reported as volume concentration equivalents of 
propane.

[[Page 632]]

Installation and measurement location specifications, performance and 
equipment specifications, test and data reduction procedures, and brief 
quality assurance guidelines are included in the specifications. 
Calibration drift, calibration error, and response time tests are 
conducted to determine conformance of the CEMS with the specifications.

                             2. Definitions

    2.1 Continuous Emission Monitoring System (CEMS). The total 
equipment used to acquire data, which includes sample extraction and 
transport hardware, analyzer, data recording and processing hardware, 
and software. The system consists of the following major subsystems:
    2.1.1 Sample Interface. That portion of the system that is used for 
one or more of the following: Sample acquisition, sample transportation, 
sample conditioning, or protection of the analyzer from the effects of 
the stack effluent.
    2.1.2 Organic Analyzer. That portion of the system that senses 
organic concentration and generates an output proportional to the gas 
concentration.
    2.1.3 Data Recorder. That portion of the system that records a 
permanent record of the measurement values. The data recorder may 
include automatic data reduction capabilities.
    2.2 Instrument Measurement Range. The difference between the minimum 
and maximum concentration that can be measured by a specific instrument. 
The minimum is often stated or assumed to be zero and the range 
expressed only as the maximum.
    2.3 Span or Span Value. Full scale instrument measurement range. The 
span value must be documented by the CEMS manufacturer with laboratory 
data.
    2.4 Calibration Gas. A known concentration of a gas in an 
appropriate diluent gas.
    2.5 Calibration Drift (CD). The difference in the CEMS output 
readings from the established reference value after a stated period of 
operation during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment 
takes place. A CD test is performed to demonstrate the stability of the 
CEMS calibration over time.
    2.6 Response Time. The time interval between the start of a step 
change in the system input (e.g., change of calibration gas) and the 
time when the data recorder displays 95 percent of the final value.
    2.7 Accuracy. A measurement of agreement between a measured value 
and an accepted or true value, expressed as the percentage difference 
between the true and measured values relative to the true value. For 
these performance specifications, accuracy is checked by conducting a 
calibration error (CE) test.
    2.8 Calibration Error (CE). The difference between the concentration 
indicated by the CEMS and the known concentration of the cylinder gas. A 
CE test procedure is performed to document the accuracy and linearity of 
the monitoring equipment over the entire measurement range.
    2.9 Performance Specification Test (PST) Period. The period during 
which CD, CE, and response time tests are conducted.
    2.10 Centroidal Area. A concentric area that is geometrically 
similar to the stack or duct cross section and is no greater than 1 
percent of the stack or duct cross-sectional area.

         3. Installation and Measurement Location Specifications

    3.1 CEMS Installation and Measurement Locations. The CEMS must be 
installed in a location in which measurements representative of the 
source's emissions can be obtained. The optimum location of the sample 
interface for the CEMS is determined by a number of factors, including 
ease of access for calibration and maintenance, the degree to which 
sample conditioning will be required, the degree to which it represents 
total emissions, and the degree to which it represents the combustion 
situation in the firebox (where applicable). The location should be as 
free from in-leakage influences as possible and reasonably free from 
severe flow disturbances. The sample location should be at least two 
equivalent duct diameters downstream from the nearest control device, 
point of pollutant generation, or other point at which a change in the 
pollutant concentration or emission rate occurs and at least 0.5 
diameter upstream from the exhaust or control device. The equivalent 
duct diameter is calculated as per 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, method 1, 
section 2.1. If these criteria are not achievable or if the location is 
otherwise less than optimum, the possibility of stratification should be 
investigated as described in section 3.2. The measurement point must be 
within the centroidal area of the stack or duct cross section.
    3.2 Stratification Test Procedure. Stratification is defined as a 
difference in excess of 10 percent between the average concentration in 
the duct or stack and the concentration at any point more than 1.0 meter 
from the duct or stack wall. To determine whether effluent 
stratification exists, a dual probe system should be used to determine 
the average effluent concentration while measurements at each traverse 
point are being made. One probe, located at the stack or duct centroid, 
is used as a stationary reference point to indicate the change in 
effluent concentration over time. The second probe is used for sampling 
at the traverse points specified in 40 CFR part 60 appendix A, method 1. 
The monitoring system samples sequentially at the

[[Page 633]]

reference and traverse points throughout the testing period for five 
minutes at each point.

            4. CEMS Performance and Equipment Specifications

    If this method is applied in highly explosive areas, caution and 
care must be exercised in choice of equipment and installation.
    4.1 Flame Ionization Detector (FID) Analyzer. A heated FID analyzer 
capable of meeting or exceeding the requirements of these 
specifications. Heated systems must maintain the temperature of the 
sample gas between 150 [deg]C (300 [deg]F) and 175 [deg]C (350 [deg]F) 
throughout the system. This requires all system components such as the 
probe, calibration valve, filter, sample lines, pump, and the FID to be 
kept heated at all times such that no moisture is condensed out of the 
system. The essential components of the measurement system are described 
below:
    4.1.1 Sample Probe. Stainless steel, or equivalent, to collect a gas 
sample from the centroidal area of the stack cross-section.
    4.1.2 Sample Line. Stainless steel or Teflon tubing to transport the 
sample to the analyzer.

    Note: Mention of trade names or specific products does not 
constitute endorsement by the Environmental Protection Agency.

    4.1.3 Calibration Valve Assembly. A heated three-way valve assembly 
to direct the zero and calibration gases to the analyzer is recommended. 
Other methods, such as quick-connect lines, to route calibration gas to 
the analyzers are applicable.
    4.1.4 Particulate Filter. An in-stack or out-of-stack sintered 
stainless steel filter is recommended if exhaust gas particulate loading 
is significant. An out-of-stack filter must be heated.
    4.1.5 Fuel. The fuel specified by the manufacturer (e.g., 40 percent 
hydrogen/60 percent helium, 40 percent hydrogen/60 percent nitrogen gas 
mixtures, or pure hydrogen) should be used.
    4.1.6 Zero Gas. High purity air with less than 0.1 parts per million 
by volume (ppm) HC as methane or carbon equivalent or less than 0.1 
percent of the span value, whichever is greater.
    4.1.7 Calibration Gases. Appropriate concentrations of propane gas 
(in air or nitrogen). Preparation of the calibration gases should be 
done according to the procedures in EPA Protocol 1. In addition, the 
manufacturer of the cylinder gas should provide a recommended shelf life 
for each calibration gas cylinder over which the concentration does not 
change by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent from the certified 
value.
    4.2 CEMS Span Value. 100 ppm propane. The span value must be 
documented by the CEMS manufacturer with laboratory data.
    4.3 Daily Calibration Gas Values. The owner or operator must choose 
calibration gas concentrations that include zero and high-level 
calibration values.
    4.3.1 The zero level may be between zero and 0.1 ppm (zero and 0.1 
percent of the span value).
    4.3.2 The high-level concentration must be between 50 and 90 ppm (50 
and 90 percent of the span value).
    4.4 Data Recorder Scale. The strip chart recorder, computer, or 
digital recorder must be capable of recording all readings within the 
CEMS' measurement range and must have a resolution of 0.5 ppm (0.5 
percent of span value).
    4.5 Response Time. The response time for the CEMS must not exceed 2 
minutes to achieve 95 percent of the final stable value.
    4.6 Calibration Drift. The CEMS must allow the determination of CD 
at the zero and high-level values. The CEMS calibration response must 
not differ by more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 ppm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 percent of the span value) after each 24-hour period 
of the 7-day test at both zero and high levels.
    4.7 Calibration Error. The mean difference between the CEMS and 
reference values at all three test points listed below must be no 
greater than 5 ppm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the span value).
    4.7.1 Zero Level. Zero to 0.1 ppm (0 to 0.1 percent of span value).
    4.7.2 Mid-Level. 30 to 40 ppm (30 to 40 percent of span value).
    4.7.3 High-Level. 70 to 80 ppm (70 to 80 percent of span value).
    4.8 Measurement and Recording Frequency. The sample to be analyzed 
must pass through the measurement section of the analyzer without 
interruption. The detector must measure the sample concentration at 
least once every 15 seconds. An average emission rate must be computed 
and recorded at least once every 60 seconds.
    4.9 Hourly Rolling Average Calculation. The CEMS must calculate 
every minute an hourly rolling average, which is the arithmetic mean of 
the 60 most recent 1-minute average values.
    4.10 Retest. If the CEMS produces results within the specified 
criteria, the test is successful. If the CEMS does not meet one or more 
of the criteria, necessary corrections must be made and the performance 
tests repeated.

             5. Performance Specification Test (PST) Periods

    5.1 Pretest Preparation Period. Install the CEMS, prepare the PTM 
test site according to the specifications in section 3, and prepare the 
CEMS for operation and calibration according to the manufacturer's 
written instructions. A pretest conditioning period

[[Page 634]]

similar to that of the 7-day CD test is recommended to verify the 
operational status of the CEMS.
    5.2 Calibration Drift Test Period. While the facility is operating 
under normal conditions, determine the magnitude of the CD at 24-hour 
intervals for seven consecutive days according to the procedure given in 
section 6.1. All CD determinations must be made following a 24-hour 
period during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment 
takes place. If the combustion unit is taken out of service during the 
test period, record the onset and duration of the downtime and continue 
the CD test when the unit resumes operation.
    5.3 Calibration Error Test and Response Time Test Periods. Conduct 
the CE and response time tests during the CD test period.

              6. Performance Specification Test Procedures

    6.1 Relative Accuracy Test Audit (RATA) and Absolute Calibration 
Audits (ACA). The test procedures described in this section are in lieu 
of a RATA and ACA.
    6.2 Calibration Drift Test.
    6.2.1 Sampling Strategy. Conduct the CD test at 24-hour intervals 
for seven consecutive days using calibration gases at the two daily 
concentration levels specified in section 4.3. Introduce the two 
calibration gases into the sampling system as close to the sampling 
probe outlet as practical. The gas must pass through all CEM components 
used during normal sampling. If periodic automatic or manual adjustments 
are made to the CEMS zero and calibration settings, conduct the CD test 
immediately before these adjustments, or conduct it in such a way that 
the CD can be determined. Record the CEMS response and subtract this 
value from the reference (calibration gas) value. To meet the 
specification, none of the differences may exceed 3 percent of the span 
of the CEM.
    6.2.2 Calculations. Summarize the results on a data sheet. An 
example is shown in Figure 1. Calculate the differences between the CEMS 
responses and the reference values.
    6.3 Response Time. The entire system including sample extraction and 
transport, sample conditioning, gas analyses, and the data recording is 
checked with this procedure.
    6.3.1 Introduce the calibration gases at the probe as near to the 
sample location as possible. Introduce the zero gas into the system. 
When the system output has stabilized (no change greater than 1 percent 
of full scale for 30 sec), switch to monitor stack effluent and wait for 
a stable value. Record the time (upscale response time) required to 
reach 95 percent of the final stable value.
    6.3.2 Next, introduce a high-level calibration gas and repeat the 
above procedure. Repeat the entire procedure three times and determine 
the mean upscale and downscale response times. The longer of the two 
means is the system response time.
    6.4 Calibration Error Test Procedure.
    6.4.1 Sampling Strategy. Challenge the CEMS with zero gas and EPA 
Protocol 1 cylinder gases at measurement points within the ranges 
specified in section 4.7.
    6.4.1.1 The daily calibration gases, if Protocol 1, may be used for 
this test.

[[Page 635]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.011

    6.4.1.2 Operate the CEMS as nearly as possible in its normal 
sampling mode. The calibration gas should be injected into the sampling 
system as close to the sampling probe outlet as practical and must pass 
through all filters, scrubbers, conditioners, and other monitor 
components used during normal sampling. Challenge the CEMS three non-
consecutive times at each measurement point and record the responses. 
The duration of each gas injection should be for a sufficient period of 
time to ensure that the CEMS surfaces are conditioned.
    6.4.2 Calculations. Summarize the results on a data sheet. An 
example data sheet is shown in Figure 2. Average the differences between 
the instrument response and the certified cylinder gas value for each 
gas. Calculate three CE results according to Equation 1. No confidence 
coefficient is used in CE calculations.

                              7. Equations

    Calibration Error. Calculate CE using Equation 1.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.012
    
Where:

d=Mean difference between CEMS response and the known reference 
concentration, determined using Equation 2.

[[Page 636]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.013

Where:

d<INF>i</INF>=Individual difference between CEMS response and the known 
reference concentration.

                              8. Reporting

    At a minimum, summarize in tabular form the results of the CD, 
response time, and CE test, as appropriate. Include all data sheets, 
calculations, CEMS data records, and cylinder gas or reference material 
certifications.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE99.014

                              9. References

    1. Measurement of Volatile Organic Compounds-Guideline Series. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 
27711, EPA-450/2-78-041, June 1978.
    2. Traceability Protocol for Establishing True Concentrations of 
Gases Used for Calibration and Audits of Continuous Source Emission 
Monitors (Protocol No. 1). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ORD/
EMSL, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 27711, June 1978.
    3. Gasoline Vapor Emission Laboratory Evaluation-Part 2. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, OAQPS, Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina, 27711, EMB Report No. 76-GAS-6, August 1975.

[[Page 637]]

Performance Specification 9--Specifications and Test Procedures for Gas 
  Chromatographic Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
                                 Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Applicability. These requirements apply to continuous emission 
monitoring systems (CEMSs) that use gas chromatography (GC) to measure 
gaseous organic compound emissions. The requirements include procedures 
intended to evaluate the acceptability of the CEMS at the time of its 
installation and whenever specified in regulations or permits. Quality 
assurance procedures for calibrating, maintaining, and operating the 
CEMS properly at all times are also given in this procedure.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    2.1 Calibration precision, calibration error, and performance audit 
tests are conducted to determine conformance of the CEMS with these 
specifications. Daily calibration and maintenance requirements are also 
specified.

                             3.0 Definitions

    3.1 Gas Chromatograph (GC). That portion of the system that 
separates and detects organic analytes and generates an output 
proportional to the gas concentration. The GC must be temperature 
controlled.

    Note: The term temperature controlled refers to the ability to 
maintain a certain temperature around the column. Temperature-
programmable GC is not required for this performance specification, as 
long as all other requirements for precision, linearity and accuracy 
listed in this performance specification are met. It should be noted 
that temperature programming a GC will speed up peak elution, thus 
allowing increased sampling frequency.

    3.1.1 Column. Analytical column capable of separating the analytes 
of interest.
    3.1.2 Detector. A detection system capable of detecting and 
quantifying all analytes of interest.
    3.1.3 Integrator. That portion of the system that quantifies the 
area under a particular sample peak generated by the GC.
    3.1.4 Data Recorder. A strip chart recorder, computer, or digital 
recorder capable of recording all readings within the instrument's 
calibration range.
    3.2 Calibration Precision. The error between triplicate injections 
of each calibration standard.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety

    The procedures required under this performance specification may 
involve hazardous materials, operations, and equipment. This performance 
specification does not purport to address all of the safety problems 
associated with these procedures. It is the responsibility of the user 
to establish appropriate safety problems associated with these 
procedures. It is the responsibility of the user to establish 
appropriate safety and health practices and determine the application 
regulatory limitations prior to performing these procedures. The CEMS 
user's manual and materials recommended by the reference method should 
be consulted for specific precautions to be taken.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Presurvey Sample Analysis and GC Selection. Determine the 
pollutants to be monitored from the applicable regulation or permit and 
determine the approximate concentration of each pollutant (this 
information can be based on past compliance test results). Select an 
appropriate GC configuration to measure the organic compounds. The GC 
components should include a heated sample injection loop (or other 
sample introduction systems), separatory column, temperature-controlled 
oven, and detector. If the source chooses dual column and/or dual 
detector configurations, each column/detector is considered a separate 
instrument for the purpose of this performance specification and thus 
the procedures in this performance specification shall be carried out on 
each system. If this method is applied in highly explosive areas, 
caution should be exercised in selecting the equipment and method of 
installation.
    6.2 Sampling System. The sampling system shall be heat traced and 
maintained at a minimum of 120 [deg]C with no cold spots. All system 
components shall be heated, including the probe, calibration valve, 
sample lines, sampling loop (or sample introduction system), GC oven, 
and the detector block (when appropriate for the type of detector being 
utilized, e.g., flame ionization detector).

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards

    7.1 Calibration Gases. Obtain three concentrations of calibration 
gases certified by the manufacturer to be accurate to within 2 percent 
of the value on the label. A gas dilution system may be used to prepare 
the calibration gases from a high concentration certified standard if 
the gas dilution system meets the requirements specified in Test Method 
205, 40 CFR Part 51, Appendix M. The performance test specified in Test 
Method 205 shall be repeated quarterly, and the results of the Method 
205 test shall be included in the report. The calibration gas 
concentration of each target analyte shall be as follows (measured 
concentration is based on the

[[Page 638]]

presurvey concentration determined in Section 6.1).

    Note: If the low level calibration gas concentration falls at or 
below the limit of detection for the instrument for any target 
pollutant, a calibration gas with a concentration at 4 to 5 times the 
limit of detection for the instrument may be substituted for the low-
level calibration gas listed in Section 7.1.1.

    7.1.1 Low-level. 40-60 percent of measured concentration.
    7.1.2 Mid-level. 90-110 percent of measured concentration.
    7.1.3 High-level. 140-160 percent of measured concentration, or 
select highest expected concentration.
    7.2 Performance Audit Gas. A certified EPA audit gas shall be used, 
when possible. A gas mixture containing all the target compounds within 
the calibration range and certified by EPA's Traceability Protocol for 
Assay and Certification of Gaseous Calibration Standards may be used 
when EPA performance audit materials are not available. The instrument 
relative error shall be <= 10 percent of the certified value of the 
audit gas.

       8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport

    8.1 Installation and Measurement Location Specifications. Install 
the CEMs in a location where the measurements are representative of the 
source emissions. Consider other factors, such as ease of access for 
calibration and maintenance purposes. The location should not be close 
to air in-leakages. The sampling location should be at least two 
equivalent duct diameters downstream from the nearest control device, 
point of pollutant generation, or other point at which a change in the 
pollutant concentration or emission rate occurs. The location should be 
at least 0.5 diameter upstream from the exhaust or control device. To 
calculate equivalent duct diameter, see Section 12.2 of Method 1 (40 CFR 
Part 60, Appendix A). Sampling locations not conforming to the 
requirements in this section may be used if necessary upon approval of 
the Administrator.
    8.2 Pretest Preparation Period. Using the procedures described in 
Method 18
(40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A), perform initial tests to determine GC 
conditions that provide good resolution and minimum analysis time for 
compounds of interest. Resolution interferences that may occur can be 
eliminated by appropriate GC column and detector choice or by shifting 
the retention times through changes in the column flow rate and the use 
of temperature programming.
    8.3 7-Day Calibration Error (CE) Test Period. At the beginning of 
each 24-hour period, set the initial instrument setpoints by conducting 
a multi-point calibration for each compound. The multi-point calibration 
shall meet the requirements in Section 13.3. Throughout the 24-hour 
period, sample and analyze the stack gas at the sampling intervals 
prescribed in the regulation or permit. At the end of the 24 hour 
period, inject the three calibration gases for each compound in 
triplicate and determine the average instrument response. Determine the 
CE for each pollutant at each level using the equation in Section 9-2.
    Each CE shall be <= 10 percent. Repeat this procedure six more times 
for a total of 7 consecutive days.
    8.4 Performance Audit Test Periods. Conduct the performance audit 
once during the initial 7-day CE test and quarterly thereafter. Sample 
and analyze the EPA audit gas(es) (or the gas mixture prepared by EPA's 
traceability protocol if an EPA audit gas is not available) three times. 
Calculate the average instrument response. Report the audit results as 
part of the reporting requirements in the appropriate regulation or 
permit (if using a gas mixture, report the certified cylinder 
concentration of each pollutant).
    8.5 Reporting. Follow the reporting requirements of the applicable 
regulation or permit. If the reporting requirements include the results 
of this performance specification, summarize in tabular form the results 
of the CE tests. Include all data sheets, calculations, CEMS data 
records, performance audit results, and calibration gas concentrations 
and certifications.

                     9.0 Quality Control [Reserved]

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Initial Multi-Point Calibration. After initial startup of the 
GC, after routine maintenance or repair, or at least once per month, 
conduct a multi-point calibration of the GC for each target analyte. The 
multi-point calibration for each analyte shall meet the requirements in 
Section 13.3.
    10.2 Daily Calibration. Once every 24 hours, analyze the mid-level 
calibration standard for each analyte in triplicate. Calculate the 
average instrument response for each analyte. The average instrument 
response shall not vary more than 10 percent from the certified 
concentration value of the cylinder for each analyte. If the difference 
between the analyzer response and the cylinder concentration for any 
target compound is greater than 10 percent, immediately inspect the 
instrument making any necessary adjustments, and conduct an initial 
multi-point calibration as described in Section 10.1.

[[Page 639]]

11.0 Analytical Procedure. Sample Collection and Analysis Are Concurrent 
          for This Performance Specification (See Section 8.0)

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 Nomenclature.

C<INF>m</INF>=average instrument response, ppm.
C<INF>a</INF>=cylinder gas value, ppm.
F=Flow rate of stack gas through sampling system, in Liters/min.
n=Number of measurement points.
r<SUP>2</SUP>=Coefficient of determination.
V=Sample system volume, in Liters, which is the volume inside the sample 
probe and tubing leading from the stack to the sampling loop.
x=CEMS response.
y=Actual value of calibration standard.

    12.2 Coefficient of Determination. Calculate r<SUP>2</SUP> using 
linear regression analysis and the average concentrations obtained at 
three calibration points as shown in Equation 9-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.461

    12.3 Calibration Error Determination. Determine the percent 
calibration error (CE) at each concentration for each pollutant using 
the following equation.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.462

    12.4 Sampling System Time Constant (T).
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.463
    
                         13.0 Method Performance

    13.1 Calibration Error (CE). The CEMS must allow the determination 
of CE at all three calibration levels. The average CEMS calibration 
response must not differ by more than 10 percent of calibration gas 
value at each level after each 24-hour period of the initial test.
    13.2 Calibration Precision and Linearity. For each triplicate 
injection at each concentration level for each target analyte, any one 
injection shall not deviate more than 5 percent from the average 
concentration measured at that level. The linear regression curve for 
each organic compound at all three levels shall have an r<SUP>2</SUP> 
<ls-thn-eq>=0.995 (using Equation 9-1).
    13.3 Measurement Frequency. The sample to be analyzed shall flow 
continuously through the sampling system. The sampling system time 
constant shall be <=5 minutes or the sampling frequency specified in the 
applicable regulation, whichever is less. Use Equation 9-3 to determine 
T. The analytical system shall be capable of measuring the effluent 
stream at the frequency specified in the appropriate regulation or 
permit.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

                       16.0 References [Reserved]

    17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data [Reserved]

  Performance Specification 11--Specifications and Test Procedures for 
Particulate Matter Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems at Stationary 
                                 Sources

1.0 What Are the Purpose and Applicability of Performance Specification 
                                   11?

    The purpose of Performance Specification 11 (PS-11) is to establish 
the initial installation and performance procedures that are required 
for evaluating the acceptability of a particulate matter (PM) continuous 
emission monitoring system (CEMS); it is not to evaluate the ongoing 
performance of your PM CEMS over an extended period of time, nor to 
identify specific calibration techniques and auxiliary procedures to 
assess CEMS performance. You will find procedures for evaluating the 
ongoing performance of a PM CEMS in Procedure 2 of Appendix F--Quality 
Assurance Requirements for Particulate Matter Continuous Emission 
Monitoring Systems Used at Stationary Sources.
    1.1 Under what conditions does PS-11 apply to my PM CEMS? The PS-11 
applies to your PM CEMS if you are required by any provision of Title 40 
of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) to install and operate PM CEMS.
    1.2 When must I comply with PS-11? You must comply with PS-11 when 
directed by the applicable rule that requires you to install and operate 
a PM CEMS.
    1.3 What other monitoring must I perform? To report your PM 
emissions in units of the emission standard, you may need to

[[Page 640]]

monitor additional parameters to correct the PM concentration reported 
by your PM CEMS. Your CEMS may include the components listed in 
paragraphs (1) through (3) of this section:
    (1) A diluent monitor (i.e., O<INF>2</INF>, CO<INF>2</INF>, or other 
CEMS specified in the applicable regulation), which must meet its own 
performance specifications (also found in this appendix),
    (2) Auxiliary monitoring equipment to allow measurement, 
determination, or input of the flue gas temperature, pressure, moisture 
content, and/or dry volume of stack effluent sampled, and
    (3) An automatic sampling system. The performance of your PM CEMS 
and the establishment of its correlation to manual reference method 
measurements must be determined in units of mass concentration as 
measured by your PM CEMS (e.g., milligrams per actual cubic meter (mg/
acm) or milligrams per dry standard cubic meter (mg/dscm)).

              2.0 What Are the Basic Requirements of PS-11?

    The PS-11 requires you to perform initial installation and 
calibration procedures that confirm the acceptability of your CEMS when 
it is installed and placed into operation. You must develop a site-
specific correlation of your PM CEMS response against manual gravimetric 
reference method measurements (including those made using EPA Methods 5, 
5I, or 17).
    2.1 What types of PM CEMS technologies are covered? Several 
different types of PM CEMS technologies (e.g., light scattering, Beta 
attenuation, etc.) can be designed with in-situ or extractive sample gas 
handling systems. Each PM CEMS technology and sample gas handling 
technology has certain site-specific advantages. You should select and 
install a PM CEMS that is appropriate for the flue gas conditions at 
your source.
    2.2 How is PS-11 different from other performance specifications? 
The PS-11 is based on a technique of correlating PM CEMS responses 
relative to emission concentrations determined by the reference method. 
This technique is called ``the correlation.'' This differs from CEMS 
used to measure gaseous pollutants that have available calibration gases 
of known concentration. Because the type and characteristics of PM vary 
from source to source, a single PM correlation, applicable to all 
sources, is not possible.
    2.3 How are the correlation data handled? You must carefully review 
your manual reference method data and your PM CEMS responses to include 
only valid, high-quality data. For the correlation, you must convert the 
manual reference method data to measurement conditions (e.g., wet or dry 
basis) that are consistent with your PM CEMS. Then, you must correlate 
the manual method and PM CEMS data in terms of the output as received 
from the monitor (e.g., milliamps). At the appropriate PM CEMS response 
specified in section 13.2 of this performance specification, you must 
calculate the confidence interval half range and tolerance interval half 
range as a percentage of the applicable PM concentration emission limit 
and compare the confidence interval and tolerance interval percentages 
with the performance criteria. Also, you must calculate the correlation 
coefficient and compare the correlation coefficient with the applicable 
performance criterion specified in section 13.2 of this performance 
specification.
    Situations may arise where you will need two or more correlations. 
If you need multiple correlations, you must collect sufficient data for 
each correlation, and each correlation must satisfy the performance 
criteria specified in section 13.2 of this performance specification.
    2.4 How do I design my PM CEMS correlation program? When planning 
your PM CEMS correlation effort, you must address each of the items in 
paragraphs (1) through (7) of this section to enhance the probability of 
success. You will find each of these elements further described in this 
performance specification or in the applicable reference method 
procedure.
    (1) What type of PM CEMS should I select? You should select a PM 
CEMS that is appropriate for your source with technical consideration 
for potential factors such as interferences, site-specific 
configurations, installation location, flue gas conditions, PM 
concentration range, and other PM characteristics. You can find guidance 
on which technology is best suited for specific situations in our report 
``Current Knowledge of Particulate Matter (PM) Continuous Emission 
Monitoring'' (PM CEMS Knowledge Document, see section 16.5).
    (2) Where should I install my PM CEMS? Your PM CEMS must be 
installed in a location that is most representative of PM emissions, as 
determined by the reference method, such that the correlation between PM 
CEMS response and emissions determined by the reference method will meet 
these performance specifications. Care must be taken in selecting a 
location and measurement point to minimize problems due to flow 
disturbances, cyclonic flow, and varying PM stratification.
    (3) How should I record my CEMS data? You need to ensure that your 
PM CEMS and data logger are set up to collect and record all normal 
emission levels and excursions. You must ensure that your data logger 
and PM CEMS have been properly programmed to accept and transfer status 
signals of valid monitor operation (e.g., flags for internal 
calibration, suspect data, or maintenance periods).
    (4) What CEMS data should I review? You must review drift data daily 
to document

[[Page 641]]

proper operation. You must also ensure that any audit material is 
appropriate for the typical operating range of your PM CEMS.
    (5) How long should I operate my PM CEMS before conducting the 
initial correlation test? You should allow sufficient time for your PM 
CEMS to operate for you to become familiar with your PM CEMS.
    (i) You should observe PM CEMS response over time during normal and 
varying process conditions. This will ensure that your PM CEMS has been 
properly set up to operate at a range that is compatible with the 
concentrations and characteristics of PM emissions for your source. You 
should use this information to establish the range of operating 
conditions necessary to determine the correlations of PM CEMS data to 
manual reference method measurements over a wide operating range.
    (ii) You must determine the types of process changes that will 
influence, on a definable and repeatable basis, flue gas PM 
concentrations and the resulting PM CEMS responses. You may find this 
period useful to make adjustments to your planned approach for operating 
your PM CEMS at your source. For instance, you may change the 
measurement range or batch sampling period to something other than those 
you initially planned to use.
    (6) How do I conduct the initial correlation test? When conducting 
the initial correlation test of your PM CEMS response to PM emissions 
determined by the reference method, you must pay close attention to 
accuracy and details. Your PM CEMS must be operating properly. You must 
perform the manual reference method testing accurately, with attention 
to eliminating site-specific systemic errors. You must coordinate the 
timing of the manual reference method testing with the sampling cycle of 
your PM CEMS. You must complete a minimum of 15 manual reference method 
tests. You must perform the manual reference method testing over the 
full range of PM CEMS responses that correspond to normal operating 
conditions for your source and control device and will result in the 
widest range of emission concentrations.
    (7) How should I perform the manual reference method testing? You 
must perform the manual reference method testing in accordance with 
specific rule requirements, coordinated closely with PM CEMS and process 
operations. It is highly recommended that you use paired trains for the 
manual reference method testing. You must perform the manual reference 
method testing over a suitable PM concentration range that corresponds 
to the full range of normal process and control device operating 
conditions. Because the manual reference method testing for this 
correlation test is not for compliance reporting purposes, you may 
conduct the reference method test runs for less than the typical minimum 
test run duration of 1 hour.
    (8) What do I do with the manual reference method data and PM CEMS 
data? You must complete each of the activities in paragraphs (8)(i) 
through (v) of this section.
    (i) Screen the manual reference method data for validity (e.g., 
isokinetics, leak checks), quality assurance, and quality control (e.g., 
outlier identification).
    (ii) Screen your PM CEMS data for validity (e.g., daily drift check 
requirements) and quality assurance (e.g., flagged data).
    (iii) Convert the manual reference method test data into measurement 
units (e.g., mg/acm) consistent with the measurement conditions of your 
PM CEMS.
    (iv) Calculate the correlation equation(s) as specified in section 
12.3.
    (v) Calculate the correlation coefficient, confidence interval half 
range, and tolerance interval half range for the complete set of PM CEMS 
and reference method correlation data for comparison with the 
correlation performance criteria specified in section 13.2.
    2.5 What other procedures must I perform? Before conducting the 
initial correlation test, you must successfully complete a 7-day drift 
test (See section 8.5).

              3.0 What Special Definitions Apply to PS-11?

    3.1 ``Appropriate Measurement Range of your PM CEMS'' means a 
measurement range that is capable of recording readings over the 
complete range of your source's PM emission concentrations during 
routine operations. The appropriate range is determined during the 
pretest preparations as specified in section 8.4.
    3.2 ``Appropriate Data Range for PM CEMS Correlation'' means the 
data range that reflects the full range of your source's PM emission 
concentrations recorded by your PM CEMS during the correlation test 
planning period or other normal operations as defined in the applicable 
regulations.
    3.3 ``Batch Sampling'' means that gas is sampled on an intermittent 
basis and concentrated on a collection medium before intermittent 
analysis and follow-up reporting. Beta gauge PM CEMS are an example of 
batch sampling devices.
    3.4 ``Confidence Interval Half Range (CI)'' means the statistical 
term for one-half of the width of the 95 percent confidence interval 
around the predicated mean PM concentration (y value) calculated at the 
PM CEMS response value (x value) where the confidence interval is 
narrowest. Procedures for calculating CI are specified in section 
12.3(1)(ii) for linear correlations and in section 12.3(2)(ii) for 
polynomial correlations. The CI as a percent of the emission limit value 
(CI%) is calculated at the appropriate PM CEMS response value specified 
in Section 13.2(2).

[[Page 642]]

    3.5 ``Continuous Emission Monitoring System (CEMS)'' means all of 
the equipment required for determination of PM mass concentration in 
units of the emission standard. The sample interface, pollutant monitor, 
diluent monitor, other auxiliary data monitor(s), and data recorder are 
the major subsystems of your CEMS.
    3.6 ``Correlation'' means the primary mathematical relationship for 
correlating the output from your PM CEMS to a PM concentration, as 
determined by the PM reference method. The correlation is expressed in 
the measurement units that are consistent with the measurement 
conditions (e.g., mg/dscm, mg/acm) of your PM CEMS.
    3.7 ``Correlation Coefficient (r)'' means a quantitative measure of 
the association between your PM CEMS outputs and the reference method 
measurements. Equations for calculating the r value are provided in 
section 12.3(1)(iv) for linear correlations and in section 12.3(2)(iv) 
for polynomial correlations.
    3.8 ``Cycle Time'' means the time required to complete one sampling, 
measurement, and reporting cycle. For a batch sampling PM CEMS, the 
cycle time would start when sample gas is first extracted from the 
stack/duct and end when the measurement of that batch sample is complete 
and a new result for that batch sample is produced on the data recorder.
    3.9 ``Data Recorder'' means the portion of your CEMS that provides a 
permanent record of the monitor output in terms of response and status 
(flags). The data recorder may also provide automatic data reduction and 
CEMS control capabilities (see section 6.6).
    3.10 ``Diluent Monitor and Other Auxiliary Data Monitor(s) (if 
applicable)'' means the portion of your CEMS that provides the diluent 
gas concentration (such as O<INF>2</INF> or CO<INF>2</INF>, as specified 
by the applicable regulations), temperature, pressure, and/or moisture 
content, and generates an output proportional to the diluent gas 
concentration or gas property.
    3.11 ``Drift Check'' means a check of the difference between your PM 
CEMS output readings and the established reference value of a reference 
standard or procedure after a stated period of operation during which no 
unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment took place. The 
procedures used to determine drift are specific to the operating 
principles of your specific PM CEMS. A drift check includes both a zero 
drift check and an upscale drift check.
    3.12 ``Exponential Correlation'' means an exponential equation used 
to define the relationship between your PM CEMS output and the reference 
method PM concentration, as indicated by Equation 11-37.
    3.13 ``Flagged Data'' means data marked by your CEMS indicating that 
the response value(s) from one or more CEMS subsystems is suspect or 
invalid or that your PM CEMS is not in source-measurement operating 
mode.
    3.14 ``Linear Correlation'' means a first-order mathematical 
relationship between your PM CEMS output and the reference method PM 
concentration that is linear in form, as indicated by Equation 11-3.
    3.15 ``Logarithmic Correlation'' means a first-order mathematical 
relationship between the natural logarithm of your PM CEMS output and 
the reference method PM concentration that is linear in form, as 
indicated by Equation 11-34.
    3.16 ``Low-Emitting Source'' means a source that operated at no more 
than 50 percent of the emission limit during the most recent performance 
test, and, based on the PM CEMS correlation, the daily average emissions 
for the source, measured in the units of the applicable emission limit, 
have not exceeded 50 percent of the emission limit for any day since the 
most recent performance test.
    3.17 ``Paired Trains'' means two reference method trains that are 
used to conduct simultaneous measurements of PM concentrations. Guidance 
on the use of paired sampling trains can be found in the PM CEMS 
Knowledge Document (see section 16.5).
    3.18 ``Polynomial Correlation'' means a second-order equation used 
to define the relationship between your PM CEMS output and reference 
method PM concentration, as indicated by Equation 11-16.
    3.19 ``Power Correlation'' means an equation used to define a power 
function relationship between your PM CEMS output and the reference 
method concentration, as indicated by Equation 11-42.
    3.20 ``Reference Method'' means the method defined in the applicable 
regulations, but commonly refers to those methods collectively known as 
EPA Methods 5, 5I, and 17 (for particulate matter), found in Appendix A 
of 40 CFR 60. Only the front half and dry filter catch portions of the 
reference method can be correlated to your PM CEMS output.
    3.21 ``Reference Standard'' means a reference material or procedure 
that produces a known and unchanging response when presented to the 
pollutant monitor portion of your CEMS. You must use these standards to 
evaluate the overall operation of your PM CEMS, but not to develop a PM 
CEMS correlation.
    3.22 ``Response Time'' means the time interval between the start of 
a step change in the system input and the time when the pollutant 
monitor output reaches 95 percent of the final value (see sections 6.5 
and 13.3 for procedures and acceptance criteria).
    3.23 ``Sample Interface'' means the portion of your CEMS used for 
one or more of the following: sample acquisition, sample delivery, 
sample conditioning, or protection of

[[Page 643]]

the monitor from the effects of the stack effluent.
    3.24 ``Sample Volume Check'' means a check of the difference between 
your PM CEMS sample volume reading and the sample volume reference 
value.
    3.25 ``Tolerance Interval half range (TI)'' means one-half of the 
width of the tolerance interval with upper and lower limits, within 
which a specified percentage of the future data population is contained 
with a given level of confidence, as defined by the respective tolerance 
interval half range equations in section 12.3(1)(iii) for linear 
correlations and in section 12.3(2)(iii) for polynomial correlations. 
The TI as a percent of the emission limit value (TI%) is calculated at 
the appropriate PM CEMS response value specified in Section 13.2(3).
    3.26 ``Upscale Check Value'' means the expected response to a 
reference standard or procedure used to check the upscale response of 
your PM CEMS.
    3.27 ``Upscale Drift (UD) Check'' means a check of the difference 
between your PM CEMS output reading and the upscale check value.
    3.28 ``Zero Check Value'' means the expected response to a reference 
standard or procedure used to check the response of your PM CEMS to 
particulate-free or low-particulate concentration conditions.
    3.29 ``Zero Drift (ZD) Check'' means a check of the difference 
between your PM CEMS output reading and the zero check value.
    3.30 ``Zero Point Correlation Value'' means a value added to PM CEMS 
correlation data to represent low or near zero PM concentration data 
(see section 8.6 for rationale and procedures).

        4.0 Are There Any Potential Interferences for My PM CEMS?

    Yes, condensible water droplets or condensible acid gas aerosols 
(i.e., those with condensation temperatures above those specified by the 
reference method) at the measurement location can be interferences for 
your PM CEMS if the necessary precautions are not met.
    4.1 Where are interferences likely to occur? Interferences may 
develop if your CEMS is installed downstream of a wet air pollution 
control system or any other conditions that produce flue gases, which, 
at your PM CEMS measurement point, normally or occasionally contain 
entrained water droplets or condensible salts before release to the 
atmosphere.
    4.2 How do I deal with interferences? We recommend that you use a PM 
CEMS that extracts and heats representative samples of the flue gas for 
measurement to simulate results produced by the reference method for 
conditions such as those described in section 4.1. Independent of your 
PM CEMS measurement technology and extractive technique, you should have 
a configuration simulating the reference method to ensure that:
    (1) No formation of new PM or deposition of PM occurs in sample 
delivery from the stack or duct; and
    (2) No condensate accumulates in the sample flow measurement 
apparatus.
    4.3 What PM CEMS measurement technologies should I use? You should 
use a PM CEMS measurement technology that is free of interferences from 
any condensible constituent in the flue gas.

 5.0 What Do I Need To Know To Ensure the Safety of Persons Using PS-11?

    People using the procedures required under PS-11 may be exposed to 
hazardous materials, operations, site conditions, and equipment. This 
performance specification does not purport to address all of the safety 
issues associated with its use. It is your responsibility to establish 
appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicable 
regulatory limitations before performing these procedures. You must 
consult your CEMS user's manual and other reference materials 
recommended by the reference method for specific precautions to be 
taken.

               6.0 What Equipment and Supplies Do I Need?

    Different types of PM CEMS use different operating principles. You 
should select an appropriate PM CEMS based on your site-specific 
configurations, flue gas conditions, and PM characteristics.
    (1) Your PM CEMS must sample the stack effluent continuously or, for 
batch sampling PM CEMS, intermittently.
    (2) You must ensure that the averaging time, the number of 
measurements in an average, the minimum data availability, and the 
averaging procedure for your CEMS conform with those specified in the 
applicable emission regulation.
    (3) Your PM CEMS must include, as a minimum, the equipment described 
in sections 6.1 through 6.7.
    6.1 What equipment is needed for my PM CEMS's sample interface? Your 
PM CEMS's sample interface must be capable of delivering a 
representative sample of the flue gas to your PM CEMS. This subsystem 
may be required to heat the sample gas to avoid PM deposition or 
moisture condensation, provide dilution air, perform other gas 
conditioning to prepare the sample for analysis, or measure the sample 
volume or flow rate.
    (1) If your PM CEMS is installed downstream of a wet air pollution 
control system such that the flue gases normally or occasionally contain 
entrained water droplets, we recommend that you select a sampling system 
that includes equipment to extract and heat a representative sample of 
the flue gas for measurement so that the pollutant

[[Page 644]]

monitor portion of your CEMS measures only dry PM. Heating should be 
sufficient to raise the temperature of the extracted flue gas above the 
water condensation temperature and should be maintained at all times and 
at all points in the sample line from where the flue gas is extracted, 
including the pollutant monitor and any sample flow measurement devices.
    (2) You must consider the measured conditions of the sample gas 
stream to ensure that manual reference method test data are converted to 
units of PM concentration that are appropriate for the correlation 
calculations. Additionally, you must identify what, if any, additional 
auxiliary data from other monitoring and handling systems are necessary 
to convert your PM CEMS response into the units of the PM standard.
    (3) If your PM CEMS is an extractive type and your source's flue gas 
volumetric flow rate varies by more than 10 percent from nominal, your 
PM CEMS should maintain an isokinetic sampling rate (within 10 percent 
of true isokinetic). If your extractive-type PM CEMS does not maintain 
an isokinetic sampling rate, you must use actual site-specific data or 
data from a similar installation to prove to us, the State, and/or local 
enforcement agency that isokinetic sampling is not necessary.
    6.2 What type of equipment is needed for my PM CEMS? Your PM CEMS 
must be capable of providing an electronic output that can be correlated 
to the PM concentration.
    (1) Your PM CEMS must be able to perform zero and upscale drift 
checks. You may perform these checks manually, but performing these 
checks automatically is preferred.
    (2) We recommend that you select a PM CEMS that is capable of 
performing automatic diagnostic checks and sending instrument status 
signals (flags) to the data recorder.
    (3) If your PM CEMS is an extractive type that measures the sample 
volume and uses the measured sample volume as part of calculating the 
output value, your PM CEMS must be able to perform a check of the sample 
volume to verify the accuracy of the sample volume measuring equipment. 
The sample volume check must be conducted daily and at the normal 
sampling rate of your PM CEMS.
    6.3 What is the appropriate measurement range for my PM CEMS? 
Initially, your PM CEMS must be set up to measure over the expected 
range of your source's PM emission concentrations during routine 
operations. You may change the measurement range to a more appropriate 
range prior to correlation testing.
    6.4 What if my PM CEMS does automatic range switching? Your PM CEMS 
may be equipped to perform automatic range switching so that it is 
operating in a range most sensitive to the detected concentrations. If 
your PM CEMS does automatic range switching, you must configure the data 
recorder to handle the recording of data values in multiple ranges 
during range-switching intervals.
    6.5 What averaging time and sample intervals should be used? Your 
CEMS must sample the stack effluent such that the averaging time, the 
number of measurements in an average, the minimum sampling time, and the 
averaging procedure for reporting and determining compliance conform 
with those specified in the applicable regulation. Your PM CEMS must be 
designed to meet the specified response time and cycle time established 
in this performance specification (see section 13.3).
    6.6 What type of equipment is needed for my data recorder? Your CEMS 
data recorder must be able to accept and record electronic signals from 
all the monitors associated with your PM CEMS.
    (1) Your data recorder must record the signals from your PM CEMS 
that can be correlated to PM mass concentrations. If your PM CEMS uses 
multiple ranges, your data recorder must identify what range the 
measurement was made in and provide range-adjusted results.
    (2) Your data recorder must accept and record monitor status signals 
(flagged data).
    (3) Your data recorder must accept signals from auxiliary data 
monitors, as appropriate.
    6.7 What other equipment and supplies might I need? You may need 
other supporting equipment as defined by the applicable reference 
method(s) (see section 7) or as specified by your CEMS manufacturer.

               7.0 What Reagents and Standards Do I Need?

    You will need reference standards or procedures to perform the zero 
drift check, the upscale drift check, and the sample volume check.
    7.1 What is the reference standard value for the zero drift check? 
You must use a zero check value that is no greater than 20 percent of 
the PM CEMS's response range. You must obtain documentation on the zero 
check value from your PM CEMS manufacturer.
    7.2 What is the reference standard value for the upscale drift 
check? You must use an upscale check value that produces a response 
between 50 and 100 percent of the PM CEMS's response range. For a PM 
CEMS that produces output over a range of 4 mA to 20 mA, the upscale 
check value must produce a response in the range of 12 mA to 20 mA. You 
must obtain documentation on the upscale check value from your PM CEMS 
manufacturer.
    7.3 What is the reference standard value for the sample volume 
check? You must use a reference standard value or procedure that 
produces a sample volume value equivalent

[[Page 645]]

to the normal sampling rate. You must obtain documentation on the sample 
volume value from your PM CEMS manufacturer.

     8.0 What Performance Specification Test Procedure Do I Follow?

    You must complete each of the activities in sections 8.1 through 8.8 
for your performance specification test.
    8.1 How should I select and set up my equipment? You should select a 
PM CEMS that is appropriate for your source, giving consideration to 
potential factors such as flue gas conditions, interferences, site-
specific configuration, installation location, PM concentration range, 
and other PM characteristics. Your PM CEMS must meet the equipment 
specifications in sections 6.1 and 6.2.
    (1) You should select a PM CEMS that is appropriate for the flue gas 
conditions at your source. If your source's flue gas contains entrained 
water droplets, we recommend that your PM CEMS include a sample delivery 
and conditioning system that is capable of extracting and heating a 
representative sample.
    (i) Your PM CEMS must maintain the sample at a temperature 
sufficient to prevent moisture condensation in the sample line before 
analysis of PM.
    (ii) If condensible PM is an issue, we recommend that you operate 
your PM CEMS to maintain the sample gas temperature at the same 
temperature as the reference method filter.
    (iii) Your PM CEMS must avoid condensation in the sample flow rate 
measurement lines.
    (2) Some PM CEMS do not have a wide measurement range capability. 
Therefore, you must select a PM CEMS that is capable of measuring the 
full range of PM concentrations expected from your source from normal 
levels through the emission limit concentration.
    (3) Some PM CEMS are sensitive to particle size changes, water 
droplets in the gas stream, particle charge, stack gas velocity changes, 
or other factors. Therefore, you should select a PM CEMS appropriate for 
the emission characteristics of your source.
    (4) We recommend that you consult your PM CEMS vendor to obtain 
basic recommendations on the instrument capabilities and setup 
configuration. You are ultimately responsible for setup and operation of 
your PM CEMS.
    8.2 Where do I install my PM CEMS? You must install your PM CEMS at 
an accessible location downstream of all pollution control equipment. 
You must perform your PM CEMS concentration measurements from a location 
considered representative or be able to provide data that can be 
corrected to be representative of the total PM emissions as determined 
by the manual reference method.
    (1) You must select a measurement location that minimizes problems 
due to flow disturbances, cyclonic flow, and varying PM stratification 
(refer to Method 1 for guidance).
    (2) If you plan to achieve higher emissions for correlation test 
purposes by adjusting the performance of the air pollution control 
device (per section 8.6(4)(i)), you must locate your PM CEMS and 
reference method sampling points well downstream of the control device 
(e.g., downstream of the induced draft fan), in order to minimize PM 
stratification that may be created in these cases.
    8.3 How do I select the reference method measurement location and 
traverse points? You must follow EPA Method 1 for identifying manual 
reference method traverse points. Ideally, you should perform your 
manual reference method measurements at locations that satisfy the 
measurement site selection criteria specified in EPA Method 1 of at 
least eight duct diameters downstream and at least two duct diameters 
upstream of any flow disturbance. Where necessary, you may conduct 
testing at a location that is two diameters downstream and 0.5 diameters 
upstream of flow disturbances. If your location does not meet the 
minimum downstream and upstream requirements, you must obtain approval 
from us to test at your location.
    8.4 What are my pretest preparation steps? You must install your 
CEMS and prepare the reference method test site according to the 
specifications in sections 8.2 and 8.3.
    (1) After completing the initial field installation, we recommend 
that you operate your PM CEMS according to the manufacturer's 
instructions to familiarize yourself with its operation before you begin 
correlation testing.
    (i) During this initial period of operation, we recommend that you 
conduct daily checks (zero and upscale drift and sample volume, as 
appropriate), and, when any check exceeds the daily specification (see 
section 13.1), make adjustments and perform any necessary maintenance to 
ensure reliable operation.
    (2) When you are confident that your PM CEMS is operating properly, 
we recommend that you operate your CEMS over a correlation test planning 
period of sufficient duration to identify the full range of operating 
conditions and PM emissions to be used in your PM CEMS correlation test.
    (i) During the correlation test planning period, you should operate 
the process and air pollution control equipment over the normal range of 
operating conditions, except when you attempt to produce higher 
emissions.
    (ii) Your data recorder should record PM CEMS response during the 
full range of routine process operating conditions.

[[Page 646]]

    (iii) You should try to establish the relationships between 
operating conditions and PM CEMS response, especially those conditions 
that produce the highest PM CEMS response over 15-minute averaging 
periods, and the lowest PM CEMS response as well. The objective is to be 
able to reproduce the conditions for purposes of the actual correlation 
testing discussed in section 8.6.
    (3) You must set the response range of your PM CEMS such that the 
instrument measures the full range of responses that correspond to the 
range of source operating conditions that you will implement during 
correlation testing.
    (4) We recommend that you perform preliminary reference method 
testing after the correlation test planning period. During this 
preliminary testing, you should measure the PM emission concentration 
corresponding to the highest PM CEMS response observed during the full 
range of normal operation, when perturbing the control equipment, or as 
the result of PM spiking.
    (5) Before performing correlation testing, you must perform a 7-day 
zero and upscale drift test (see section 8.5).
    (6) You must not change the response range of the monitor once the 
response range has been set and the drift test successfully completed.
    8.5 How do I perform the 7-day drift test? You must check the zero 
(or low-level value between 0 and 20 percent of the response range of 
the instrument) and upscale (between 50 and 100 percent of the 
instrument's response range) drift. You must perform this check at least 
once daily over 7 consecutive days. Your PM CEMS must quantify and 
record the zero and upscale measurements and the time of the 
measurements. If you make automatic or manual adjustments to your PM 
CEMS zero and upscale settings, you must conduct the drift test 
immediately before these adjustments, or conduct it in such a way that 
you can determine the amount of drift. You will find the calculation 
procedures for drift in section 12.1 and the acceptance criteria for 
allowable drift in section 13.1.
    (1) What is the purpose of 7-day drift tests? The purpose of the 7-
day drift test is to demonstrate that your system is capable of 
operating in a stable manner and maintaining its calibration for at 
least a 7-day period.
    (2) How do I conduct the 7-day drift test? To conduct the 7-day 
drift test, you must determine the magnitude of the drift once each day, 
at 24-hour intervals, for 7 consecutive days while your source is 
operating normally.
    (i) You must conduct the 7-day drift test at the two points 
specified in section 8.5. You may perform the 7-day drift tests 
automatically or manually by introducing to your PM CEMS suitable 
reference standards (these need not be certified) or by using other 
appropriate procedures.
    (ii) You must record your PM CEMS zero and upscale response and 
evaluate them against the zero check value and upscale check value.
    (3) When must I conduct the 7-day drift test? You must complete a 
valid 7-day drift test before attempting the correlation test.
    8.6 How do I conduct my PM CEMS correlation test? You must conduct 
the correlation test according to the procedure given in paragraphs (1) 
through (5) of this section. If you need multiple correlations, you must 
conduct sufficient testing and collect at least 15 pairs of reference 
method and PM CEMS data for calculating each separate correlation.
    (1) You must use the reference method for PM (usually EPA Methods 5, 
5I, or 17) that is prescribed by the applicable regulations. You may 
need to perform other reference methods or performance specifications 
(e.g., Method 3 for oxygen, Method 4 for moisture, etc.) depending on 
the units in which your PM CEMS reports PM concentration.
    (i) We recommend that you use paired reference method trains when 
collecting manual PM data to identify and screen the reference method 
data for imprecision and bias. Procedures for checking reference method 
data for bias and precision can be found in the PM CEMS Knowledge 
Document (see section 16.5).
    (ii) You may use test runs that are shorter than 60 minutes in 
duration (e.g., 20 or 30 minutes). You may perform your PM CEMS 
correlation tests during new source performance standards performance 
tests or other compliance tests subject to the Clean Air Act or other 
statutes, such as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. In these 
cases, your reference method results obtained during the PM CEMS 
correlation test may be used to determine compliance so long as your 
source and the test conditions and procedures (e.g., reference method 
sample run durations) are consistent with the applicable regulations and 
the reference method.
    (iii) You must convert the reference method results to units 
consistent with the conditions of your PM CEMS measurements. For 
example, if your PM CEMS measures and reports PM emissions in the units 
of mass per actual volume of stack gas, you must convert your reference 
method results to those units (e.g., mg/acm). If your PM CEMS extracts 
and heats the sample gas to eliminate water droplets, then measures and 
reports PM emissions under those actual conditions, you must convert 
your reference method results to those same conditions (e.g., mg/acm at 
160 [deg]C).
    (2) During each test run, you must coordinate process operations, 
reference method

[[Page 647]]

sampling, and PM CEMS operations. For example, you must ensure that the 
process is operating at the targeted conditions, both reference method 
trains are sampling simultaneously (if paired sampling trains are being 
used), and your PM CEMS and data logger are operating properly.
    (i) You must coordinate the start and stop times of each run between 
the reference method sampling and PM CEMS operation. For a batch 
sampling PM CEMS, you must start the reference method at the same time 
as your PM CEMS sampling.
    (ii) You must note the times for port changes (and other periods 
when the reference method sampling may be suspended) on the data sheets 
so that you can adjust your PM CEMS data accordingly, if necessary.
    (iii) You must properly align the time periods for your PM CEMS and 
your reference method measurements to account for your PM CEMS response 
time.
    (3) You must conduct a minimum of 15 valid runs each consisting of 
simultaneous PM CEMS and reference method measurement sets.
    (i) You may conduct more than 15 sets of CEMS and reference method 
measurements. If you choose this option, you may reject certain test 
results so long as the total number of valid test results you use to 
determine the correlation is greater than or equal to 15.
    (ii) You must report all data, including the rejected data.
    (iii) You may reject the results of up to five test runs without 
explanation.
    (iv) If you reject the results of more than five test runs, the 
basis for rejecting the results of the additional test runs must be 
explicitly stated in the reference method, this performance 
specification, Procedure 2 of appendix F, or your quality assurance 
plan.
    (4) Simultaneous PM CEMS and reference method measurements must be 
performed in a manner to ensure that the range of data that will be used 
to establish the correlation for your PM CEMS is maximized. You must 
first attempt to maximize your correlation range by following the 
procedures described in paragraphs (4)(i) through (iv) of this section. 
If you cannot obtain the three levels as described in paragraphs (i) 
through (iv), then you must use the procedure described in section 
8.6(5).
    (i) You must attempt to obtain the three different levels of PM mass 
concentration by varying process operating conditions, varying PM 
control device conditions, or by means of PM spiking.
    (ii) The three PM concentration levels you use in the correlation 
tests must be distributed over the complete operating range experienced 
by your source.
    (iii) At least 20 percent of the minimum 15 measured data points you 
use should be contained in each of the following levels:
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Level 1: From no PM (zero concentration) 
emissions to 50 percent of the maximum PM concentration;
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Level 2: 25 to 75 percent of the maximum PM 
concentration; and
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Level 3: 50 to 100 percent of the maximum PM 
concentration.
    (iv) Although the above levels overlap, you may only apply 
individual run data to one level.
    (5) If you cannot obtain three distinct levels of PM concentration 
as described, you must perform correlation testing over the maximum 
range of PM concentrations that is practical for your PM CEMS. To ensure 
that the range of data used to establish the correlation for your PM 
CEMS is maximized, you must follow one or more of the steps in 
paragraphs (5)(i) through (iv) of this section.
    (i) Zero point data for in-situ instruments should be obtained, to 
the extent possible, by removing the instrument from the stack and 
monitoring ambient air on a test bench.
    (ii) Zero point data for extractive instruments should be obtained 
by removing the extractive probe from the stack and drawing in clean 
ambient air.
    (iii) Zero point data also can be obtained by performing manual 
reference method measurements when the flue gas is free of PM emissions 
or contains very low PM concentrations (e.g., when your process is not 
operating, but the fans are operating or your source is combusting only 
natural gas).
    (iv) If none of the steps in paragraphs (5)(i) through (iii) of this 
section are possible, you must estimate the monitor response when no PM 
is in the flue gas (e.g., 4 mA = 0 mg/acm).
    8.7 What do I do with the initial correlation test data for my PM 
CEMS? You must calculate and report the results of the correlation 
testing, including the correlation coefficient, confidence interval, and 
tolerance interval for the PM CEMS response and reference method 
correlation data that are use to establish the correlation, as specified 
in section 12. You must include all data sheets, calculations, charts 
(records of PM CEMS responses), process data records including PM 
control equipment operating parameters, and reference media 
certifications necessary to confirm that your PM CEMS met the 
requirements of this performance specification. In addition, you must:
    (1) Determine the integrated (arithmetic average) PM CEMS output 
over each reference method test period;
    (2) Adjust your PM CEMS outputs and reference method test data to 
the same clock time (considering response time of your PM CEMS);
    (3) Confirm that the reference method results are consistent with 
your PM CEMS response in terms of, where applicable, moisture, 
temperature, pressure, and diluent concentrations; and

[[Page 648]]

    (4) Determine whether any of the reference method test results do 
not meet the test method criteria.
    8.8 What is the limitation on the range of my PM CEMS correlation? 
Although the data you collect during the correlation testing should be 
representative of the full range of normal operating conditions at your 
source, you must conduct additional correlation testing if either of the 
conditions specified in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section occurs.
    (1) If your source is a low-emitting source, as defined in section 
3.16 of this specification, you must conduct additional correlation 
testing if either of the events specified in paragraphs (1)(i) or (ii) 
of this section occurs while your source is operating under normal 
conditions.
    (i) Your source generates 24 consecutive hourly average PM CEMS 
responses that are greater than 125 percent of the highest PM CEMS 
response (e.g., mA reading) used for the correlation curve or are 
greater than the PM CEMS response that corresponds to 50 percent of the 
emission limit, whichever is greater, or
    (ii) The cumulative hourly average PM CEMS responses generated by 
your source are greater than 125 percent of the highest PM CEMS response 
used for the correlation curve or are greater than the PM CEMS response 
that corresponds to 50 percent of the emission limit, whichever is 
greater, for more than 5 percent of your PM CEMS operating hours for the 
previous 30-day period.
    (2) If your source is not a low-emitting source, as defined in 
section 3.16 of this specification, you must conduct additional 
correlation testing if either of the events specified in paragraph (i) 
or (ii) of this section occurs while your source is operating under 
normal conditions.
    (i) Your source generates 24 consecutive hourly average PM CEMS 
responses that are greater than 125 percent of the highest PM CEMS 
response (e.g., mA reading) used for the correlation curve, or
    (ii) The cumulative hourly average PM CEMS responses generated by 
your source are greater than 125 percent of the highest PM CEMS response 
used for the correlation curve for more than 5 percent of your PM CEMS 
operating hours for the previous 30-day period.
    (3) If additional correlation testing is required, you must conduct 
at least three additional test runs under the conditions that caused the 
higher PM CEMS response.
    (i) You must complete the additional testing and use the resulting 
new data along with the previous data to calculate a revised correlation 
equation within 60 days after the occurrence of the event that requires 
additional testing, as specified in paragraphs 8.8(1) and (2).
    (4) If your source generates consecutive PM CEMS hourly responses 
that are greater than 125 percent of the highest PM CEMS response used 
to develop the correlation curve for 24 hours or for a cumulative period 
that amounts to more than 5 percent of the PM CEMS operating hours for 
the previous 30-day period, you must report the reason for the higher PM 
CEMS responses.

             9.0 What Quality Control Measures Are Required?

    Quality control measures for PM CEMS are specified in 40 CFR 60, 
Appendix F, Procedure 2.

  10.0 What Calibration and Standardization Procedures Must I Perform? 
                               [Reserved]

        11.0 What Analytical Procedures Apply to This Procedure?

    Specific analytical procedures are outlined in the applicable 
reference method(s).

          12.0 What Calculations and Data Analyses Are Needed?

    You must determine the primary relationship for correlating the 
output from your PM CEMS to a PM concentration, typically in units of 
mg/acm or mg/dscm of flue gas, using the calculations and data analysis 
process in sections 12.2 and 12.3. You develop the correlation by 
performing an appropriate regression analysis between your PM CEMS 
response and your reference method data.
    12.1 How do I calculate upscale drift and zero drift? You must 
determine the difference in your PM CEMS output readings from the 
established reference values (zero and upscale check values) after a 
stated period of operation during which you performed no unscheduled 
maintenance, repair, or adjustment.
    (1) Calculate the upscale drift (UD) using Equation 11-1:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.003
    
Where:

UD = The upscale (high-level) drift of your PM CEMS in percent,
R<INF>CEM</INF> = The measured PM CEMS response to the upscale reference 
standard, and
R<INF>U</INF> = The preestablished numerical value of the upscale 
reference standard.

    (2) Calculate the zero drift (ZD) using Equation 11-2:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.004
    
Where:


[[Page 649]]


ZD = The zero (low-level) drift of your PM CEMS in percent,
R<INF>CEM</INF> = The measured PM CEMS response to the zero reference 
standard,
R<INF>L</INF> = The preestablished numerical value of the zero reference 
standard, and
R<INF>U</INF> = The preestablished numerical value of the upscale 
reference standard.

    (3) Summarize the results on a data sheet similar to that shown in 
Table 2 (see section 17).
    12.2 How do I perform the regression analysis? You must couple each 
reference method PM concentration measurement, y, in the appropriate 
units, with an average PM CEMS response, x, over corresponding time 
periods. You must complete your PM CEMS correlation calculations using 
data deemed acceptable by quality control procedures identified in 40 
CFR 60, Appendix F, Procedure 2.
    (1) You must evaluate all flagged or suspect data produced during 
measurement periods and determine whether they should be excluded from 
your PM CEMS's average.
    (2) You must assure that the reference method and PM CEMS results 
are on a consistent moisture, temperature, and diluent basis. You must 
convert the reference method PM concentration measurements (dry standard 
conditions) to the units of your PM CEMS measurement conditions. The 
conditions of your PM CEMS measurement are monitor-specific. You must 
obtain from your PM CEMS vendor or instrument manufacturer the 
conditions and units of measurement for your PM CEMS.
    (i) If your sample gas contains entrained water droplets and your PM 
CEMS is an extractive system that measures at actual conditions (i.e., 
wet basis), you must use the measured moisture content determined from 
the impinger analysis when converting your reference method PM data to 
PM CEMS conditions; do not use the moisture content calculated from a 
psychrometric chart based on saturated conditions.
    12.3 How do I determine my PM CEMS correlation? To predict PM 
concentrations from PM CEMS responses, you must use the calculation 
method of least squares presented in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this 
section. When performing the calculations, each reference method PM 
concentration measurement must be treated as a discrete data point; if 
using paired sampling trains, do not average reference method data pairs 
for any test run.
    This performance specification describes procedures for evaluating 
five types of correlation models: linear, polynomial, logarithmic, 
exponential, and power. Procedures for selecting the most appropriate 
correlation model are presented in section 12.4 of this specification.
    (1) How do I evaluate a linear correlation for my correlation test 
data? To evaluate a linear correlation, follow the procedures described 
in paragraphs (1)(i) through (iv) of this section.
    (i) Calculate the linear correlation equation, which gives the 
predicted PM concentration () as a function of the PM CEMS response (x), 
as indicated by Equation 11-3:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.005

Where:

y = the predicted PM concentration,
b<INF>0</INF> = the intercept for the correlation curve, as calculated 
using Equation 11-4,
b<INF>1</INF> = the slope of the correlation curve, as calculated using 
Equation 11-6, and
x = the PM CEMS response value.

    Calculate the y intercept (b<INF>0</INF>) of the correlation curve 
using Equation 11-4:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.006

Where:

x = the mean value of the PM CEMS response data, as calculated using 
Equation 11-5, and
y = the mean value of the PM concentration data, as calculated using 
Equation 11-5:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.007

Where:

x<INF>i</INF> = the PM CEMS response value for run i,
y<INF>i</INF> = the PM concentration value for run i, and
n = the number of data points.

    Calculate the slope (b<INF>1</INF>) of the correlation curve using 
Equation 11-6:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.008

Where:

S<INF>xx</INF>, S<INF>xy</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-7:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.009


[[Page 650]]


    (ii) Calculate the half range of the 95 percent confidence interval 
(CI) for the predicted PM concentration (y) at the mean value of x, 
using Equation 11-8:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.010

Where:

CI = the half range for the 95 percent confidence interval for the mean 
x value,
t<INF>df,1-a/2</INF> = the value for the t statistic provided in Table 1 
for df = n-2, and
S<INF>L</INF> = the scatter or deviation of values about the correlation 
curve, which is determined using Equation 11-9:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.011

    Calculate the confidence interval half range at the mean x value as 
a percentage of the emission limit (CI%) using Equation 11-10:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.012

Where:

CI = the confidence interval half range at the mean x value, and
EL = PM emission limit, as described in section 13.2.

    (iii) Calculate the half range of the tolerance interval at the mean 
x value (TI) using Equation 11-11:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.013

Where:

TI = the tolerance interval half range at the mean x value,
k<INF>t</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-12, and
S<INF>L</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-9:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.014

Where:

n[min] = the number of test runs (n),
u<INF>n[min]</INF> = the tolerance factor for 75 percent provided in 
Table 1, and
v<INF>df</INF> = the value from Table 1 for df = n-2.
    Calculate the tolerance interval half range at the mean x value as a 
percentage of the emission limit (TI%) using Equation 11-13:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.015

Where:

TI = the tolerance interval half range at the mean value of x, and
EL = PM emission limit, as described in section 13.2.

    (iv) Calculate the linear correlation coefficient (r) using Equation 
11-14:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.016

Where:

S<INF>L</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-9, and
S<INF>y</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-15:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.017

    (2) How do I evaluate a polynomial correlation for my correlation 
test data? To evaluate a polynomial correlation, follow the procedures 
described in paragraphs (2)(i) through (iv) of this section.
    (i) Calculate the polynomial correlation equation, which is 
indicated by Equation 11-16, using Equations 11-17 through 11-22:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.018

Where:

y = the PM CEMS concentration predicted by the polynomial correlation 
equation, and
b<INF>0</INF>, b<INF>1</INF>, b<INF>2</INF> = the coefficients 
determined from the solution to the matrix equation Ab=B where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.019


[[Page 651]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.020

Where:

x<INF>i</INF> = the PM CEMS response for run i,
y<INF>i</INF> = the reference method PM concentration for run i, and
n = the number of test runs.

    Calculate the polynomial correlation curve coefficients 
(b<INF>0</INF>, b<INF>1</INF>, and b<INF>2</INF>) using Equations 11-19 
to 11-21, respectively:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.022

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.023

    (ii) Calculate the confidence interval half range (CI) by first 
calculating the C coefficients (C<INF>0</INF> to C<INF>5</INF>) using 
Equations 11-23 and 11-24:
Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.024

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.025

    Calculate [Delta] using Equation 11-25 for each x value:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.026
    

[[Page 652]]


    Determine the x value that corresponds to the minimum value of 
[Delta] ([Delta]<INF>min</INF>). Determine the scatter or deviation of 
values about the polynomial correlation curve (S<INF>P</INF>) using 
Equation 11-26:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.027

    Calculate the half range of the 95 percent confidence interval (CI) 
at the x value that corresponds to [Delta]<INF>min</INF> using Equation 
11-27:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.028

Where:

df = n -3, and
t<INF>df</INF> = as listed in Table 1 (see section 17).

    Calculate the confidence interval half range at the x value for 
[Delta]<INF>min</INF> as a percentage of the emission limit (CI%) using 
Equation 11-28:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.029

Where:

CI = the confidence interval half range at the x value that corresponds 
to [Delta]<INF>min</INF>, and
EL = PM emission limit, as described in section 13.2.

    (iii) Calculate the tolerance interval half range (TI) at the x 
value for [Delta]<INF>min</INF>, as indicated in Equation 11-29 for the 
polynomial correlation, using Equations 11-30 and 11-31:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.030

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.031

u<INF>n'</INF> = the value indicated in Table 1, and
v<INF>df</INF> = the value indicated in Table 1 for df = n-3.

    If the calculated value for n is less than 2, then n = 2.
    Calculate the tolerance interval half range at the x value for 
[Delta]<INF>min</INF> as a percentage of the emission limit (TI%) using 
Equation 11-32:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.032

Where:

TI = the tolerance interval half range at the x value that corresponds 
to [Delta]<INF>min</INF>, and
EL = PM emission limit, as described in section 13.2.

    (iv) Calculate the polynomial correlation coefficient (r) using 
Equation 11-33:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.033

Where:

S<INF>P</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-26, and
S<INF>y</INF> = as calculated using Equation 11-15.

    (3) How do I evaluate a logarithmic correlation for my correlation 
test data? To evaluate a logarithmic correlation, which has the form 
indicated by Equation 11-34, follow the procedures described in 
paragraphs (3)(i) through (iii) of this section.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.034

    (i) Perform a logarithmic transformation of each PM CEMS response 
value (x values) using Equation 11-35:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.035

Where:

x<INF>i</INF>' = is the transformed value of x<INF>i</INF>, and
Ln(x<INF>i</INF>) = the natural logarithm of the PM CEMS response for 
run i.

    (ii) Using the values for x<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
x<INF>i</INF>, perform the same procedures used to develop the linear 
correlation equation described in paragraph (1)(i) of this section. The 
resulting equation has the form indicated by Equation 11-36:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.036

Where:

x' = the natural logarithm of the PM CEMS response, and the variables , 
b<INF>0</INF>, and b<INF>1</INF> are as defined in paragraph (1)(i) of 
this section.

    (iii) Using the values for x<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
x<INF>i</INF>, calculate the confidence interval half range at the mean 
x' value as a percentage of the emission limit (CI%), the tolerance 
interval half range at the mean x' value as a percentage of the emission 
limit (TI%), and the correlation coefficient (r) using the procedures 
described in paragraphs (1)(ii) through (iv) of this section.
    (4) How do I evaluate an exponential correlation for my correlation 
test data? To evaluate an exponential correlation, which has the form 
indicated by Equation 11-37, follow the procedures described in 
paragraphs (4)(i) through (v) of this section:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.037

    (i) Perform a logarithmic transformation of each PM concentration 
measurement (y values) using Equation 11-38:

[[Page 653]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.038

Where:

y<INF>i</INF>' = is the transformed value of y<INF>i</INF>, and
Ln(y<INF>i</INF>) = the natural logarithm of the PM concentration 
measurement for run i.

    (ii) Using the values for y<INF>i</INF> in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>' perform the same procedures used to develop the linear 
correlation equation described in paragraph (1)(i) of this section. The 
resulting equation will have the form indicated by Equation 11-39.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.039

Where:

<INF>i'</INF> = the natural logarithm of the predicted PM concentration 
values, and the variables b<INF>0</INF>, b<INF>1</INF>, and x are as 
defined in paragraph (1)(i) of this section.

    (iii) Using the values for y<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>, calculate the confidence interval half range (CI), as 
described in paragraph (1)(ii) of this section. However, for the 
exponential correlation, you must calculate the value for CI at the 
median x value, instead of the mean x value for linear correlations. 
Calculate the confidence interval half range at the median x value as a 
percentage of the emission limit (CI%) using Equation 11-40:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.040

Where:

CI = the confidence interval half range at the median x value, and
Ln(EL) = the natural logarithm of the PM emission limit, as described in 
section 13.2.

    (iv) Using the values for y<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>, calculate the tolerance interval half range (TI), as 
described in paragraph (1)(iii) of this section. For the exponential 
correlation, the value for TI also must be calculated at the median x 
value. Calculate the tolerance interval half range at the median x value 
as a percentage of the emission limit (TI%) using Equation 11-41:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.041

Where:

TI = the tolerance interval half range at the median x value, and
Ln(EL) = the natural logarithm of the PM emission limit, as described in 
section 13.2.

    (v) Using the values for y<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>, calculate the correlation coefficient (r) using the 
procedure described in paragraph (1)(iv) of this section.
    (5) How do I evaluate a power correlation for my correlation test 
data? To evaluate a power correlation, which has the form indicated by 
Equation 11-42, follow the procedures described in paragraphs (5)(i) 
through (v) of this section.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.042

    (i) Perform logarithmic transformations of each PM CEMS response (x 
values) and each PM concentration measurement (y values) using Equations 
11-35 and 11-38, respectively.
    (ii) Using the values for x<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
x<INF>i</INF>, and the values for y<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values 
for y<INF>i</INF>, perform the same procedures used to develop the 
linear correlation equation described in paragraph (1)(i) of this 
section. The resulting equation will have the form indicated by Equation 
11-43:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.043

Where:

' = the natural logarithm of the predicted PM concentration values, and
x' = the natural logarithm of the PM CEMS response values, and the 
variables b<INF>0</INF> and b<INF>1</INF> are as defined in paragraph 
(1)(i) of this section.

    (iii) Using the values for y<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>, calculate the confidence interval half range (CI), as 
described in paragraph (1)(ii) of this section. You must calculate the 
value for CI at the median x' value, instead of the mean x value for 
linear correlations. Calculate the confidence interval half range at the 
median x' value as a percentage of the emission limit (CI%) using 
Equation 11-40.
    (iv) Using the values fory<INF>i</INF>, in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>, calculate the tolerance interval half range (TI), as 
described in paragraph (1)(iii) of this section. The value for TI also 
must be calculated at the median x' value. Calculate the tolerance 
interval half range at the median x' value as a percentage of the 
emission limit (CI%) using Equation 11-41.
    (v) Using the values for y<INF>i</INF>' in place of the values for 
y<INF>i</INF>, calculate the correlation coefficient (r) using the 
procedure described in paragraph (1)(iv) of this section.
    12.4 Which correlation model should I use? Follow the procedures 
described in paragraphs (1) through (4) of this section to determine 
which correlation model you should use.
    (1) For each correlation model that you develop using the procedures 
described in section 12.3 of this specification, compare the confidence 
interval half range percentage, tolerance interval half range 
percentage, and correlation coefficient to the performance criteria 
specified in section 13.2 of this specification. You can use the linear, 
logarithmic, exponential, or power correlation model if the model 
satisfies all of the performance criteria specified in section 13.2 of 
this specification. However, to use the polynomial

[[Page 654]]

model you first must check that the polynomial correlation curve 
satisfies the criteria for minimum and maximum values specified in 
paragraph (3) of this section.
    (2) If you develop more than one correlation curve that satisfy the 
performance criteria specified in section 13.2 of this specification, 
you should use the correlation curve with the greatest correlation 
coefficient. If the polynomial model has the greatest correlation 
coefficient, you first must check that the polynomial correlation curve 
satisfies the criteria for minimum and maximum values specified in 
paragraph (3) of this section.
    (3) You can use the polynomial model that you develop using the 
procedures described in section 12.3(2) if the model satisfies the 
performance criteria specified in section 13.2 of this specification, 
and the minimum or maximum value of the polynomial correlation curve 
does not occur within the expanded data range. The minimum or maximum 
value of the polynomial correlation curve is the point where the slope 
of the curve equals zero. To determine if the minimum or maximum value 
occurs within the expanded data range, follow the procedure described in 
paragraphs (3)(i) through (iv) of this section.
    (i) Determine if your polynomial correlation curve has a minimum or 
maximum point by comparing the polynomial coefficient b<INF>2</INF> to 
zero. If b<INF>2</INF> is less than zero, the curve has a maximum value. 
If b<INF>2</INF> is greater than zero, the curve has a minimum value. 
(Note: If b<INF>2</INF> equals zero, the correlation curve is linear.)
    (ii) Calculate the minimum value using Equation 11-44.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.044
    
    (iii) If your polynomial correlation curve has a minimum point, you 
must compare the minimum value to the minimum PM CEMS response used to 
develop the correlation curve. If the correlation curve minimum value is 
less than or equal to the minimum PM CEMS response value, you can use 
the polynomial correlation curve, provided the correlation curve also 
satisfies all of the performance criteria specified in section 13.2 of 
this specification. If the correlation curve minimum value is greater 
than the minimum PM CEMS response value, you cannot use the polynomial 
correlation curve to predict PM concentrations.
    (iv) If your polynomial correlation curve has a maximum, the maximum 
value must be greater than the allowable extrapolation limit. If your 
source is not a low-emitting source, as defined in section 3.16 of this 
specification, the allowable extrapolation limit is 125 percent of the 
highest PM CEMS response used to develop the correlation curve. If your 
source is a low-emitting source, the allowable extrapolation limit is 
125 percent of the highest PM CEMS response used to develop the 
correlation curve or the PM CEMS response that corresponds to 50 percent 
of the emission limit, whichever is greater. If the polynomial 
correlation curve maximum value is greater than the extrapolation limit, 
and the correlation curve satisfies all of the performance criteria 
specified in section 13.2 of this specification, you can use the 
polynomial correlation curve to predict PM concentrations. If the 
correlation curve maximum value is less than the extrapolation limit, 
you cannot use the polynomial correlation curve to predict PM 
concentrations.
    (4) You may petition the Administrator for alternative solutions or 
sampling recommendations if the correlation models described in section 
12.3 of this specification do not satisfy the performance criteria 
specified in section 13.2 of this specification.

         13.0 What Are the Performance Criteria for My PM CEMS?

    You must evaluate your PM CEMS based on the 7-day drift check, the 
accuracy of the correlation, and the sampling periods and cycle/response 
time.
    13.1 What is the 7-day drift check performance specification? Your 
daily PM CEMS internal drift checks must demonstrate that the average 
daily drift of your PM CEMS does not deviate from the value of the 
reference light, optical filter, Beta attenuation signal, or other 
technology-suitable reference standard by more than 2 percent of the 
upscale value. If your CEMS includes diluent and/or auxiliary monitors 
(for temperature, pressure, and/or moisture) that are employed as a 
necessary part of this performance specification, you must determine the 
calibration drift separately for each ancillary monitor in terms of its 
respective output (see the appropriate performance specification for the 
diluent CEMS specification). None of the calibration drifts may exceed 
their individual specification.
    13.2 What performance criteria must my PM CEMS correlation satisfy? 
Your PM CEMS correlation must meet each of the minimum specifications in 
paragraphs (1),

[[Page 655]]

(2), and (3) of this section. Before confidence and tolerance interval 
half range percentage calculations are made, you must convert the 
emission limit to the appropriate units of your PM CEMS measurement 
conditions using the average of emissions gas property values (e.g., 
diluent concentration, temperature, pressure, and moisture) measured 
during the correlation test.
    (1) The correlation coefficient must satisfy the criterion specified 
in paragraph (1)(i) or (ii), whichever applies.
    (i) If your source is not a low-emitting source, as defined in 
section 3.16 of this specification, the correlation coefficient (r) must 
be greater than or equal to 0.85.
    (ii) If your source is a low-emitting source, as defined in section 
3.16 of this specification, the correlation coefficient (r) must be 
greater than or equal to 0.75.
    (2) The confidence interval half range must satisfy the applicable 
criterion specified in paragraph (2)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this section, 
based on the type of correlation model.
    (i) For linear or logarithmic correlations, the 95 percent 
confidence interval half range at the mean PM CEMS response value from 
the correlation test must be within 10 percent of the PM emission limit 
value specified in theapplicable regulation, as calculated using 
Equation 11-10.
    (ii) For polynomial correlations, the 95 percent confidence interval 
half range at the PM CEMS response value from the correlation test that 
corresponds to the minimum value for [Delta] must be within 10 percent 
of the PM emission limit value specified in the applicable regulation, 
as calculated using Equation 11-28.
    (iii) For exponential or power correlations, the 95 percent 
confidence interval half range at the median PM CEMS response value from 
the correlation test must be within 10 percent of the natural logarithm 
of the PM emission limit value specified in the applicable regulation, 
as calculated using Equation 11-40.
    (3) The tolerance interval half range must satisfy the applicable 
criterion specified in paragraph (3)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this section, 
based on the type of correlation model.
    (i) For linear or logarithmic correlations, the tolerance interval 
half range at the mean PM CEMS response value from the correlation test 
must have 95 percent confidence that 75 percent of all possible values 
are within 25 percent of the PM emission limit value specified in the 
applicable regulation, as calculated using Equation 11-13.
    (ii) For polynomial correlations, the tolerance interval half range 
at the PM CEMS response value from the correlation test that corresponds 
to the minimum value for [Delta] must have 95 percent confidence that 75 
percent of all possible values are within 25 percent of the PM emission 
limit value specified in the applicable regulation, as calculated using 
Equation 11-32.
    (iii) For exponential or power correlations, the tolerance interval 
half range at the median PM CEMS response value from the correlation 
test must have 95 percent confidence that 75 percent of all possible 
values are within 25 percent of the natural logarithm of the PM emission 
limit value specified in the applicable regulation, as calculated using 
Equation 11-41.
    13.3 What are the sampling periods and cycle/response time? You must 
document and maintain the response time and any changes in the response 
time following installation.
    (1) If you have a batch sampling PM CEMS, you must evaluate the 
limits presented in paragraphs (1)(i) and (ii) of this section.
    (i) The response time of your PM CEMS, which is equivalent to the 
cycle time, must be no longer than 15 minutes. In addition, the delay 
between the end of the sampling time and reporting of the sample 
analysis must be no greater than 3 minutes. You must document any 
changes in the response time following installation.
    (ii) The sampling time of your PM CEMS must be no less than 30 
percent of the cycle time. If you have a batch sampling PM CEMS, 
sampling must be continuous except during pauses when the collected 
pollutant on the capture media is being analyzed and the next capture 
medium starts collecting a new sample.
    13.4 What PM compliance monitoring must I do? You must report your 
CEMS measurements in the units of the standard expressed in the 
regulations (e.g., mg/dscm @ 7 percent oxygen, pounds per million Btu 
(lb/mmBtu), etc.). You may need to install auxiliary data monitoring 
equipment to convert the units reported by your PM CEMS into units of 
the PM emission standard.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

  16.0 Which References Are Relevant to This Performance Specification?

    16.1 Technical Guidance Document: Compliance Assurance Monitoring. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards Emission Measurement Center. August 1998.
    16.2 40 CFR 60, Appendix B, ``Performance Specification 2--
Specifications and Test Procedures for SO<INF>2</INF>, and 
NO<INF>X</INF>, Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources.''
    16.3 40 CFR 60, Appendix B, ``Performance Specification 1--
Specification and Test Procedures for Opacity Continuous Emission 
Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources.''

[[Page 656]]

    16.4 40 CFR 60, Appendix A, ``Method 1--Sample and Velocity 
Traverses for Stationary Sources.''
    16.5 ``Current Knowledge of Particulate Matter (PM) Continuous 
Emission Monitoring.'' EPA-454/R-00-039. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. September 2000.
    16.6 40 CFR 266, Appendix IX, Section 2, ``Performance 
Specifications for Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems.''
    16.7 ISO 10155, ``Stationary Source Emissions--Automated Monitoring 
of Mass Concentrations of Particles: Performance Characteristics, Test 
Procedures, and Specifications.'' American National Standards Institute, 
New York City. 1995.

  17.0 What Reference Tables and Validation Data Are Relevant to PS-11?

    Use the information in Table 1 for determining the confidence and 
tolerance interval half ranges. Use Table 2 to record your 7-day drift 
test data.

               Table 1.--Factors for Calculation of Confidence and Tolerance Interval Half Ranges
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            df or n'                                    tdf             vdf          un' (75)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2...............................................................           4.303           4.415           1.433
3...............................................................           3.182           2.920           1.340
4...............................................................           2.776           2.372           1.295
5...............................................................           2.571           2.089           1.266
6...............................................................           2.447           1.915           1.247
7...............................................................           2.365           1.797           1.233
8...............................................................           2.306           1.711           1.223
9...............................................................           2.262           1.645           1.214
10..............................................................           2.228           1.593           1.208
11..............................................................           2.201           1.551           1.203
12..............................................................           2.179           1.515           1.199
13..............................................................           2.160           1.485           1.195
14..............................................................           2.145           1.460           1.192
15..............................................................           2.131           1.437           1.189
16..............................................................           2.120           1.418           1.187
17..............................................................           2.110           1.400           1.185
18..............................................................           2.101           1.385           1.183
19..............................................................           2.093           1.370           1.181
20..............................................................           2.086           1.358           1.179
21..............................................................           2.080           1.346           1.178
22..............................................................           2.074           1.335           1.177
23..............................................................           2.069           1.326           1.175
24..............................................................           2.064           1.317           1.174
25..............................................................           2.060           1.308           1.173
26..............................................................           2.056           1.301           1.172
27..............................................................           2.052           1.294           1.172
28..............................................................           2.048           1.287           1.171
29..............................................................           2.045           1.281           1.171
30..............................................................           2.042           1.274           1.170
31..............................................................           2.040           1.269           1.169
32..............................................................           2.037           1.264           1.169
33..............................................................           2.035           1.258           1.168
34..............................................................           2.032           1.253           1.168
35..............................................................           2.030           1.248           1.167
36..............................................................           2.028           1.244           1.167
37..............................................................           2.026           1.240           1.166
38..............................................................           2.025           1.236           1.166
39..............................................................           2.023           1.232           1.165
40..............................................................           2.021           1.228           1.165
41..............................................................           2.020           1.225           1.165
42..............................................................           2.018           1.222           1.164
43..............................................................           2.017           1.219           1.164
44..............................................................           2.015           1.216           1.163
45..............................................................           2.014           1.213           1.163
46..............................................................           2.013           1.210           1.163
47..............................................................           2.012           1.207           1.163
48..............................................................           2.011           1.205           1.162
49..............................................................           2.010           1.202           1.162
50..............................................................           2.009           1.199           1.162
51..............................................................           2.008           1.197           1.162
52..............................................................           2.007           1.194           1.162
53..............................................................           2.006           1.191           1.161
54..............................................................           2.005           1.189           1.161
55..............................................................           2.005           1.186           1.161
56..............................................................           2.004           1.183           1.161
57..............................................................           2.003           1.181           1.161
58..............................................................           2.002           1.178           1.160

[[Page 657]]

 
59..............................................................           2.001           1.176           1.160
60..............................................................           2.000           1.173           1.160
61..............................................................           2.000           1.170           1.160
62..............................................................           1.999           1.168           1.160
63..............................................................           1.999           1.165           1.159
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                         Table 2.--7-Day Drift Test Data
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                   Zero drift
  Zero drift day    Date  and  time   Zero check  value  PM CEMS  response      Difference      ((RCEMS-RL) /RU)
    <greek-i>                                (RL)              (RCEMS)          (RCEMS-RL)           x 100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
------------------
2
------------------
3
------------------
4
------------------
5
------------------
6
------------------
7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 658]]


 
                                                            PM CEMS                            Upscale drift
Upscale drift day   Date  and  time   Upscale  check       response         Difference       ((RCEMS-RU)/RU) x
    <greek-i>                           value  (RU)         (RCEMS)         (RCEMS-RU)              100%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
------------------
2
------------------
3
------------------
4
------------------
5
------------------
6
------------------
7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 659]]

 Performance Specification 15--Performance Specification for Extractive 
     FTIR Continuous Emissions Monitor Systems in Stationary Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analytes. This performance specification is applicable for 
measuring all hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) which absorb in the 
infrared region and can be quantified using Fourier Transform Infrared 
Spectroscopy (FTIR), as long as the performance criteria of this 
performance specification are met. This specification is to be used for 
evaluating FTIR continuous emission monitoring systems for measuring 
HAPs regulated under Title III of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. 
This specification also applies to the use of FTIR CEMs for measuring 
other volatile organic or inorganic species.
    1.2 Applicability. A source which can demonstrate that the 
extractive FTIR system meets the criteria of this performance 
specification for each regulated pollutant may use the FTIR system to 
continuously monitor for the regulated pollutants.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification

    For compound-specific sampling requirements refer to FTIR sampling 
methods (e.g., reference 1). For data reduction procedures and 
requirements refer to the EPA FTIR Protocol (reference 2), hereafter 
referred to as the ``FTIR Protocol.'' This specification describes 
sampling and analytical procedures for quality assurance. The infrared 
spectrum of any absorbing compound provides a distinct signature. The 
infrared spectrum of a mixture contains the superimposed spectra of each 
mixture component. Thus, an FTIR CEM provides the capability to 
continuously measure multiple components in a sample using a single 
analyzer. The number of compounds that can be speciated in a single 
spectrum depends, in practice, on the specific compounds present and the 
test conditions.

                             3.0 Definitions

    For a list of definitions related to FTIR spectroscopy refer to 
Appendix A of the FTIR Protocol. Unless otherwise specified, 
spectroscopic terms, symbols and equations in this performance 
specification are taken from the FTIR Protocol or from documents cited 
in the Protocol. Additional definitions are given below.
    3.1 FTIR Continuous Emission Monitoring System (FTIR CEM).
    3.1.1 FTIR System. Instrument to measure spectra in the mid-infrared 
spectral region (500 to 4000 cm<SUP>-1</SUP>). It contains an infrared 
source, interferometer, sample gas containment cell, infrared detector, 
and computer. The interferometer consists of a beam splitter that 
divides the beam into two paths, one path a fixed distance and the other 
a variable distance. The computer is equipped with software to run the 
interferometer and store the raw digitized signal from the detector 
(interferogram). The software performs the mathematical conversion (the 
Fourier transform) of the interferogram into a spectrum showing the 
frequency dependent sample absorbance. All spectral data can be stored 
on computer media.
    3.1.2 Gas Cell. A gas containment cell that can be evacuated. It 
contains the sample as the infrared beam passes from the interferometer, 
through the sample, and to the detector. The gas cell may have multi-
pass mirrors depending on the required detection limit(s) for the 
application.
    3.1.3 Sampling System. Equipment used to extract sample from the 
test location and transport the gas to the FTIR analyzer. Sampling 
system components include probe, heated line, heated non-reactive pump, 
gas distribution manifold and valves, flow measurement devices and any 
sample conditioning systems.
    3.2 Reference CEM. An FTIR CEM, with sampling system, that can be 
used for comparison measurements.
    3.3 Infrared Band (also Absorbance Band or Band). Collection of 
lines arising from rotational transitions superimposed on a vibrational 
transition. An infrared absorbance band is analyzed to determine the 
analyte concentration.
    3.4 Sample Analysis. Interpreting infrared band shapes, frequencies, 
and intensities to obtain sample component concentrations. This is 
usually performed by a software routine using a classical least squares 
(cls), partial least squares (pls), or K- or P- matrix method.
    3.5 (Target) Analyte. A compound whose measurement is required, 
usually to some established limit of detection and analytical 
uncertainty.
    3.6 Interferant. A compound in the sample matrix whose infrared 
spectrum overlaps at least part of an analyte spectrum complicating the 
analyte measurement. The interferant may not prevent the analyte 
measurement, but could increase the analytical uncertainty in the 
measured concentration. Reference spectra of interferants are used to 
distinguish the interferant bands from the analyte bands. An interferant 
for one analyte may not be an interferant for other analytes.
    3.7 Reference Spectrum. Infrared spectra of an analyte, or 
interferant, prepared under controlled, documented, and reproducible 
laboratory conditions (see Section 4.6 of the FTIR Protocol). A suitable 
library of reference spectra can be used to measure target analytes in 
gas samples.
    3.8 Calibration Spectrum. Infrared spectrum of a compound suitable 
for characterizing the FTIR instrument configuration (Section 4.5 in the 
FTIR Protocol).

[[Page 660]]

    3.9 One hundred percent line. A double beam transmittance spectrum 
obtained by combining two successive background single beam spectra. 
Ideally, this line is equal to 100 percent transmittance (or zero 
absorbance) at every point in the spectrum. The zero absorbance line is 
used to measure the RMS noise of the system.
    3.10 Background Deviation. Any deviation (from 100 percent) in the 
one hundred percent line (or from zero absorbance). Deviations greater 
than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent in any analytical region are 
unacceptable. Such deviations indicate a change in the instrument 
throughput relative to the single-beam background.
    3.11 Batch Sampling. A gas cell is alternately filled and evacuated. 
A Spectrum of each filled cell (one discreet sample) is collected and 
saved.
    3.12 Continuous Sampling. Sample is continuously flowing through a 
gas cell. Spectra of the flowing sample are collected at regular 
intervals.
    3.13 Continuous Operation. In continuous operation an FTIR CEM 
system, without user intervention, samples flue gas, records spectra of 
samples, saves the spectra to a disk, analyzes the spectra for the 
target analytes, and prints concentrations of target analytes to a 
computer file. User intervention is permitted for initial set-up of 
sampling system, initial calibrations, and periodic maintenance.
    3.14 Sampling Time. In batch sampling--the time required to fill the 
cell with flue gas. In continuous sampling--the time required to collect 
the infrared spectrum of the sample gas.
    3.15 PPM-Meters. Sample concentration expressed as the 
concentration-path length product, ppm (molar) concentration multiplied 
by the path length of the FTIR gas cell. Expressing concentration in 
these units provides a way to directly compare measurements made using 
systems with different optical configurations. Another useful expression 
is (ppm-meters)/K, where K is the absolute temperature of the sample in 
the gas cell.
    3.16 CEM Measurement Time Constant. The Time Constant (TC, minutes 
for one cell volume to flow through the cell) determines the minimum 
interval for complete removal of an analyte from the FTIR cell. It 
depends on the sampling rate (R<INF>s</INF> in Lpm), the FTIR cell 
volume (V<INF>cell</INF> in L) and the chemical and physical properties 
of an analyte.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.464

For example, if the sample flow rate (through the FTIR cell) is 5 Lpm 
and the cell volume is 7 liters, then TC is equal to 1.4 minutes (0.71 
cell volumes per minute). This performance specification defines 5 * TC 
as the minimum interval between independent samples.
    3.17 Independent Measurement. Two independent measurements are 
spectra of two independent samples. Two independent samples are 
separated by, at least 5 cell volumes. The interval between independent 
measurements depends on the cell volume and the sample flow rate 
(through the cell). There is no mixing of gas between two independent 
samples. Alternatively, estimate the analyte residence time empirically: 
(1) Fill cell to ambient pressure with a (known analyte concentration) 
gas standard, (2) measure the spectrum of the gas standard, (3) purge 
the cell with zero gas at the sampling rate and collect a spectrum every 
minute until the analyte standard is no longer detected 
spectroscopically. If the measured time corresponds to less than 5 cell 
volumes, use 5 * TC as the minimum interval between independent 
measurements. If the measured time is greater than 5 * TC, then use this 
time as the minimum interval between independent measurements.
    3.18 Test Condition. A period of sampling where all process, and 
sampling conditions, and emissions remain constant and during which a 
single sampling technique and a single analytical program are used. One 
Run may include results for more than one test condition. Constant 
emissions means that the composition of the emissions remains 
approximately stable so that a single analytical program is suitable for 
analyzing all of the sample spectra. A greater than two-fold change in 
analyte or interferant concentrations or the appearance of additional 
compounds in the emissions, may constitute a new test condition and may 
require modification of the analytical program.
    3.19 Run. A single Run consists of spectra (one spectrum each) of at 
least 10 independent samples over a minimum of one hour. The 
concentration results from the spectra can be averaged together to give 
a run average for each analyte measured in the test run.

                            4.0 Interferences

    Several compounds, including water, carbon monoxide, and carbon 
dioxide, are known interferences in the infrared region in which the 
FTIR instrument operates. Follow the procedures in the FTIR protocol for 
subtracting or otherwise dealing with these and other interferences.

                               5.0 Safety

    The procedures required under this performance specification may 
involve hazardous materials, operations, and equipment. This performance 
specification may not address all of the safety problems associated with 
these procedures. It is the responsibility of the user to establish 
appropriate

[[Page 661]]

safety and health practices and determine the applicable regulatory 
limitations prior to performing these procedures. The CEMS users manual 
and materials recommended by this performance specification should be 
consulted for specific precautions to be taken.

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies

    6.1 Installation of sampling equipment should follow requirements of 
FTIR test Methods such as references 1 and 3 and the EPA FTIR Protocol 
(reference 2). Select test points where the gas stream composition is 
representative of the process emissions. If comparing to a reference 
method, the probe tips for the FTIR CEM and the RM should be positioned 
close together using the same sample port if possible.
    6.2 FTIR Specifications. The FTIR CEM must be equipped with 
reference spectra bracketing the range of path length-concentrations 
(absorbance intensities) to be measured for each analyte. The effective 
concentration range of the analyzer can be adjusted by changing the path 
length of the gas cell or by diluting the sample. The optical 
configuration of the FTIR system must be such that maximum absorbance of 
any target analyte is no greater than 1.0 and the minimum absorbance of 
any target analyte is at least 10 times the RMSD noise in the analytical 
region. For example, if the measured RMSD in an analytical region is 
equal to 10<SUP>-3</SUP>, then the peak analyte absorbance is required 
to be at least 0.01. Adequate measurement of all of the target analytes 
may require changing path lengths during a run, conducting separate runs 
for different analytes, diluting the sample, or using more than one gas 
cell.
    6.3 Data Storage Requirements. The system must have sufficient 
capacity to store all data collected in one week of routine sampling. 
Data must be stored to a write-protected medium, such as write-once-
read-many (WORM) optical storage medium or to a password protected 
remote storage location. A back-up copy of all data can be temporarily 
saved to the computer hard drive. The following items must be stored 
during testing.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> At least one sample interferogram per sampling 
Run or one interferogram per hour, whichever is greater. This assumes 
that no sampling or analytical conditions have changed during the run.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> All sample absorbance spectra (about 12 per hr, 
288 per day).
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> All background spectra and interferograms 
(variable, but about 5 per day).
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> All CTS spectra and interferograms (at least 2 
each 24 hour period).
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Documentation showing a record of resolution, 
path length, apodization, sampling time, sampling conditions, and test 
conditions for all sample, CTS, calibration, and background spectra.
    Using a resolution of 0.5 cm<SUP>-1</SUP>, with analytical range of 
3500 cm<SUP>-1</SUP>, assuming about 65 Kbytes per spectrum and 130 Kb 
per interferogram, the storage requirement is about 164 Mb for one week 
of continuous sampling. Lower spectral resolution requires less storage 
capacity. All of the above data must be stored for at least two weeks. 
After two weeks, storage requirements include: (1) all analytical 
results (calculated concentrations), (2) at least 1 sample spectrum with 
corresponding background and sample interferograms for each test 
condition, (3) CTS and calibration spectra with at least one 
interferogram for CTS and all interferograms for calibrations, (4) a 
record of analytical input used to produce results, and (5) all other 
documentation. These data must be stored according to the requirements 
of the applicable regulation.

                  7.0 Reagents and Standards [Reserved]

 8.0 Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport [Reserved]

                           9.0 Quality Control

    These procedures shall be used for periodic quarterly or semiannual 
QA/QC checks on the operation of the FTIR CEM. Some procedures test only 
the analytical program and are not intended as a test of the sampling 
system.
    9.1 Audit Sample. This can serve as a check on both the sampling 
system and the analytical program.
    9.1.1 Sample Requirements. The audit sample can be a mixture or a 
single component. It must contain target analyte(s) at approximately the 
expected flue gas concentration(s). If possible, each mixture component 
concentration should be NIST traceable (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 percent 
accuracy). If a cylinder mixture standard(s) cannot be obtained, then, 
alternatively, a gas phase standard can be generated from a condensed 
phase analyte sample. Audit sample contents and concentrations are not 
revealed to the FTIR CEM operator until after successful completion of 
procedures in 5.3.2.
    9.1.2 Test Procedure. An audit sample is obtained from the 
Administrator. Spike the audit sample using the analyte spike procedure 
in Section 11. The audit sample is measured directly by the FTIR system 
(undiluted) and then spiked into the effluent at a known dilution ratio. 
Measure a series of spiked and unspiked samples using the same 
procedures as those used to analyze the stack gas. Analyze the results 
using Sections 12.1 and 12.2. The measured concentration of each analyte 
must be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the expected 
concentration (plus the uncertainty), i.e., the calculated correction 
factor must be within

[[Page 662]]

0.93 and 1.07 for an audit with an analyte uncertainty of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent.
    9.2 Audit Spectra. Audit spectra can be used to test the analytical 
program of the FTIR CEM, but provide no test of the sampling system.
    9.2.1 Definition and Requirements. Audit spectra are absorbance 
spectra that; (1) have been well characterized, and (2) contain 
absorbance bands of target analyte(s) and potential interferants at 
intensities equivalent to what is expected in the source effluent. Audit 
spectra are provided by the administrator without identifying 
information. Methods of preparing Audit spectra include; (1) 
mathematically adding sample spectra or adding reference and interferant 
spectra, (2) obtaining sample spectra of mixtures prepared in the 
laboratory, or (3) they may be sample spectra collected previously at a 
similar source. In the last case it must be demonstrated that the 
analytical results are correct and reproducible. A record associated 
with each Audit spectrum documents its method of preparation. The 
documentation must be sufficient to enable an independent analyst to 
reproduce the Audit spectra.
    9.2.2 Test Procedure. Audit spectra concentrations are measured 
using the FTIR CEM analytical program. Analytical results must be within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the certified audit concentration for 
each analyte (plus the uncertainty in the audit concentration). If the 
condition is not met, demonstrate how the audit spectra are 
unrepresentative of the sample spectra. If the audit spectra are 
representative, modify the FTIR CEM analytical program until the test 
requirement is met. Use the new analytical program in subsequent FTIR 
CEM analyses of effluent samples.
    9.3 Submit Spectra For Independent Analysis. This procedure tests 
only the analytical program and not the FTIR CEM sampling system. The 
analyst can submit FTIR CEM spectra for independent analysis by EPA. 
Requirements for submission include; (1) three representative absorbance 
spectra (and stored interferograms) for each test period to be reviewed, 
(2) corresponding CTS spectra, (3) corresponding background spectra and 
interferograms, (4) spectra of associated spiked samples if applicable, 
and (5) analytical results for these sample spectra. The analyst will 
also submit documentation of process times and conditions, sampling 
conditions associated with each spectrum, file names and sampling times, 
method of analysis and reference spectra used, optical configuration of 
FTIR CEM including cell path length and temperature, spectral resolution 
and apodization used for every spectrum. Independent analysis can also 
be performed on site in conjunction with the FTIR CEM sampling and 
analysis. Sample spectra are stored on the independent analytical system 
as they are collected by the FTIR CEM system. The FTIR CEM and the 
independent analyses are then performed separately. The two analyses 
will agree to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>120 percent for each analyte 
using the procedure in Section 12.3. This assumes both analytical 
routines have properly accounted for differences in optical path length, 
resolution, and temperature between the sample spectra and the reference 
spectra.

                  10.0 Calibration and Standardization

    10.1 Calibration Transfer Standards. For CTS requirements see 
Section 4.5 of the FTIR Protocol. A well characterized absorbance band 
in the CTS gas is used to measure the path length and line resolution of 
the instrument. The CTS measurements made at the beginning of every 24 
hour period must agree to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent after 
correction for differences in pressure.
    Verify that the frequency response of the instrument and CTS 
absorbance intensity are correct by comparing to other CTS spectra or by 
referring to the literature.
    10.2 Analyte Calibration. If EPA library reference spectra are not 
available, use calibration standards to prepare reference spectra 
according to Section 6 of the FTIR Protocol. A suitable set of analyte 
reference data includes spectra of at least 2 independent samples at 
each of at least 2 different concentrations. The concentrations bracket 
a range that includes the expected analyte absorbance intensities. The 
linear fit of the reference analyte band areas must have a fractional 
calibration uncertainty (FCU in Appendix F of the FTIR Protocol) of no 
greater than 10 percent. For requirements of analyte standards refer to 
Section 4.6 of the FTIR Protocol.
    10.3 System Calibration. The calibration standard is introduced at a 
point on the sampling probe. The sampling system is purged with the 
calibration standard to verify that the absorbance measured in this way 
is equal to the absorbance in the analyte calibration. Note that the 
system calibration gives no indication of the ability of the sampling 
system to transport the target analyte(s) under the test conditions.
    10.4 Analyte Spike. The target analyte(s) is spiked at the outlet of 
the sampling probe, upstream of the particulate filter, and combined 
with effluent at a ratio of about 1 part spike to 9 parts effluent. The 
measured absorbance of the spike is compared to the expected absorbance 
of the spike plus the analyte concentration already in the effluent. 
This measures sampling system bias, if any, as distinguished from 
analyzer bias. It is important that spiked sample pass through all of 
the sampling system components before analysis.
    10.5 Signal-to-Noise Ratio (S/N). The measure of S/N in this 
performance specification is the root-mean-square (RMS) noise level as 
given in Appendix C of the FTIR

[[Page 663]]

Protocol. The RMS noise level of a contiguous segment of a spectrum is 
defined as the RMS difference (RMSD) between the n contiguous absorbance 
values (A<INF>i</INF>) which form the segment and the mean value 
(A<INF>M</INF>) of that segment.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.465

A decrease in the S/N may indicate a loss in optical throughput, or 
detector or interferometer malfunction.
    10.6 Background Deviation. The 100 percent baseline must be between 
95 and 105 percent transmittance (absorbance of 0.02 to -0.02) in every 
analytical region. When background deviation exceeds this range, a new 
background spectrum must be collected using nitrogen or other zero gas.
    10.7 Detector Linearity. Measure the background and CTS at three 
instrument aperture settings; one at the aperture setting to be used in 
the testing, and one each at settings one half and twice the test 
aperture setting. Compare the three CTS spectra. CTS band areas should 
agree to within the uncertainty of the cylinder standard. If test 
aperture is the maximum aperture, collect CTS spectrum at maximum 
aperture, then close the aperture to reduce the IR through-put by half. 
Collect a second background and CTS at the smaller aperture setting and 
compare the spectra as above. Instead of changing the aperture neutral 
density filters can be used to attenuate the infrared beam. Set up the 
FTIR system as it will be used in the test measurements. Collect a CTS 
spectrum. Use a neutral density filter to attenuate the infrared beam 
(either immediately after the source or the interferometer) to 
approximately \1/2\ its original intensity. Collect a second CTS 
spectrum. Use another filter to attenuate the infrared beam to 
approximately \1/4\ its original intensity. Collect a third background 
and CTS spectrum. Compare the CTS spectra as above. Another check on 
linearity is to observe the single beam background in frequency regions 
where the optical configuration is known to have a zero response. Verify 
that the detector response is ``flat'' and equal to zero in these 
regions. If detector response is not linear, decrease aperture, or 
attenuate the infrared beam. Repeat the linearity check until system 
passes the requirement.

                        11.0 Analytical Procedure

    11.1 Initial Certification. First, perform the evaluation procedures 
in Section 6.0 of the FTIR Protocol. The performance of an FTIR CEM can 
be certified upon installation using EPA Method 301 type validation (40 
CFR, Part 63, Appendix A), or by comparison to a reference Method if one 
exists for the target analyte(s). Details of each procedure are given 
below. Validation testing is used for initial certification upon 
installation of a new system. Subsequent performance checks can be 
performed with more limited analyte spiking. Performance of the 
analytical program is checked initially, and periodically as required by 
EPA, by analyzing audit spectra or audit gases.
    11.1.1 Validation. Use EPA Method 301 type sampling (reference 4, 
Section 5.3 of Method 301) to validate the FTIR CEM for measuring the 
target analytes. The analyte spike procedure is as follows: (1) a known 
concentration of analyte is mixed with a known concentration of a non-
reactive tracer gas, (2) the undiluted spike gas is sent directly to the 
FTIR cell and a spectrum of this sample is collected, (3) pre-heat the 
spiked gas to at least the sample line temperature, (4) introduce spike 
gas at the back of the sample probe upstream of the particulate filter, 
(5) spiked effluent is carried through all sampling components 
downstream of the probe, (6) spike at a ratio of roughly 1 part spike to 
9 parts flue gas (or more dilute), (7) the spike-to-flue gas ratio is 
estimated by comparing the spike flow to the total sample flow, and (8) 
the spike ratio is verified by comparing the tracer concentration in 
spiked flue gas to the tracer concentration in undiluted spike gas. The 
analyte flue gas concentration is unimportant as long as the spiked 
component can be measured and the sample matrix (including 
interferences) is similar to its composition under test conditions. 
Validation can be performed using a single FTIR CEM analyzing sample 
spectra collected sequentially. Since flue gas analyte (unspiked) 
concentrations can vary, it is recommended that two separate sampling 
lines (and pumps) are used; one line to carry unspiked flue gas and the 
other line to carry spiked flue gas. Even with two sampling lines the 
variation in unspiked concentration may be fast compared to the interval 
between consecutive measurements. Alternatively, two FTIR CEMs can be 
operated side-by-side, one measuring spiked sample, the other unspiked 
sample. In this arrangement spiked and unspiked measurements can be 
synchronized to minimize the affect of temporal variation in the 
unspiked analyte concentration. In either sampling arrangement, the 
interval between measured concentrations used in the statistical 
analysis should be, at least, 5 cell volumes (5 * TC in equation 1). A 
validation run consists of, at least, 24 independent analytical results, 
12 spiked and 12 unspiked samples. See Section 3.17 for definition of an 
``independent'' analytical result. The results are analyzed using 
Sections 12.1 and 12.2 to determine if the measurements passed the 
validation requirements. Several analytes can be spiked and measured in 
the same sampling run, but a separate statistical analysis is

[[Page 664]]

performed for each analyte. In lieu of 24 independent measurements, 
averaged results can be used in the statistical analysis. In this 
procedure, a series of consecutive spiked measurements are combined over 
a sampling period to give a single average result. The related unspiked 
measurements are averaged in the same way. The minimum 12 spiked and 12 
unspiked result averages are obtained by averaging measurements over 
subsequent sampling periods of equal duration. The averaged results are 
grouped together and statistically analyzed using Section 12.2.
    11.1.1.1 Validation with a Single Analyzer and Sampling Line. If one 
sampling line is used, connect the sampling system components and purge 
the entire sampling system and cell with at least 10 cell volumes of 
sample gas. Begin sampling by collecting spectra of 2 independent 
unspiked samples. Introduce the spike gas into the back of the probe, 
upstream of the particulate filter. Allow 10 cell volumes of spiked flue 
gas to purge the cell and sampling system. Collect spectra of 2 
independent spiked samples. Turn off the spike flow and allow 10 cell 
volumes of unspiked flue gas to purge the FTIR cell and sampling system. 
Repeat this procedure 6 times until the 24 samples are collected. Spiked 
and unspiked samples can also be measured in groups of 4 instead of in 
pairs. Analyze the results using Sections 12.1 and 12.2. If the 
statistical analysis passes the validation criteria, then the validation 
is completed. If the results do not pass the validation, the cause may 
be that temporal variations in the analyte sample gas concentration are 
fast relative to the interval between measurements. The difficulty may 
be avoided by: (1) Averaging the measurements over long sampling periods 
and using the averaged results in the statistical analysis, (2) 
modifying the sampling system to reduce TC by, for example, using a 
smaller volume cell or increasing the sample flow rate, (3) using two 
sample lines (4) use two analyzers to perform synchronized measurements. 
This performance specification permits modifications in the sampling 
system to minimize TC if the other requirements of the validation 
sampling procedure are met.
    11.1.1.2 Validation With a Single Analyzer and Two Sampling Lines. 
An alternative sampling procedure uses two separate sample lines, one 
carrying spiked flue gas, the other carrying unspiked gas. A valve in 
the gas distribution manifold allows the operator to choose either 
sample. A short heated line connects the FTIR cell to the 3-way valve in 
the manifold. Both sampling lines are continuously purged. Each sample 
line has a rotameter and a bypass vent line after the rotameter, 
immediately upstream of the valve, so that the spike and unspiked sample 
flows can each be continuously monitored. Begin sampling by collecting 
spectra of 2 independent unspiked samples. Turn the sampling valve to 
close off the unspiked gas flow and allow the spiked flue gas to enter 
the FTIR cell. Isolate and evacuate the cell and fill with the spiked 
sample to ambient pressure. (While the evacuated cell is filling, 
prevent air leaks into the cell by making sure that the spike sample 
rotameter always indicates that a portion of the flow is directed out 
the by-pass vent.) Open the cell outlet valve to allow spiked sample to 
continuously flow through the cell. Measure spectra of 2 independent 
spiked samples. Repeat this procedure until at least 24 samples are 
collected.
    11.1.1.3 Synchronized Measurements With Two Analyzers. Use two FTIR 
analyzers, each with its own cell, to perform synchronized spiked and 
unspiked measurements. If possible, use a similar optical configuration 
for both systems. The optical configurations are compared by measuring 
the same CTS gas with both analyzers. Each FTIR system uses its own 
sampling system including a separate sampling probe and sampling line. A 
common gas distribution manifold can be used if the samples are never 
mixed. One sampling system and analyzer measures spiked effluent. The 
other sampling system and analyzer measures unspiked flue gas. The two 
systems are synchronized so that each measures spectra at approximately 
the same times. The sample flow rates are also synchronized so that both 
sampling rates are approximately the same (TC<INF>1</INF>  
TC<INF>2</INF> in equation 1). Start both systems at the same time. 
Collect spectra of at least 12 independent samples with each (spiked and 
unspiked) system to obtain the minimum 24 measurements. Analyze the 
analytical results using Sections 12.1 and 12.2. Run averages can be 
used in the statistical analysis instead of individual measurements.
    11.1.1.4 Compare to a Reference Method (RM). Obtain EPA approval 
that the method qualifies as an RM for the analyte(s) and the source to 
be tested. Follow the published procedures for the RM in preparing and 
setting up equipment and sampling system, performing measurements, and 
reporting results. Since FTIR CEMS have multicomponent capability, it is 
possible to perform more than one RM simultaneously, one for each target 
analyte. Conduct at least 9 runs where the FTIR CEM and the RM are 
sampling simultaneously. Each Run is at least 30 minutes long and 
consists of spectra of at least 5 independent FTIR CEM samples and the 
corresponding RM measurements. If more than 9 runs are conducted, the 
analyst may eliminate up to 3 runs from the analysis if at least 9 runs 
are used.
    11.1.1.4.1 RMs Using Integrated Sampling. Perform the RM and FTIR 
CEM sampling simultaneously. The FTIR CEM can measure spectra as 
frequently as the analyst chooses

[[Page 665]]

(and should obtain measurements as frequently as possible) provided that 
the measurements include spectra of at least 5 independent measurements 
every 30 minutes. Concentration results from all of the FTIR CEM spectra 
within a run may be averaged for use in the statistical comparison even 
if all of the measurements are not independent. When averaging the FTIR 
CEM concentrations within a run, it is permitted to exclude some 
measurements from the average provided the minimum of 5 independent 
measurements every 30 minutes are included: The Run average of the FTIR 
CEM measurements depends on both the sample flow rate and the 
measurement frequency (MF). The run average of the RM using the 
integrated sampling method depends primarily on its sampling rate. If 
the target analyte concentration fluctuates significantly, the 
contribution to the run average of a large fluctuation depends on the 
sampling rate and measurement frequency, and on the duration and 
magnitude of the fluctuation. It is, therefore, important to carefully 
select the sampling rate for both the FTIR CEM and the RM and the 
measurement frequency for the FTIR CEM. The minimum of 9 run averages 
can be compared according to the relative accuracy test procedure in 
Performance Specification 2 for SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> CEMs 
(40 CFR, Part 60, App. B).
    11.1.1.4.2 RMs Using a Grab Sampling Technique. Synchronize the RM 
and FTIR CEM measurements as closely as possible. For a grab sampling RM 
record the volume collected and the exact sampling period for each 
sample. Synchronize the FTIR CEM so that the FTIR measures a spectrum of 
a similar cell volume at the same time as the RM grab sample was 
collected. Measure at least 5 independent samples with both the FTIR CEM 
and the RM for each of the minimum 9 Runs. Compare the Run concentration 
averages by using the relative accuracy analysis procedure in 40 CFR, 
Part 60, App. B.
    11.1.1.4.3 Continuous Emission Monitors (CEMs) as RMs. If the RM is 
a CEM, synchronize the sampling flow rates of the RM and the FTIR CEM. 
Each run is at least 1-hour long and consists of at least 10 FTIR CEM 
measurements and the corresponding 10 RM measurements (or averages). For 
the statistical comparison use the relative accuracy analysis procedure 
in 40 CFR, Part 60, App. B. If the RM time constant is <\1/2\ the FTIR 
CEM time constant, brief fluctuations in analyte concentrations which 
are not adequately measured with the slower FTIR CEM time constant can 
be excluded from the run average along with the corresponding RM 
measurements. However, the FTIR CEM run average must still include at 
least 10 measurements over a 1-hr period.

                   12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis

    12.1 Spike Dilution Ratio, Expected Concentration. The Method 301 
bias is calculated as follows.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.466

Where:

B=Bias at the spike level
S<INF>m</INF>=Mean of the observed spiked sample concentrations
M<INF>m</INF>=Mean of the observed unspiked sample concentrations
CS=Expected value of the spiked concentration.

    The CS is determined by comparing the SF<INF>6</INF> tracer 
concentration in undiluted spike gas to the SF<INF>6</INF> tracer 
concentrations in the spiked samples;
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.467

The expected concentration (CS) is the measured concentration of the 
analyte in undiluted spike gas divided by the dilution factor
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.468

Where:

[anal]<INF>dir</INF>=The analyte concentration in undiluted spike gas 
measured directly by filling the FTIR cell with the spike gas.

If the bias is statistically significant (Section 12.2), Method 301 
requires that a correction factor, CF, be multiplied by the analytical 
results, and that 0.7 <= CF <= 1.3.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.469

    12.2 Statistical Analysis of Validation Measurements. Arrange the 
independent measurements (or measurement averages) as in Table 1. More 
than 12 pairs of measurements can be analyzed. The statistical analysis 
follows EPA Method 301, Section 6.3. Section 12.1 of this performance 
specification shows the calculations for the bias, expected

[[Page 666]]

spike concentration, and correction factor. This Section shows the 
determination of the statistical significance of the bias. Determine the 
statistical significance of the bias at the 95 percent confidence level 
by calculating the t-value for the set of measurements. First, calculate 
the differences, d<INF>i</INF>, for each pair of spiked and each pair of 
unspiked measurements. Then calculate the standard deviation of the 
spiked pairs of measurements.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.470

Where:

d<INF>i</INF>=The differences between pairs of spiked measurements.
SD<INF>s</INF>=The standard deviation in the d<INF>i</INF> values.
n=The number of spiked pairs, 2n=12 for the minimum of 12 spiked and 12 
unspiked measurements.

Calculate the relative standard deviation, RSD, using SD<INF>s</INF> and 
the mean of the spiked concentrations, S<INF>m</INF>. The RSD must be 
<=50%.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.471

Repeat the calculations in equations 7 and 8 to determine SD<INF>u</INF> 
and RSD, respectively, for the unspiked samples. Calculate the standard 
deviation of the mean using SD<INF>s</INF> and SD<INF>u</INF> from 
equation 7.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.472

The t-statistic is calculated as follows to test the bias for 
statistical significance;
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17OC00.473

where the bias, B, and the correction factor, CF, are given in Section 
12.1. For 11 degrees of freedom, and a one-tailed distribution, Method 
301 requires that t <=2.201. If the t-statistic indicates the bias is 
statistically significant, then analytical measurements must be 
multiplied by the correction factor. There is no limitation on the 
number of measurements, but there must be at least 12 independent spiked 
and 12 independent unspiked measurements. Refer to the t-distribution 
(Table 2) at the 95 percent confidence level and appropriate degrees of 
freedom for the critical t-value.

                             16.0 References

    1. Method 318, 40 CFR, Part 63, Appendix A (Draft), ``Measurement of 
Gaseous Formaldehyde, Phenol and Methanol Emissions by FTIR 
Spectroscopy,'' EPA Contract No. 68D20163, Work Assignment 2-18, 
February, 1995.
    2. ``EPA Protocol for the Use of Extractive Fourier Transform 
Infrared (FTIR) Spectrometry in Analyses of Gaseous Emissions from 
Stationary Industrial Sources,'' February, 1995.
    3. ``Measurement of Gaseous Organic and Inorganic Emissions by 
Extractive FTIR

[[Page 667]]

Spectroscopy,'' EPA Contract No. 68-D2-0165, Work Assignment 3-08.
    4. ``Method 301--Field Validation of Pollutant Measurement Methods 
from Various Waste Media,'' 40 CFR 63, App A.

         17.0 Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data

                    Table 1--Arrangement of Validation Measurements for Statistical Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Measurement  (or average)        Time        Spiked  (ppm)      di spiked     Unspiked  (ppm)    di unspiked
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................  ..............              S1   ...............              U1
--------------------------------------------------------------                 -----------------
2...........................  ..............              S2            S2-S1               U2            U2-U1
-----------------------------
3...........................  ..............              S3   ...............              U3
--------------------------------------------------------------                 -----------------
4...........................  ..............              S4            S4-S3               U4            U4-U3
-----------------------------
5...........................  ..............              S5   ...............              U5
--------------------------------------------------------------                 -----------------
6...........................  ..............              S6            S6-S5               U6            U6-U5
-----------------------------
7...........................  ..............              S7   ...............              U7
--------------------------------------------------------------                 -----------------
8...........................  ..............              S8            S8-S7               U8            U8-U7
-----------------------------
9...........................  ..............              S9   ...............              U9
--------------------------------------------------------------                 -----------------
10..........................  ..............             S10           S10-S9              U10           U10-U9
-----------------------------
11..........................  ..............             S11   ...............             U11
--------------------------------------------------------------                 -----------------
12..........................  ..............             S12          S12-S11              U12          U12-U11
-----------------------------
Average -<ls-thn-eq>........  ..............              Sm   ...............              Mm
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                Table 2--t=Values
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     n-1a         t-value         n-1a         t-value        n-1a         t-value        n-1a         t-value
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         11          2.201             17         2.110            23         2.069            29         2.045
         12          2.179             18         2.101            24         2.064            30         2.042
         13          2.160             19         2.093            25         2.060            40         2.021
         14          2.145             20         2.086            26         2.056            60         2.000
         15          2.131             21         2.080            27         2.052           120         1.980
         16          2.120             22         2.074            28         2.048             8        1.960
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a)n is the number of independent pairs of measurements (a pair consists of one spiked and its corresponding
  unspiked measurement). Either discreet (independent) measurements in a single run, or run averages can be
  used.


[48 FR 13327, Mar. 30, 1983 and 48 FR 23611, May 25, 1983, as amended at 
48 FR 32986, July 20, 1983; 51 FR 31701, Aug. 5, 1985; 52 FR 17556, May 
11, 1987; 52 FR 30675, Aug. 18, 1987; 52 FR 34650, Sept. 14, 1987; 53 FR 
7515, Mar. 9, 1988; 53 FR 41335, Oct. 21, 1988; 55 FR 18876, May 7, 
1990; 55 FR 40178, Oct. 2, 1990; 55 FR 47474, Nov. 14, 1990; 56 FR 5526, 
Feb. 11, 1991; 59 FR 64593, Dec. 15, 1994; 64 FR 53032, Sept. 30, 1999; 
65 FR 62130, 62144, Oct. 17, 2000; 65 FR 48920, Aug. 10, 2000; 69 FR 
1802, Jan. 12, 2004]

    Effective Date Note: At 70 FR 28673, May 18, 2005, appendix B to 
part 60 was amended by adding in numerical order new Performance 
Specification 12A, effective July 18, 2005. For the convenience of the 
user, the added text is set forth as follows:

            Appendix B to Part 60--Performance Specifications

                                * * * * *

 Performance Specification 12A--Specifications and Test Procedures For 
  Total Vapor Phase Mercury Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in 
                           Stationary Sources

                        1.0 Scope and Application

    1.1 Analyte.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Analyte                              CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mercury (Hg)................................................   7439-97-6
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 668]]

    1.2 Applicability.
    1.2.1 This specification is for evaluating the acceptability of 
total vapor phase Hg continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) 
installed on the exit gases from fossil fuel fired boilers at the time 
of or soon after installation and whenever specified in the regulations. 
The Hg CEMS must be capable of measuring the total concentration in 
[mu]g/m\3\ (regardless of speciation) of vapor phase Hg, and recording 
that concentration on a wet or dry basis. Particle bound Hg is not 
included in the measurements.
    This specification is not designed to evaluate an installed CEMS's 
performance over an extended period of time nor does it identify 
specific calibration techniques and auxiliary procedures to assess the 
CEMS's performance. The source owner or operator, however, is 
responsible to calibrate, maintain, and operate the CEMS properly. The 
Administrator may require, under Clean Air Act (CAA) section 114, the 
operator to conduct CEMS performance evaluations at other times besides 
the initial test to evaluate the CEMS performance. See Sec. 60.13(c).
    1.2.2 For an affected facility that is also subject to the 
requirements of subpart I of part 75 of this chapter, the owner or 
operator may conduct the performance evaluation of the Hg CEMS according 
to Sec. 75.20(c)(1) of this chapter and section 6 of appendix A to part 
75 of this chapter, in lieu of following the procedures in this 
performance specification.

                2.0 Summary of Performance Specification.

    Procedures for measuring CEMS relative accuracy, measurement error 
and drift are outlined. CEMS installation and measurement location 
specifications, and data reduction procedures are included. Conformance 
of the CEMS with the Performance Specification is determined.

                            3.0 Definitions.

    3.1 Continuous Emission Monitoring System (CEMS) means the total 
equipment required for the determination of a pollutant concentration. 
The system consists of the following major subsystems:
    3.2 Sample Interface means that portion of the CEMS used for one or 
more of the following: sample acquisition, sample transport, sample 
conditioning, and protection of the monitor from the effects of the 
stack effluent.
    3.3 Hg Analyzer means that portion of the Hg CEMS that measures the 
total vapor phase Hg mass concentration and generates a proportional 
output.
    3.4 Data Recorder means that portion of the CEMS that provides a 
permanent electronic record of the analyzer output. The data recorder 
may provide automatic data reduction and CEMS control capabilities.
    3.5 Span Value means the upper limit of the intended Hg 
concentration measurement range. The span value is a value equal to two 
times the emission standard. Alternatively, for an affected facility 
that is also subject to the requirements of subpart I of part 75 of this 
chapter, the Hg span value(s) may be determined according to section 
2.1.7 of appendix A to part 75 of this chapter.
    3.6 Measurement Error (ME) means the absolute value of the 
difference between the concentration indicated by the Hg analyzer and 
the known concentration generated by a reference gas, expressed as a 
percentage of the span value, when the entire CEMS, including the 
sampling interface, is challenged. An ME test procedure is performed to 
document the accuracy and linearity of the Hg CEMS at several points 
over the measurement range.
    3.7 Upscale Drift (UD) means the absolute value of the difference 
between the CEMS output response and an upscale Hg reference gas, 
expressed as a percentage of the span value, when the entire CEMS, 
including the sampling interface, is challenged after a stated period of 
operation during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment 
took place.
    3.8 Zero Drift (ZD) means the absolute value of the difference 
between the CEMS output response and a zero-level Hg reference gas, 
expressed as a percentage of the span value, when the entire CEMS, 
including the sampling interface, is challenged after a stated period of 
operation during which no unscheduled maintenance, repair, or adjustment 
took place.
    3.9 Relative Accuracy (RA) means the absolute mean difference 
between the pollutant concentration(s) determined by the CEMS and the 
value determined by the reference method (RM) plus the 2.5 percent error 
confidence coefficient of a series of tests divided by the mean of the 
RM tests. Alternatively, for low concentration sources, the RA may be 
expressed as the absolute value of the difference between the mean CEMS 
and RM values.

                      4.0 Interferences. [Reserved]

                               5.0 Safety.

    The procedures required under this performance specification may 
involve hazardous materials, operations, and equipment. This performance 
specification may not address all of the safety problems associated with 
these procedures. It is the responsibility of the user to establish 
appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicable 
regulatory limitations prior to performing these procedures. The CEMS 
user's manual and materials recommended by the RM should be consulted 
for specific precautions to be taken.

[[Page 669]]

                       6.0 Equipment and Supplies.

    6.1 CEMS Equipment Specifications.
    6.1.1 Data Recorder Scale. The Hg CEMS data recorder output range 
must include zero and a high level value. The high level value must be 
approximately two times the Hg concentration corresponding to the 
emission standard level for the stack gas under the circumstances 
existing as the stack gas is sampled. A lower high level value may be 
used, provided that the measured values do not exceed 95 percent of the 
high level value. Alternatively, for an affected facility that is also 
subject to the requirements of subpart I of part 75 of this chapter, the 
owner or operator may set the full-scale range(s) of the Hg analyzer 
according to section 2.1.7 of appendix A to part 75 of this chapter.
    6.1.2 The CEMS design should also provide for the determination of 
calibration drift at a zero value (zero to 20 percent of the span value) 
and at an upscale value (between 50 and 100 percent of the high-level 
value).
    6.2 Reference Gas Delivery System. The reference gas delivery system 
must be designed so that the flowrate of reference gas introduced to the 
CEMS is the same at all three challenge levels specified in Section 7.1 
and at all times exceeds the flow requirements of the CEMS.
    6.3 Other equipment and supplies, as needed by the applicable 
reference method used. See Section 8.6.2.

                       7.0 Reagents and Standards.

    7.1 Reference Gases. Reference gas standards are required for both 
elemental and oxidized Hg (Hg and mercuric chloride, HgCl<INF>2</INF>). 
The use of National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)-
certified or NIST-traceable standards and reagents is required. The 
following gas concentrations are required.
    7.1.1 Zero-level. 0 to 20 percent of the span value.
    7.1.2 Mid-level. 50 to 60 percent of the span value.
    7.1.3 High-level. 80 to 100 percent of the span value.
    7.2 Reference gas standards may also be required for the reference 
methods. See Section 8.6.2.

           8.0 Performance Specification (PS) Test Procedure.

    8.1 Installation and Measurement Location Specifications.
    8.1.1 CEMS Installation. Install the CEMS at an accessible location 
downstream of all pollution control equipment. Since the Hg CEMS sample 
system normally extracts gas from a single point in the stack, use a 
location that has been shown to be free of stratification for 
SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> through concentration measurement 
traverses for those gases. If the cause of failure to meet the RA test 
requirement is determined to be the measurement location and a 
satisfactory correction technique cannot be established, the 
Administrator may require the CEMS to be relocated.
    Measurement locations and points or paths that are most likely to 
provide data that will meet the RA requirements are listed below.
    8.1.2 Measurement Location. The measurement location should be (1) 
at least two equivalent diameters downstream of the nearest control 
device, point of pollutant generation or other point at which a change 
of pollutant concentration may occur, and (2) at least half an 
equivalent diameter upstream from the effluent exhaust. The equivalent 
duct diameter is calculated as per 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 1.
    8.1.3 Hg CEMS Sample Extraction Point. Use a sample extraction point 
(1) no less than 1.0 meter from the stack or duct wall, or (2) within 
the centroidal velocity traverse area of the stack or duct cross 
section.
    8.2 RM Measurement Location and Traverse Points. Refer to PS 2 of 
this appendix. The RM and CEMS locations need not be immediately 
adjacent.
    8.3 ME Test Procedure. The Hg CEMS must be constructed to permit the 
introduction of known concentrations of Hg and HgCl<INF>2</INF> 
separately into the sampling system of the CEMS immediately preceding 
the sample extraction filtration system such that the entire CEMS can be 
challenged. Sequentially inject each of the three reference gases (zero, 
mid-level, and high level) for each Hg species. Record the CEMS response 
and subtract the reference value from the CEMS value, and express the 
absolute value of the difference as a percentage of the span value (see 
example data sheet in Figure 12A-1). For each reference gas, the 
absolute value of the difference between the CEMS response and the 
reference value shall not exceed 5 percent of the span value. If this 
specification is not met, identify and correct the problem before 
proceeding.
    8.4 UD Test Procedure.
    8.4.1 UD Test Period. While the affected facility is operating at 
more than 50 percent of normal load, or as specified in an applicable 
subpart, determine the magnitude of the UD once each day (at 24-hour 
intervals, to the extent practicable) for 7 consecutive unit operating 
days according to the procedure given in Sections 8.4.2 through 8.4.3. 
The 7 consecutive unit operating days need not be 7 consecutive calendar 
days. Use either Hg[deg] or HgCl<INF>2</INF> standards for this test.
    8.4.2 The purpose of the UD measurement is to verify the ability of 
the CEMS to conform to the established CEMS response used for 
determining emission concentrations or emission rates. Therefore, if 
periodic automatic or manual adjustments are made to

[[Page 670]]

the CEMS zero and response settings, conduct the UD test immediately 
before these adjustments, or conduct it in such a way that the UD can be 
determined.
    8.4.3 Conduct the UD test at either the mid-level or high-level 
point specified in Section 7.1. Introduce the reference gas to the CEMS. 
Record the CEMS response and subtract the reference value from the CEMS 
value, and express the absolute value of the difference as a percentage 
of the span value (see example data sheet in Figure 12A-1). For the 
reference gas, the absolute value of the difference between the CEMS 
response and the reference value shall not exceed 5 percent of the span 
value. If this specification is not met, identify and correct the 
problem before proceeding.
    8.5 ZD Test Procedure.
    8.5.1 ZD Test Period. While the affected facility is operating at 
more than 50 percent of normal load, or as specified in an applicable 
subpart, determine the magnitude of the ZD once each day (at 24-hour 
intervals, to the extent practicable) for 7 consecutive unit operating 
days according to the procedure given in Sections 8.5.2 through 8.5.3. 
The 7 consecutive unit operating days need not be 7 consecutive calendar 
days. Use either nitrogen, air, Hg[deg] , or HgCl<INF>2</INF> standards 
for this test.
    8.5.2 The purpose of the ZD measurement is to verify the ability of 
the CEMS to conform to the established CEMS response used for 
determining emission concentrations or emission rates. Therefore, if 
periodic automatic or manual adjustments are made to the CEMS zero and 
response settings, conduct the ZD test immediately before these 
adjustments, or conduct it in such a way that the ZD can be determined.
    8.5.3 Conduct the ZD test at the zero level specified in Section 
7.1. Introduce the zero gas to the CEMS. Record the CEMS response and 
subtract the zero value from the CEMS value and express the absolute 
value of the difference as a percentage of the span value (see example 
data sheet in Figure 12A-1). For the zero gas, the absolute value of the 
difference between the CEMS response and the reference value shall not 
exceed 5 percent of the span value. If this specification is not met, 
identify and correct the problem before proceeding.
    8.6 RA Test Procedure.
    8.6.1 RA Test Period. Conduct the RA test according to the procedure 
given in Sections 8.6.2 through 8.6.6 while the affected facility is 
operating at normal full load, or as specified in an applicable subpart. 
The RA test may be conducted during the ZD and UD test period.
    8.6.2 RM. Unless otherwise specified in an applicable subpart of the 
regulations, use either Method 29 in appendix A to this part, or 
American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Method D 6784-02 
(incorporated by reference, see Sec. 60.17) as the RM for Hg 
concentration. Alternatively, an instrumental RM may be used, subject to 
the approval of the Administrator. Do not include the filterable portion 
of the sample when making comparisons to the CEMS results. When Method 
29 or ASTM D6784-02 is used, conduct the RM test runs with paired or 
duplicate sampling systems. When an approved instrumental method is 
used, paired sampling systems are not required. If the RM and CEMS 
measure on a different moisture basis, data derived with Method 4 in 
appendix A to this part shall also be obtained during the RA test.
    8.6.3 Sampling Strategy for RM Tests. Conduct the RM tests in such a 
way that they will yield results representative of the emissions from 
the source and can be compared to the CEMS data. It is preferable to 
conduct moisture measurements (if needed) and Hg measurements 
simultaneously, although moisture measurements that are taken within an 
hour of the Hg measurements may be used to adjust the Hg concentrations 
to a consistent moisture basis. In order to correlate the CEMS and RM 
data properly, note the beginning and end of each RM test period for 
each paired RM run (including the exact time of day) on the CEMS chart 
recordings or other permanent record of output.
    8.6.4 Number and length of RM Tests. Conduct a minimum of nine RM 
test runs. When Method 29 or ASTM D6784-02 is used, only test runs for 
which the data from the paired RM trains meet the relative deviation 
(RD) criteria of this PS shall be used in the RA calculations. In 
addition, for Method 29 and ASTM D 6784-02, use a minimum sample run 
time of 2 hours.

    Note: More than nine sets of RM tests may be performed. If this 
option is chosen, paired RM test results may be excluded so long as the 
total number of paired RM test results used to determine the CEMS RA is 
greater than or equal to nine. However, all data must be reported, 
including the excluded data.

    8.6.5 Correlation of RM and CEMS Data. Correlate the CEMS and the RM 
test data as to the time and duration by first determining from the CEMS 
final output (the one used for reporting) the integrated average 
pollutant concentration for each RM test period. Consider system 
response time, if important, and confirm that the results are on a 
consistent moisture basis with the RM test. Then, compare each 
integrated CEMS value against the corresponding RM value. When Method 29 
or ASTM D6784-02 is used, compare each CEMS value against the 
corresponding average of the paired RM values.
    8.6.6 Paired RM Outliers.
    8.6.6.1 When Method 29 or ASTM D6784-02 is used, outliers are 
identified through the

[[Page 671]]

determination of relative deviation (RD) of the paired RM tests. Data 
that do not meet this criteria should be flagged as a data quality 
problem. The primary reason for performing paired RM sampling is to 
ensure the quality of the RM data. The percent RD of paired data is the 
parameter used to quantify data quality. Determine RD for two paired 
data points as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.021

where C<INF>a</INF> and C<INF>b</INF> are concentration values 
determined from each of the two samples respectively.
    8.6.6.2 A minimum performance criteria for RM Hg data is that RD for 
any data pair must be <=10 percent as long as the mean Hg concentration 
is greater than 1.0 [mu]g/m\3\. If the mean Hg concentration is less 
than or equal to 1.0 [mu]g/m\3\, the RD must be <=20 percent. Pairs of 
RM data exceeding these RD criteria should be eliminated from the data 
set used to develop a Hg CEMS correlation or to assess CEMS RA.
    8.6.7 Calculate the mean difference between the RM and CEMS values 
in the units of micrograms per cubic meter ([mu]g/m\3\), the standard 
deviation, the confidence coefficient, and the RA according to the 
procedures in Section 12.0.
    8.7 Reporting. At a minimum (check with the appropriate EPA Regional 
Office, State or local Agency for additional requirements, if any), 
summarize in tabular form the results of the RD tests and the RA tests 
or alternative RA procedure, as appropriate. Include all data sheets, 
calculations, charts (records of CEMS responses), reference gas 
concentration certifications, and any other information necessary to 
confirm that the performance of the CEMS meets the performance criteria.

                     9.0 Quality Control. [Reserved]

            10.0 Calibration and Standardization. [Reserved]

                       11.0 Analytical Procedure.

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this PS (see 
Section 8.0). Refer to the RM employed for specific analytical 
procedures.

                  12.0 Calculations and Data Analysis.

    Summarize the results on a data sheet similar to that shown in 
Figure 2-2 for PS 2.
    12.1 Consistent Basis. All data from the RM and CEMS must be 
compared in units of [mu]g/m\3\, on a consistent and identified moisture 
and volumetric basis (STP = 20 [deg]C, 760 millimeters (mm) Hg).
    12.1.1 Moisture Correction (as applicable). If the RM and CEMS 
measure Hg on a different moisture basis, use Equation 12A-2 to make the 
appropriate corrections to the Hg concentrations.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.006

    In Equation 12-A-2, B<INF>ws</INF> is the moisture content of the 
flue gas from Method 4, expressed as a decimal fraction (e.g., for 8.0 
percent H<INF>2</INF>O, B<INF>ws</INF> = 0.08).
    12.2 Arithmetic Mean. Calculate the arithmetic mean of the 
difference, d, of a data set as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.007

Where:

n = Number of data points.
    12.3 Standard Deviation. Calculate the standard deviation, 
S<INF>d</INF>, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.008

Where:

[[Page 672]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.009

    12.4 Confidence Coefficient (CC). Calculate the 2.5 percent error 
confidence coefficient (one-tailed), CC, as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.010

    12.5 RA. Calculate the RA of a set of data as follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.011
    
Where:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18MY05.032

                        13.0 Method Performance.

    13.1 ME. ME is assessed at zero-level, mid-level and high-level 
values as given below using standards for both Hg<SUP>0</SUP> and 
HgCl<INF>2</INF>. The mean difference between the indicated CEMS 
concentration and the reference concentration value for each standard 
shall be no greater than 5 percent of the span value.
    13.2 UD. The UD shall not exceed 5 percent of the span value on any 
of the 7 days of the UD test.
    13.3 ZD. The ZD shall not exceed 5 percent of the span value on any 
of the 7 days of the ZD test.
    13.4 RA. The RA of the CEMS must be no greater than 20 percent of 
the mean value of the RM test data in terms of units of [mu]g/m\3\. 
Alternatively, if the mean RM is less than 5.0 [mu]g/m\3\, the results 
are acceptable if the absolute value of the difference between the mean 
RM and CEMS values does not exceed 1.0 [mu]g/m\3\.

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention. [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management. [Reserved]

                 16.0 Alternative Procedures. [Reserved]

                           17.0 Bibliography.

    17.1 40 CFR part 60, appendix B, ``Performance Specification 2--
Specifications and Test Procedures for SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF> 
Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary Sources.''
    17.2 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, ``Method 29--Determination of 
Metals Emissions from Stationary Sources.''
    17.3 ASTM Method D6784-02, ``Standard Test Method for Elemental, 
Oxidized, Particle-Bound and Total Mercury in Flue Gas Generated from 
Coal-Fired Stationary Sources (Ontario Hydro Method).''

                        18.0 Tables and Figures.

                                              Table 12A-1.--T-Values
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            na                               t0.975       na       t0.975       na       t0.975
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2........................................................     12.706          7      2.447         12      2.201
3........................................................      4.303          8      2.365         13      2.179
4........................................................      3.182          9      2.306         14      2.160
5........................................................      2.776         10      2.262         15      2.145
6........................................................      2.571         11      2.228         16     2.131
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ The values in this table are already corrected for n-1 degrees of freedom. Use n equal to the number of
  individual values.


[[Page 673]]


                                                       Figure 12A-1.--ME, ZD and UD Determination
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                          Drift or
                              Date                  Time          Reference  Gas value     CEMS  measured     Absolute  difference   measurement  error
                                                                       [mu]g/m\3\         value [mu]g/m\3\                            (% of span value)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zero level..........
                     -----------------------
 
                     -----------------------
 
                     -----------------------
 
                     =======================
Mid level...........
                     -----------------------
 
                     -----------------------
 
                     -----------------------
 
                     =======================
High level..........
                     -----------------------
 
                     -----------------------
 
                     -----------------------
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 674]]

                                * * * * *

      Appendix C to Part 60--Determination of Emission Rate Change

                             1. Introduction

    1.1 The following method shall be used to determine whether a 
physical or operational change to an existing facility resulted in an 
increase in the emission rate to the atmosphere. The method used is the 
Student's t test, commonly used to make inferences from small samples.

                                 2. Data

    2.1 Each emission test shall consist of n runs (usually three) which 
produce n emission rates. Thus two sets of emission rates are generated, 
one before and one after the change, the two sets being of equal size.
    2.2 When using manual emission tests, except as provided in Sec. 
60.8(b) of this part, the reference methods of appendix A to this part 
shall be used in accordance with the procedures specified in the 
applicable subpart both before and after the change to obtain the data.
    2.3 When using continuous monitors, the facility shall be operated 
as if a manual emission test were being performed. Valid data using the 
averaging time which would be required if a manual emission test were 
being conducted shall be used.

                              3. Procedure

    3.1 Subscripts a and b denote prechange and postchange respectively.
    3.2 Calculate the arithmetic mean emission rate, E, for each set of 
data using Equation 1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.292

Where:

Ei=Emission rate for the i th run.
n=number of runs.

    3.3 Calculate the sample variance, S2, for each set of data using 
Equation 2.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.293

    3.4 Calculate the pooled estimate, Sp, using Equation 3.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.294
    
    3.5 Calculate the test statistic, t, using Equation 4.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.295
    
                               4. Results

    4.1 If Eb<ls-thn-eq>,Ea and t<ls-thn-eq>t', where t' is the critical 
value of t obtained from Table 1, then with 95% confidence the 
difference between Eb and Ea is significant, and an increase in emission 
rate to the atmosphere has occurred.

                                 Table 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                t' (95
                                                               percent
                Degrees of freedom (na=nb-2)                  confidence
                                                                level)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2..........................................................        2.920
3..........................................................        2.353
4..........................................................        2.132
5..........................................................        2.015
6..........................................................        1.943
7..........................................................        1.895
8..........................................................        1.860
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    For greater than 8 degrees of freedom, see any standard statistical 
                                                       handbook or text.
    5.1 Assume the two performance tests produced the following set of 
data:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Test a                               Test b
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Run 1. 100..................................................         115
Run 2. 95...................................................         120
Run 3. 110..................................................         125
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    5.2 Using Equation 1--
Ea=100+95+110/3=102
Eb=115+120+125/3=120
    5.3 Using Equation 2--
Sa2=(100-102) <SUP>2</SUP>+(95-102) <SUP>2</SUP>+(110-102) <SUP>2</SUP>/
3-1=58.5
Sb2=(115-120) <SUP>2</SUP>+(120-120) <SUP>2</SUP>+(125-120) 
<SUP>2</SUP>/3-1=25
    5.4 Using Equation 3--
Sp=[(3-1)(58.5)+(3+1)(25)/3+3-2] \1/2\=6.46
    5.5 Using Equation 4--
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.296
    
    5.6 Since (n\1\+n\2\-2)=4, t'=2.132 (from Table 1). Thus since t>t' 
the difference in the values of Ea and Eb is significant, and there has 
been an increase in emission rate to the atmosphere.

                      6. Continuous Monitoring Data

    6.1 Hourly averages from continuous monitoring devices, where 
available, should be used as data points and the above procedure 
followed.

[40 FR 58420, Dec. 16, 1975]

[[Page 675]]

     Appendix D to Part 60--Required Emission Inventory Information

    (a) Completed NEDS point source form(s) for the entire plant 
containing the designated facility, including information on the 
applicable criteria pollutants. If data concerning the plant are already 
in NEDS, only that information must be submitted which is necessary to 
update the existing NEDS record for that plant. Plant and point 
identification codes for NEDS records shall correspond to those 
previously assigned in NEDS; for plants not in NEDS, these codes shall 
be obtained from the appropriate Regional Office.
    (b) Accompanying the basic NEDS information shall be the following 
information on each designated facility:
    (1) The state and county identification codes, as well as the 
complete plant and point identification codes of the designated facility 
in NEDS. (The codes are needed to match these data with the NEDS data.)
    (2) A description of the designated facility including, where 
appropriate:
    (i) Process name.
    (ii) Description and quantity of each product (maximum per hour and 
average per year).
    (iii) Description and quantity of raw materials handled for each 
product (maximum per hour and average per year).
    (iv) Types of fuels burned, quantities and characteristics (maximum 
and average quantities per hour, average per year).
    (v) Description and quantity of solid wastes generated (per year) 
and method of disposal.
    (3) A description of the air pollution control equipment in use or 
proposed to control the designated pollutant, including:
    (i) Verbal description of equipment.
    (ii) Optimum control efficiency, in percent. This shall be a 
combined efficiency when more than one device operates in series. The 
method of control efficiency determination shall be indicated (e.g., 
design efficiency, measured efficiency, estimated efficiency).
    (iii) Annual average control efficiency, in percent, taking into 
account control equipment down time. This shall be a combined efficiency 
when more than one device operates in series.
    (4) An estimate of the designated pollutant emissions from the 
designated facility (maximum per hour and average per year). The method 
of emission determination shall also be specified (e.g., stack test, 
material balance, emission factor).

[40 FR 53349, Nov. 17, 1975]

                    Appendix E to Part 60 [Reserved]

           Appendix F to Part 60--Quality Assurance Procedures

Procedure 1. Quality Assurance Requirements for Gas Continuous Emission 
          Monitoring Systems Used for Compliance Determination

                     1. Applicability and Principle

    1.1 Applicability. Procedure 1 is used to evaluate the effectiveness 
of quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) procedures and the 
quality of data produced by any continuous emission monitoring system 
(CEMS) that is used for determining compliance with the emission 
standards on a continuous basis as specified in the applicable 
regulation. The CEMS may include pollutant (e.g., S0<INF>2</INF> and 
N0<INF>x</INF>) and diluent (e.g., 0<INF>2</INF> or C0<INF>2</INF>) 
monitors.
    This procedure specifies the minimum QA requirements necessary for 
the control and assessment of the quality of CEMS data submitted to the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Source owners and operators 
responsible for one or more CEMS's used for compliance monitoring must 
meet these minimum requirements and are encouraged to develop and 
implement a more extensive QA program or to continue such programs where 
they already exist.
    Data collected as a result of QA and QC measures required in this 
procedure are to be submitted to the Agency. These data are to be used 
by both the Agency and the CEMS operator in assessing the effectiveness 
of the CEMS QC and QA procedures in the maintenance of acceptable CEMS 
operation and valid emission data.
    Appendix F, Procedure 1 is applicable December 4, 1987. The first 
CEMS accuracy assessment shall be a relative accuracy test audit (RATA) 
(see section 5) and shall be completed by March 4, 1988 or the date of 
the initial performance test required by the applicable regulation, 
whichever is later.
    1.2 Principle. The QA procedures consist of two distinct and equally 
important functions. One function is the assessment of the quality of 
the CEMS data by estimating accuracy. The other function is the control 
and improvement of the quality of the CEMS data by implementing QC 
policies and corrective actions. These two functions form a control 
loop: When the assessment function indicates that the data quality is 
inadequate, the control effort must be increased until the data quality 
is acceptable. In order to provide uniformity in the assessment and 
reporting of data quality, this procedure explicitly specifies the 
assessment methods for response drift and accuracy. The methods are 
based on procedures included in the applicable performance 
specifications (PS's) in appendix B of 40 CFR part 60. Procedure 1 also 
requires the analysis of the EPA audit

[[Page 676]]

samples concurrent with certain reference method (RM) analyses as 
specified in the applicable RM's.
    Because the control and corrective action function encompasses a 
variety of policies, specifications, standards, and corrective measures, 
this procedure treats QC requirements in general terms to allow each 
source owner or operator to develop a QC system that is most effective 
and efficient for the circumstances.

                             2. Definitions

    2.1 Continuous Emission Monitoring System. The total equipment 
required for the determination of a gas concentration or emission rate.
    2.2 Diluent Gas. A major gaseous constituent in a gaseous pollutant 
mixture. For combustion sources, CO<INF>2</INF> and O<INF>2</INF> are 
the major gaseous constituents of interest.
    2.3 Span Value. The upper limit of a gas concentration measurement 
range that is specified for affected source categories in the applicable 
subpart of the regulation.
    2.4 Zero, Low-Level, and High-Level Values. The CEMS response values 
related to the source specific span value. Determination of zero, low-
level, and high-level values is defined in the appropriate PS in 
appendix B of this part.
    2.5 Calibration Drift (CD). The difference in the CEMS output 
reading from a reference value after a period of operation during which 
no unscheduled maintenance, repair or adjustment took place. The 
reference value may be supplied by a cylinder gas, gas cell, or optical 
filter and need not be certified.
    2.6 Relative Accuracy (RA). The absolute mean difference between the 
gas concentration or emission rate determined by the CEMS and the value 
determined by the RM's plus the 2.5 percent error confidence coefficient 
of a series of tests divided by the mean of the RM tests or the 
applicable emission limit.

                           3. QC Requirements

    Each source owner or operator must develop and implement a QC 
program. As a minimum, each QC program must include written procedures 
which should describe in detail, complete, step-by-step procedures and 
operations for each of the following activities:
    1. Calibration of CEMS.
    2. CD determination and adjustment of CEMS.
    3. Preventive maintenance of CEMS (including spare parts inventory).
    4. Data recording, calculations, and reporting.
    5. Accuracy audit procedures including sampling and analysis 
methods.
    6. Program of corrective action for malfunctioning CEMS.
    As described in Section 5.2, whenever excessive inaccuracies occur 
for two consecutive quarters, the source owner or operator must revise 
the current written procedures or modify or replace the CEMS to correct 
the deficiency causing the excessive inaccuracies.
    These written procedures must be kept on record and available for 
inspection by the enforcement agency.

                            4. CD Assessment

    4.1 CD Requirement. As described in 40 CFR 60.13(d), source owners 
and operators of CEMS must check, record, and quantify the CD at two 
concentration values at least once daily (approximately 24 hours) in 
accordance with the method prescribed by the manufacturer. The CEMS 
calibration must, as minimum, be adjusted whenever the daily zero (or 
low-level) CD or the daily high-level CD exceeds two times the limits of 
the applicable PS's in appendix B of this regulation.
    4.2 Recording Requirement for Automatic CD Adjusting Monitors. 
Monitors that automatically adjust the data to the corrected calibration 
values (e.g., microprocessor control) must be programmed to record the 
unadjusted concentration measured in the CD prior to resetting the 
calibration, if performed, or record the amount of adjustment.
    4.3 Criteria for Excessive CD. If either the zero (or low-level) or 
high-level CD result exceeds twice the applicable drift specification in 
appendix B for five, consecutive, daily periods, the CEMS is out-of-
control. If either the zero (or low-level) or high-level CD result 
exceeds four times the applicable drift specification in appendix B 
during any CD check, the CEMS is out-of-control. If the CEMS is out-of-
control, take necessary corrective action. Following corrective action, 
repeat the CD checks.
    4.3.1 Out-Of-Control Period Definition. The beginning of the out-of-
control period is the time corresponding to the completion of the fifth, 
consecutive, daily CD check with a CD in excess of two times the 
allowable limit, or the time corresponding to the completion of the 
daily CD check preceding the daily CD check that results in a CD in 
excess of four times the allowable limit. The end of the out-of-control 
period is the time corresponding to the completion of the CD check 
following corrective action that results in the CD's at both the zero 
(or low-level) and high-level measurement points being within the 
corresponding allowable CD limit (i.e., either two times or four times 
the allowable limit in appendix B).
    4.3.2 CEMS Data Status During Out-of-Control Period. During the 
period the CEMS is out-of-control, the CEMS data may not be used in 
calculating emission compliance nor be counted towards meeting minimum 
data availability as required and described in the applicable subpart 
[e.g., Sec. 60.47a(f)].

[[Page 677]]

    4.4 Data Recording and Reporting. As required in Sec. 60.7(d) of 
this regulation (40 CFR part 60), all measurements from the CEMS must be 
retained on file by the source owner for at least 2 years. However, 
emission data obtained on each successive day while the CEMS is out-of-
control may not be included as part of the minimum daily data 
requirement of the applicable subpart [e.g., Sec. 60.47a(f)] nor be 
used in the calculation of reported emissions for that period.

                       5. Data Accuracy Assessment

    5.1 Auditing Requirements. Each CEMS must be audited at least once 
each calendar quarter. Successive quarterly audits shall occur no closer 
than 2 months. The audits shall be conducted as follows:
    5.1.1 Relative Accuracy Test Audit (RATA). The RATA must be 
conducted at least once every four calendar quarters. Conduct the RATA 
as described for the RA test procedure in the applicable PS in appendix 
B (e.g., PS 2 for SO<INF>2</INF> and NO<INF>X</INF>). In addition, 
analyze the appropriate performance audit samples received from EPA as 
described in the applicable sampling methods (e.g., Methods 6 and 7).
    5.1.2 Cylinder Gas Audit (CGA). If applicable, a CGA may be 
conducted in three of four calendar quarters, but in no more than three 
quarters in succession.
    To conduct a CGA: (1) Challenge the CEMS (both pollutant and diluent 
portions of the CEMS, if applicable) with an audit gas of known 
concentration at two points within the following ranges:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Audit range
           -------------------------------------------------------------
   Audit                                  Diluent monitors for--
   point     Pollutant monitors ----------------------------------------
                                         CO2                  O2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.........  20 to 30% of span    5 to 8% by volume..  4 to 6% by volume.
             value.
2.........  50 to 60% of span    10 to 14% by volume  8 to 12% by
             value.                                    volume.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Challenge the CEMS three times at each audit point, and use the 
average of the three responses in determining accuracy.
    Use of separate audit gas cylinder for audit points 1 and 2. Do not 
dilute gas from audit cylinder when challenging the CEMS.
    The monitor should be challenged at each audit point for a 
sufficient period of time to assure adsorption-desorption of the CEMS 
sample transport surfaces has stabilized.
    (2) Operate each monitor in its normal sampling mode, i.e., pass the 
audit gas through all filters, scrubbers, conditioners, and other 
monitor components used during normal sampling, and as much of the 
sampling probe as is practical. At a minimum, the audit gas should be 
introduced at the connection between the probe and the sample line.
    (3) Use audit gases that have been certified by comparision to 
National Bureau of Standards (NBS) gaseous Standard Reference Materials 
(SRM's) or NBS/EPA approved gas manufacturer's Certified Reference 
Materials (CRM's) (See Citation 1) following EPA Traceability Protocol 
No. 1 (See Citation 2). As an alternative to Protocol No. 1 audit gases, 
CRM's may be used directly as audit gases. A list of gas manufacturers 
that have prepared approved CRM's is available from EPA at the address 
shown in Citation 1. Procedures for preparation of CRM's are described 
in Citation 1. Procedures for preparation of EPA Traceability Protocol 1 
materials are described in Citation 2.
    The difference between the actual concentration of the audit gas and 
the concentration indicated by the monitor is used to assess the 
accuracy of the CEMS.
    5.1.3 Relative Accuracy Audit (RAA). The RAA may be conducted three 
of four calendar quarters, but in no more than three quarters in 
succession. To conduct a RAA, follow the procedure described in the 
applicable PS in appendix B for the relative accuracy test, except that 
only three sets of measurement data are required. Analyses of EPA 
performance audit samples are also required.
    The relative difference between the mean of the RM values and the 
mean of the CEMS responses will be used to assess the accuracy of the 
CEMS.
    5.1.4 Other Alternative Audits. Other alternative audit procedures 
may be used as approved by the Administrator for three of four calendar 
quarters. One RATA is required at least once every four calendar 
quarters.
    5.2 Excessive Audit Inaccuracy. If the RA, using the RATA, CGA, or 
RAA exceeds the criteria in section 5.2.3, the CEMS is out-of-control. 
If the CEMS is out-of-control, take necessary corrective action to 
eliminate the problem. Following corrective action, the source owner or 
operator must audit the CEMS with a RATA, CGA, or RAA to determine if 
the CEMS is operating within the specifications. A RATA must always be 
used following an out-of-control period resulting from a RATA. The audit 
following corrective action does not require analysis of EPA performance 
audit samples. If audit results show the CEMS to be out-of-control, the 
CEMS operator shall report both the audit showing the CEMS to be out-of-
control and the results of the audit following corrective action showing 
the CEMS to be operating within specifications.
    5.2.1 Out-Of-Control Period Definition. The beginning of the out-of-
control period is the time corresponding to the completion of the 
sampling for the RATA, RAA, or CGA. The end of the out-of-control period 
is the time corresponding to the completion of the sampling of the 
subsequent successful audit.

[[Page 678]]

    5.2.2 CEMS Data Status During Out-Of-Control Period. During the 
period the monitor is out-of-control, the CEMS data may not be used in 
calculating emission compliance nor be counted towards meeting minimum 
data availabilty as required and described in the applicable subpart 
[e.g., Sec. 60.47a(f)].
    5.2.3 Criteria for Excessive Audit Inaccuracy. Unless specified 
otherwise in the applicable subpart, the criteria for excessive 
inaccuracy are:
    (1) For the RATA, the allowable RA in the applicable PS in appendix 
B.
    (2) For the CGA, <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 percent of the average 
audit value or <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ppm, whichever is greater.
    (3) For the RAA, <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 percent of the three run 
average or <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>7.5 percent of the applicable standard, 
whichever is greater.
    5.3 Criteria for Acceptable QC Procedure. Repeated excessive 
inaccuracies (i.e., out-of-control conditions resulting from the 
quarterly audits) indicates the QC procedures are inadequate or that the 
CEMS is incapable of providing quality data. Therefore, whenever 
excessive inaccuracies occur for two consective quarters, the source 
owner or operator must revise the QC procedures (see Section 3) or 
modify or replace the CEMS.

                 6. Calculations for CEMS Data Accuracy

    6.1 RATA RA Calculation. Follow the equations described in Section 8 
of appendix B, PS 2 to calculate the RA for the RATA. The RATA must be 
calculated in units of the applicable emission standard (e.g., ng/J).
    6.2 RAA Accuracy Calculation. Use Equation 1-1 to calculate the 
accuracy for the RAA. The RAA must be calculated in units of the 
applicable emission standard (e.g., ng/J).
    6.3 CGA Accuracy Calculation. Use Equation 1-1 to calculate the 
accuracy for the CGA, which is calculated in units of the appropriate 
concentration (e.g., ppm SO<INF>2</INF> or percent O<INF>2</INF>). Each 
component of the CEMS must meet the acceptable accuracy requirement.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC16NO91.240

where:

    A=Accuracy of the CEMS, percent.
    C<INF>m</INF>=Average CEMS response during audit in units of 
applicable standard or appropriate concentration.
    C<INF>a</INF>=Average audit value (CGA certified value or three-run 
average for RAA) in units of applicable standard or appropriate 
concentration.

    6.4 Example Accuracy Calculations. Example calculations for the 
RATA, RAA, and CGA are available in Citation 3.

                        7. Reporting Requirements

    At the reporting interval specified in the applicable regulation, 
report for each CEMS the accuracy results from Section 6 and the CD 
assessment results from Section 4. Report the drift and accuracy 
information as a Data Assessment Report (DAR), and include one copy of 
this DAR for each quarterly audit with the report of emissions required 
under the applicable subparts of this part.
    As a minimum, the DAR must contain the following information:
    1. Source owner or operator name and address.
    2. Identification and location of monitors in the CEMS.
    3. Manufacturer and model number of each monitor in the CEMS.
    4. Assessment of CEMS data accuracy and date of assessment as 
determined by a RATA, RAA, or CGA described in Section 5 including the 
RA for the RATA, the A for the RAA or CGA, the RM results, the cylinder 
gases certified values, the CEMS responses, and the calculations results 
as defined in Section 6. If the accuracy audit results show the CEMS to 
be out-of-control, the CEMS operator shall report both the audit results 
showing the CEMS to be out-of-control and the results of the audit 
following corrective action showing the CEMS to be operating within 
specifications.
    5. Results from EPA performance audit samples described in Section 5 
and the applicable RM's.
    6. Summary of all corrective actions taken when CEMS was determined 
out-of-control, as described in Sections 4 and 5.
    An example of a DAR format is shown in Figure 1.

                             8. Bibliography

    1. ``A Procedure for Establishing Trace a bil i ty of Gas Mixtures 
to Certain National Bureau of Standards Standard Reference Materials.'' 
Joint publication by NBS and EPA-600/7-81-010. Available from the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Quality Assurance Division (MD-77). 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.
    2. ``Traceability Protocol for Establishing True Concentrations of 
Gases Used for Calibration and Audits of Continuous Source Emission 
Monitors (Protocol Number 1)'' June 1978. Section 3.0.4 of the Quality 
Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems. Volume III. 
Stationary Source Specific Methods. EPA-600/4-77-027b. August 1977. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Research and Development 
Publications, 26 West St. Clair Street, Cincinnati, OH 45268.
    3. Calculation and Interpretation of Accuracy for Continuous 
Emission Monitoring Systems (CEMS). Section 3.0.7 of the Quality

[[Page 679]]

Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems, Volume III, 
Stationary Source Specific Methods. EPA-600/4-77-027b. August 1977. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Research and Development 
Publications, 26 West St. Clair Street, Cincinnati, OH 45268.

           Figure 1--Example Format for Data Assessment Report

Period ending date______________________________________________________
Year____________________________________________________________________
Company name____________________________________________________________
Plant name______________________________________________________________
Source unit no._________________________________________________________
CEMS manufacturer_______________________________________________________
Model no._______________________________________________________________
CEMS serial no._________________________________________________________
CEMS type (e.g., in situ)_______________________________________________
CEMS sampling location (e.g., control device outlet)____________________
CEMS span values as per the applicable regulation: ------------ (e.g., 
SO<INF>2</INF> -------- ppm, NO<INF>X</INF> -------- ppm). ------------
----
    I. Accuracy assessment results (Complete A, B, or C below for each 
CEMS or for each pollutant and diluent analyzer, as applicable.) If the 
quarterly audit results show the CEMS to be out-of-control, report the 
results of both the quarterly audit and the audit following corrective 
action showing the CEMS to be operating properly.

    A. Relative accuracy test audit (RATA) for -------- (e.g., 
SO<INF>2</INF> in ng/J).

    1. Date of audit --------.
    2. Reference methods (RM's) used -------- (e.g., Methods 3 and 6).
    3. Average RM value -------- (e.g., ng/J, mg/dsm\3\, or percent 
volume).
    4. Average CEMS value --------.
    5. Absolute value of mean difference [d] --------.
    6. Confidence coefficient [CC] --------.
    7. Percent relative accuracy (RA) -------- percent.
    8. EPA performance audit results:
    a. Audit lot number (1) -------- (2) --------
    b. Audit sample number (1) -------- (2) --------
    c. Results (mg/dsm\3\) (1) -------- (2) --------
    d. Actual value (mg/dsm\3\)* (1) -------- (2) --------
    e. Relative error* (1) -------- (2) --------

    B. Cylinder gas audit (CGA) for -------- (e.g., SO<INF>2</INF> in 
ppm).

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Audit   Audit
                                      point   point
                                        1       2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Date of audit...................
2. Cylinder ID number..............
3. Date of certification...........
4. Type of certification...........  ......  ......  (e.g., EPA Protocol
                                                      1 or CRM).
5. Certified audit value...........  ......  ......  (e.g., ppm).
6. CEMS response value.............  ......  ......  (e.g., ppm).
7. Accuracy........................  ......  ......  percent.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    C. Relative accuracy audit (RAA) for -------- (e.g., SO<INF>2</INF> 
in ng/J).

    1. Date of audit --------.
    2. Reference methods (RM's) used -------- (e.g., Methods 3 and 6).
    3. Average RM value -------- (e.g., ng/J).
    4. Average CEMS value --------.
    5. Accuracy -------- percent.
    6. EPA performance audit results:
    a. Audit lot number (1) -------- (2) --------
    b. Audit sample number (1) -------- (2) --------
    c. Results (mg/dsm\3\) (1) -------- (2) --------
    d. Actual value (mg/dsm\3\) *(1) -------- (2)
    e. Relative error* (1) -------- (2) --------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    * To be completed by the Agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    D. Corrective action for excessive inaccuracy.

    1. Out-of-control periods.
    a. Date(s) --------.
    b. Number of days --------.
 2. Corrective action taken_____________________________________________
    3. Results of audit following corrective action. (Use format of A, 
B, or C above, as applicable.)

    II. Calibration drift assessment.

    A. Out-of-control periods.
    1. Date(s) --------.
    2. Number of days --------.

 B. Corrective action taken_____________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

   Procedure 2--Quality Assurance Requirements for Particulate Matter 
      Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems at Stationary Sources

       1.0 What Are the Purpose and Applicability of Procedure 2?

    The purpose of Procedure 2 is to establish the minimum requirements 
for evaluating the effectiveness of quality control (QC) and quality 
assurance (QA) procedures and the quality of data produced by your 
particulate matter (PM) continuous emission monitoring system (CEMS). 
Procedure 2 applies to PM CEMS used for continuously determining 
compliance with emission standards or operating permit limits as 
specified in an applicable regulation or permit. Other QC procedures may 
apply to diluent (e.g., O<INF>2</INF>) monitors and other auxiliary 
monitoring equipment included with your CEMS to facilitate PM 
measurement or determination of PM concentration in units specified in 
an applicable regulation.
    1.1 What measurement parameter does Procedure 2 address? Procedure 2 
covers the

[[Page 680]]

instrumental measurement of PM as defined by your source's applicable 
reference method (no Chemical Abstract Service number assigned).
    1.2 For what types of devices must I comply with Procedure 2? You 
must comply with Procedure 2 for the total equipment that:
    (1) We require you to install and operate on a continuous basis 
under the applicable regulation, and
    (2) You use to monitor the PM mass concentration associated with the 
operation of a process or emission control device.
    1.3 What are the data quality objectives (DQOs) of Procedure 2? The 
overall DQO of Procedure 2 is the generation of valid, representative 
data that can be transferred into useful information for determining PM 
CEMS concentrations averaged over a prescribed interval. Procedure 2 is 
also closely associated with Performance Specification 11 (PS-11).
    (1) Procedure 2 specifies the minimum requirements for controlling 
and assessing the quality of PM CEMS data submitted to us or the 
delegated permitting authority.
    (2) You must meet these minimum requirements if you are responsible 
for one or more PM CEMS used for compliance monitoring. We encourage you 
to develop and implement a more extensive QA program or to continue such 
programs where they already exist.
    1.4 What is the intent of the QA/QC procedures specified in 
Procedure 2? Procedure 2 is intended to establish the minimum QA/QC 
requirements for PM CEMS and is presented in general terms to allow you 
to develop a program that is most effective for your circumstances. You 
may adopt QA/QC procedures that go beyond these minimum requirements to 
ensure compliance with applicable regulations.
    1.5 When must I comply with Procedure 2? You must comply with the 
basic requirements of Procedure 2 immediately following successful 
completion of the initial correlation test of PS-11.

           2.0 What Are the Basic Requirements of Procedure 2?

    Procedure 2 requires you to perform periodic evaluations of PM CEMS 
performance and to develop and implement QA/QC programs to ensure that 
PM CEMS data quality is maintained.
    2.1 What are the basic functions of Procedure 2?
    (1) Assessment of the quality of your PM CEMS data by estimating 
measurement accuracy;
    (2) Control and improvement of the quality of your PM CEMS data by 
implementing QC requirements and corrective actions until the data 
quality is acceptable; and
    (3) Specification of requirements for daily instrument zero and 
upscale drift checks and daily sample volume checks, as well as routine 
response correlation audits, absolute correlation audits, sample volume 
audits, and relative response audits.

           3.0 What Special Definitions Apply to Procedure 2?

    The definitions in Procedure 2 include those provided in PS-11 of 
Appendix B, with the following additions:
    3.1 ``Absolute Correlation Audit (ACA)'' means an evaluation of your 
PM CEMS response to a series of reference standards covering the full 
measurement range of the instrument (e.g., 4 mA to 20 mA).
    3.2 ``Correlation Range'' means the range of PM CEMS responses used 
in the complete set of correlation test data.
    3.3 ``PM CEMS Correlation'' means the site-specific relationship 
(i.e., a regression equation) between the output from your PM CEMS 
(e.g., mA) and the particulate concentration, as determined by the 
reference method. The PM CEMS correlation is expressed in the same units 
as the PM concentration measured by your PM CEMS (e.g., mg/acm). You 
must derive this relation from PM CEMS response data and manual 
reference method data that were gathered simultaneously. These data must 
be representative of the full range of source and control device 
operating conditions that you expect to occur. You must develop the 
correlation by performing the steps presented in sections 12.2 and 12.3 
of PS-11.
    3.4 ``Reference Method Sampling Location'' means the location in 
your source's exhaust duct from which you collect manual reference 
method data for developing your PM CEMS correlation and for performing 
relative response audits (RRAs) and response correlation audits (RCAs).
    3.5 ``Response Correlation Audit (RCA)'' means the series of tests 
specified in section 10.3(8) of this procedure that you conduct to 
ensure the continued validity of your PM CEMS correlation.
    3.6 ``Relative Response Audit (RRA)'' means the brief series of 
tests specified in section 10.3(6) of this procedure that you conduct 
between consecutive RCAs to ensure the continued validity of your PM 
CEMS correlation.
    3.7 ``Sample Volume Audit (SVA)'' means an evaluation of your PM 
CEMS measurement of sample volume if your PM CEMS determines PM 
concentration based on a measure of PM mass in an extracted sample 
volume and an independent determination of sample volume.

                      4.0 Interferences [Reserved]

    5.0 What Do I Need To Know To Ensure the Safety of Persons Using 
                              Procedure 2?

    People using Procedure 2 may be exposed to hazardous materials, 
operations, and equipment. Procedure 2 does not purport to

[[Page 681]]

address all of the safety issues associated with its use. It is your 
responsibility to establish appropriate safety and health practices and 
determine the applicable regulatory limitations before performing this 
procedure. You must consult your CEMS user's manual for specific 
precautions to be taken with regard to your PM CEMS procedures.

          6.0 What Equipment and Supplies Do I Need? [Reserved]

               7.0 What Reagents and Standards Do I Need?

    You will need reference standards or procedures to perform the zero 
drift check, the upscale drift check, and the sample volume check.
    7.1 What is the reference standard value for the zero drift check? 
You must use a zero check value that is no greater than 20 percent of 
the PM CEMS's response range. You must obtain documentation on the zero 
check value from your PM CEMS manufacturer.
    7.2 What is the reference standard value for the upscale drift 
check? You must use an upscale check value that produces a response 
between 50 and 100 percent of the PM CEMS's response range. For a PM 
CEMS that produces output over a range of 4 mA to 20 mA, the upscale 
check value must produce a response in the range of 12 mA to 20 mA. You 
must obtain documentation on the upscale check value from your PM CEMS 
manufacturer.
    7.3 What is the reference standard value for the sample volume 
check? You must use a reference standard value or procedure that 
produces a sample volume value equivalent to the normal sampling rate. 
You must obtain documentation on the sample volume value from your PM 
CEMS manufacturer.

  8.0 What Sample Collection, Preservation, Storage, and Transport Are 
                 Relevant to This Procedure? [Reserved]

9.0 What Quality Control Measures Are Required by This Procedure for My 
                                PM CEMS?

    You must develop and implement a QC program for your PM CEMS. Your 
QC program must, at a minimum, include written procedures that describe, 
in detail, complete step-by-step procedures and operations for the 
activities in paragraphs (1) through (8) of this section.
    (1) Procedures for performing drift checks, including both zero 
drift and upscale drift and the sample volume check (see sections 
10.2(1), (2), and (5)).
    (2) Methods for adjustment of PM CEMS based on the results of drift 
checks, sample volume checks (if applicable), and the periodic audits 
specified in this procedure.
    (3) Preventative maintenance of PM CEMS (including spare parts 
inventory and sampling probe integrity).
    (4) Data recording, calculations, and reporting.
    (5) RCA and RRA procedures, including sampling and analysis methods, 
sampling strategy, and structuring test conditions over the prescribed 
range of PM concentrations.
    (6) Procedures for performing ACAs and SVAs and methods for 
adjusting your PM CEMS response based on ACA and SVA results.
    (7) Program of corrective action for malfunctioning PM CEMS, 
including flagged data periods.
    (8) For extractive PM CEMS, procedures for checking extractive 
system ducts for material accumulation.
    9.1 What QA/QC documentation must I have? You are required to keep 
the written QA/QC procedures on record and available for inspection by 
us, the State, and/or local enforcement agency for the life of your CEMS 
or until you are no longer subject to the requirements of this 
procedure.
    9.2 How do I know if I have acceptable QC procedures for my PM CEMS? 
Your QC procedures are inadequate or your PM CEMS is incapable of 
providing quality data if you fail two consecutive QC audits (i.e., out-
of-control conditions resulting from the annual audits, quarterly 
audits, or daily checks). Therefore, if you fail the same two 
consecutive audits, you must revise your QC procedures or modify or 
replace your PM CEMS to correct the deficiencies causing the excessive 
inaccuracies (see section 10.4 for limits for excessive audit 
inaccuracy).

10.0 What Calibration/Correlation and Standardization Procedures Must I 
                         Perform for My PM CEMS?

    You must generate a site-specific correlation for each of your PM 
CEMS installation(s) relating response from your PM CEMS to results from 
simultaneous PM reference method testing. The PS-11 defines procedures 
for developing the correlation and defines a series of statistical 
parameters for assessing acceptability of the correlation. However, a 
critical component of your PM CEMS correlation process is ensuring the 
accuracy and precision of reference method data. The activities listed 
in sections 10.1 through 10.10 assure the quality of the correlation.
    10.1 When should I use paired trains for reference method testing? 
Although not required, we recommend that you should use paired-train 
reference method testing to generate data used to develop your PM CEMS 
correlation and for RCA testing. Guidance on the use of paired sampling 
trains can be found in the PM CEMS Knowledge Document (see section 
16.5).

[[Page 682]]

    10.2 What routine system checks must I perform on my PM CEMS? You 
must perform routine checks to ensure proper operation of system 
electronics and optics, light and radiation sources and detectors, and 
electric or electro-mechanical systems. Necessary components of the 
routine system checks will depend on design details of your PM CEMS. As 
a minimum, you must verify the system operating parameters listed in 
paragraphs (1) through (5) of this section on a daily basis. Some PM 
CEMS may perform one or more of these functions automatically or as an 
integral portion of unit operations; for other PM CEMS, you must 
initiate or perform one or more of these functions manually.
    (1) You must check the zero drift to ensure stability of your PM 
CEMS response to the zero check value. You must determine system output 
on the most sensitive measurement range when the PM CEMS is challenged 
with a zero reference standard or procedure. You must, at a minimum, 
adjust your PM CEMS whenever the daily zero drift exceeds 4 percent.
    (2) You must check the upscale drift to ensure stability of your PM 
CEMS response to the upscale check value. You must determine system 
output when the PM CEMS is challenged with a reference standard or 
procedure corresponding to the upscale check value. You must, at a 
minimum, adjust your PM CEMS whenever the daily upscale drift check 
exceeds 4 percent.
    (3) For light-scattering and extinction-type PM CEMS, you must check 
the system optics to ensure that system response has not been altered by 
the condition of optical components, such as fogging of lens and 
performance of light monitoring devices.
    (4) You must record data from your automatic drift-adjusting PM CEMS 
before any adjustment is made. If your PM CEMS automatically adjusts its 
response to the corrected calibration values (e.g., microprocessor 
control), you must program your PM CEMS to record the unadjusted 
concentration measured in the drift check before resetting the 
calibration. Alternately, you may program your PM CEMS to record the 
amount of adjustment.
    (5) For extractive PM CEMS that measure the sample volume and use 
the measured sample volume as part of calculating the output value, you 
must check the sample volume on a daily basis to verify the accuracy of 
the sample volume measuring equipment. This sample volume check must be 
done at the normal sampling rate of your PM CEMS. You must adjust your 
PM CEMS sample volume measurement whenever the daily sample volume check 
error exceeds 10 percent.
    10.3 What are the auditing requirements for my PM CEMS? You must 
subject your PM CEMS to an ACA and an SVA, as applicable, at least once 
each calender quarter. Successive quarterly audits must occur no closer 
than 2 months apart. You must conduct an RCA and an RRA at the 
frequencies specified in the applicable regulation or facility operating 
permit. An RRA or RCA conducted during any calendar quarter can take the 
place of the ACA required for that calendar quarter. An RCA conducted 
during the period in which an RRA is required can take the place of the 
RRA for that period.
    (1) When must I perform an ACA? You must perform an ACA each quarter 
unless you conduct an RRA or RCA during that same quarter.
    (2) How do I perform an ACA? You perform an ACA according to the 
procedure specified in paragraphs (2)(i) through (v) of this section.
    (i) You must challenge your PM CEMS with an audit standard or an 
equivalent audit reference to reproduce the PM CEMS's measurement at 
three points within the following ranges:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Audit point                          Audit range
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1......................................  0 to 20 percent of measurement
                                          range
2......................................  40 to 60 percent of measurement
                                          range
3......................................  70 to 100 percent of
                                          measurement range
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) You must then challenge your PM CEMS three times at each audit 
point and use the average of the three responses in determining accuracy 
at each audit point. Use a separate audit standard for audit points 1, 
2, and 3. Challenge the PM CEMS at each audit point for a sufficient 
period of time to ensure that your PM CEMS response has stabilized.
    (iii) Operate your PM CEMS in the mode, manner, and range specified 
by the manufacturer.
    (iv) Store, maintain, and use audit standards as recommended by the 
manufacturer.
    (v) Use the difference between the actual known value of the audit 
standard and the response of your PM CEMS to assess the accuracy of your 
PM CEMS.
    (3) When must I perform an SVA? You must perform an audit of the 
measured sample volume (e.g., the sampling flow rate for a known time) 
once per quarter for applicable PM CEMS with an extractive sampling 
system. Also, you must perform and pass an SVA prior to initiation of 
any of the reference method data collection runs for an RCA or RRA.
    (4) How do I perform an SVA? You perform an SVA according to the 
procedure specified in paragraphs (4)(i) through (iii) of this section.
    (i) You perform an SVA by independently measuring the volume of 
sample gas extracted from the stack or duct over each batch cycle or 
time period with a calibrated

[[Page 683]]

device. You may make this measurement either at the inlet or outlet of 
your PM CEMS, so long as it measures the sample gas volume without 
including any dilution or recycle air. Compare the measured volume with 
the volume reported by your PM CEMS for the same cycle or time period to 
calculate sample volume accuracy.
    (ii) You must make measurements during three sampling cycles for 
batch extractive monitors (e.g., Beta-gauge) or during three periods of 
at least 20 minutes for continuous extractive PM CEMS.
    (iii) You may need to condense, collect, and measure moisture from 
the sample gas prior to the calibrated measurement device (e.g., dry gas 
meter) and correct the results for moisture content. In any case, the 
volumes measured by the calibrated device and your PM CEMS must be on a 
consistent temperature, pressure, and moisture basis.
    (5) How often must I perform an RRA? You must perform an RRA at the 
frequency specified in the applicable regulation or facility operating 
permit. You may conduct an RCA instead of an RRA during the period when 
the RRA is required.
    (6) How do I perform an RRA? You must perform the RRA according to 
the procedure specified in paragraphs (6)(i) and (ii) of this section.
    (i) You perform an RRA by collecting three simultaneous reference 
method PM concentration measurements and PM CEMS measurements at the as-
found source operating conditions and PM concentration.
    (ii) We recommend that you use paired trains for reference method 
sampling. Guidance on the use of paired sampling trains can be found in 
the PM CEMS Knowledge Document (see section 16.5 of PS-11).
    (7) How often must I perform an RCA? You must perform an RCA at the 
frequency specified in the applicable regulation or facility operating 
permit.
    (8) How do I perform an RCA? You must perform the RCA according to 
the procedures for the PM CEMS correlation test described in PS-11, 
section 8.6, except that the minimum number of runs required is 12 in 
the RCA instead of 15 as specified in PS-11.
    (9) What other alternative audits can I use? You can use other 
alternative audit procedures as approved by us, the State, or local 
agency for the quarters when you would conduct ACAs.
    10.4 What are my limits for excessive audit inaccuracy? Unless 
specified otherwise in the applicable subpart, the criteria for 
excessive audit inaccuracy are listed in paragraphs (1) through (6) of 
this section.
    (1) What are the criteria for excessive zero or upscale drift? Your 
PM CEMS is out of control if the zero drift check or upscale drift check 
either exceeds 4 percent for five consecutive daily periods or exceeds 8 
percent for any one day.
    (2) What are the criteria for excessive sample volume measurement 
error? Your PM CEMS is out of control if sample volume check error 
exceeds 10 percent for five consecutive daily periods or exceeds 20 
percent for any one day.
    (3) What are the criteria for excessive ACA error? Your PM CEMS is 
out of control if the results of any ACA exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 
percent of the average audit value or 7.5 percent of the applicable 
standard, whichever is greater.
    (4) What is the criterion for excessive SVA error? Your PM CEMS is 
out of control if results exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the 
average sample volume audit value.
    (5) What are the criteria for passing an RCA? To pass an RCA, you 
must meet the criteria specified in paragraphs (5)(i) through (iii) of 
this section. If your PM CEMS fails to meet these RCA criteria, it is 
out of control.
    (i) For all 12 data points, the PM CEMS response value can be no 
greater than the greatest PM CEMS response value used to develop your 
correlation curve.
    (ii) For 9 of the 12 data points, the PM CEMS response value must 
lie within the PM CEMS output range used to develop your correlation 
curve.
    (iii) At least 75 percent of a minimum number of 12 sets of PM CEMS 
and reference method measurements must fall within a specified area on a 
graph of the correlation regression line. The specified area on the 
graph of the correlation regression line is defined by two lines 
parallel to the correlation regression line, offset at a distance of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 percent of the numerical emission limit value 
from the correlation regression line.
    (6) What are the criteria to pass an RRA? To pass an RRA, you must 
meet the criteria specified in paragraphs (6)(i) and (ii) of this 
section. If your PM CEMS fails to meet these RRA criteria, it is out of 
control.
    (i) For all three data points, the PM CEMS response value can be no 
greater than the greatest PM CEMS response value used to develop your 
correlation curve.
    (ii) For two of the three data points, the PM CEMS response value 
must lie within the PM CEMS output range used to develop your 
correlation curve.
    (iii) At least two of the three sets of PM CEMS and reference method 
measurements must fall within the same specified area on a graph of the 
correlation regression line as required for the RCA and described in 
paragraph (5)(iii) of this section.
    10.5 What do I do if my PM CEMS is out of control? If your PM CEMS 
is out of control, you must take the actions listed in paragraphs (1) 
and (2) of this section.
    (1) You must take necessary corrective action to eliminate the 
problem and perform tests, as appropriate, to ensure that the corrective 
action was successful.
    (i) Following corrective action, you must repeat the previously 
failed audit to confirm

[[Page 684]]

that your PM CEMS is operating within the specifications.
    (ii) If your PM CEMS failed an RRA, you must take corrective action 
until your PM CEMS passes the RRA criteria. If the RRA criteria cannot 
be achieved, you must perform an RCA.
    (iii) If your PM CEMS failed an RCA, you must follow procedures 
specified in section 10.6 of this procedure.
    (2) You must report both the audit showing your PM CEMS to be out of 
control and the results of the audit following corrective action showing 
your PM CEMS to be operating within specifications.
    10.6 What do I do if my PM CEMS fails an RCA? After an RCA failure, 
you must take all applicable actions listed in paragraphs (1) through 
(3) of this section.
    (1) Combine RCA data with data from the active PM CEMS correlation 
and perform the mathematical evaluations defined in PS-11 for 
development of a PM CEMS correlation, including examination of alternate 
correlation models (i.e., linear, polynomial, logarithmic, exponential, 
and power). If the expanded data base and revised correlation meet PS-11 
statistical criteria, use the revised correlation.
    (2) If the criteria specified in paragraph (1) of this section are 
not achieved, you must develop a new PM CEMS correlation based on 
revised data. The revised data set must consist of the test results from 
only the RCA. The new data must meet all requirements of PS-11 to 
develop a revised PM CEMS correlation, except that the minimum number of 
sets of PM CEMS and reference method measurements is 12 instead of the 
minimum of 15 sets required by PS-11. Your PM CEMS is considered to be 
back in controlled status when the revised correlation meets all of the 
performance criteria specified in section 13.2 of PS-11.
    (3) If the actions in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section do not 
result in an acceptable correlation, you must evaluate the cause(s) and 
comply with the actions listed in paragraphs (3)(i) through (iv) of this 
section within 90 days after the completion of the failed RCA.
    (i) Completely inspect your PM CEMS for mechanical or operational 
problems. If you find a mechanical or operational problem, repair your 
PM CEMS and repeat the RCA.
    (ii) You may need to relocate your PM CEMS to a more appropriate 
measurement location. If you relocate your PM CEMS, you must perform a 
new correlation test according to the procedures specified in PS-11.
    (iii) The characteristics of the PM or gas in your source's flue gas 
stream may have changed such that your PM CEMS measurement technology is 
no longer appropriate. If this is the case, you must install a PM CEMS 
with measurement technology that is appropriate for your source's flue 
gas characteristics. You must perform a new correlation test according 
to the procedures specified in PS-11.
    (iv) If the corrective actions in paragraphs (3)(i) through (iii) of 
this section were not successful, you must petition us, the State, or 
local agency for approval of alternative criteria or an alternative for 
continuous PM monitoring.
    10.7 When does the out-of-control period begin and end? The out-of-
control period begins immediately after the last test run or check of an 
unsuccessful RCA, RRA, ACA, SVA, drift check, or sample volume check. 
The out-of-control period ends immediately after the last test run or 
check of the subsequent successful audit or drift check.
    10.8 Can I use the data recorded by my PM CEMS during out-of-control 
periods? During any period when your PM CEMS is out of control, you may 
not use your PM CEMS data to calculate emission compliance or to meet 
minimum data availability requirements described in the applicable 
regulation.
    10.9 What are the QA/QC reporting requirements for my PM CEMS? You 
must report the accuracy results for your PM CEMS, specified in section 
10.4 of this procedure, at the interval specified in the applicable 
regulation. Report the drift and accuracy information as a Data 
Assessment Report (DAR), and include one copy of this DAR for each 
quarterly audit with the report of emissions required under the 
applicable regulation. An example DAR is provided in Procedure 1, 
Appendix F of this part.
    10.10 What minimum information must I include in my DAR? As a 
minimum, you must include the information listed in paragraphs (1) 
through (5) of this section in the DAR:
    (1) Your name and address.
    (2) Identification and location of monitors in your CEMS.
    (3) Manufacturer and model number of each monitor in your CEMS.
    (4) Assessment of PM CEMS data accuracy/acceptability, and date of 
assessment, as determined by an RCA, RRA, ACA, or SVA described in 
section 10, including the acceptability determination for the RCA or 
RRA, the accuracy for the ACA or SVA, the reference method results, the 
audit standards, your PM CEMS responses, and the calculation results as 
defined in section 12. If the accuracy audit results show your PM CEMS 
to be out of control, you must report both the audit results showing 
your PM CEMS to be out of control and the results of the audit following 
corrective action showing your PM CEMS to be operating within 
specifications.
    (5) Summary of all corrective actions you took when you determined 
your PM CEMS to be out of control, as described in section 10.5, or 
after failing on RCA, as described in section 10.6.

[[Page 685]]

    10.7 Where and how long must I retain the QA data that this 
procedure requires me to record for my PM CEMS? You must keep the 
records required by this procedure for your PM CEMS onsite and available 
for inspection by us, the State, and/or local enforcement agency for a 
period of 5 years.

        11.0 What Analytical Procedures Apply to This Procedure?

    Sample collection and analysis are concurrent for this procedure. 
You must refer to the appropriate reference method for the specific 
analytical procedures.

 12.0 What Calculations and Data Analysis Must I Perform for my PM CEMS?

    (1) How do I determine RCA and RRA acceptability? You must plot each 
of your PM CEMS and reference method data sets from an RCA or RRA on a 
graph based on your PM CEMS correlation line to determine if the 
criteria in paragraphs 10.4(5) or (6), respectively, are met.
    (2) How do I calculate ACA accuracy? You must use Equation 2-1 to 
calculate ACA accuracy for each of the three audit points:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.045

Where:

ACA Accuracy = The ACA accuracy at each audit point, in percent,
R<INF>CEM</INF> = Your PM CEMS response to the reference standard, and
R<INF>V</INF> = The reference standard value.

    (3) How do I calculate daily upscale and zero drift? You must 
calculate the upscale drift using to Equation 2-2 and the zero drift 
according to Equation 2-3:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.046

Where:

UD = The upscale drift of your PM CEMS, in percent,
R<INF>CEM</INF> = Your PM CEMS response to the upscale check value, and
R<INF>U</INF> = The upscale check value.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.047

Where:

ZD = The zero (low-level) drift of your PM CEMS, in percent,
R<INF>CEM</INF> = Your PM CEMS response of the zero check value,
R<INF>L</INF> = The zero check value, and
R<INF>U</INF> = The upscale check value.

    (4) How do I calculate SVA accuracy? You must use Equation 2-4 to 
calculate the accuracy, in percent, for each of the three SVA tests or 
the daily sample volume check:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JA04.048

Where:

V<INF>M</INF> = Sample gas volume determined/reported by your PM CEMS 
(e.g., dscm),
V<INF>R</INF> = Sample gas volume measured by the independent calibrated 
reference device (e.g., dscm) for the SVA or the reference value for the 
daily sample volume check, and
FS = Full-scale value.

    Note: Before calculating SVA accuracy, you must correct the sample 
gas volumes measured by your PM CEMS and the independent calibrated 
reference device to the same basis of temperature, pressure, and 
moisture content. You must document all data and calculations.

[[Page 686]]

                   13.0 Method Performance [Reserved]

                  14.0 Pollution Prevention [Reserved]

                    15.0 Waste Management [Reserved]

      16.0 Which References are Relevant to This Method? [Reserved]

17.0 What Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts, and Validation Data Are Relevant 
                       to This Method? [Reserved]

[52 FR 21008, June 4, 1987; 52 FR 27612, July 22, 1987, as amended at 56 
FR 5527, Feb. 11, 1991; 69 FR 1816, Jan. 12, 2004]

     Appendix G to Part 60--Provisions for an Alternative Method of 
Demonstrating Compliance With 40 CFR 60.43 for the Newton Power Station 
               of Central Illinois Public Service Company

    1. Designation of Affected Facilities
    1.1 The affected facilities to which this alternative compliance 
method applies are the Unit 1 and 2 coal-fired steam generating units 
located at the Central Illinois Public Service Company's (CIPS) Newton 
Power Station in Jasper County, Illinois. Each of these units is subject 
to the Standards of Performance for Fossil-Fuel-Fired Steam Generators 
for Which Construction Commenced After August 17, 1971 (subpart D).
    2. Definitions
    2.1 All definitions in subparts D and Da of part 60 apply to this 
provision except that:
    24-hour period means the period of time between 12:00 midnight and 
the following midnight.
    Boiler operating day means a 24-hour period during which any fossil 
is combusted in either the Unit 1 or Unit 2 steam generating unit and 
during which the provisions of Sec. 60.43(e) are applicable.
    CEMs means continuous emission monitoring system.
    Coal bunker means a single or group of coal trailers, hoppers, silos 
or other containers that:
    (1) are physically attached to the affected facility; and
    (2) provide coal to the coal pulverizers.
    DAFGDS means the dual alkali flue gas desulfurization system for the 
Newton Unit 1 steam generating unit.
    3. Compliance Provisions
    3.1 If the owner or operator of the affected facility elects to 
comply with the 470 ng/J (1.1 lbs/MMBTU) of combined heat input emission 
limit under Sec. 60.43(e), he shall notify the Regional Administrator, 
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 5 
and the Director, of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) 
at least 30 days in advance of the date such election is to take effect, 
stating the date such operation is to commence. When the owner or 
operator elects to comply with this limit after one or more periods of 
reverting to the 520 ng/J heat input (1.2 lbs/MMBTU) limit of Sec. 
60.43(a)(2), as provided under 3.4, he shall notify the Regional 
Administrator of the USEPA, Region 5 and the Director of the (IEPA) in 
writing at least ten (10) days in advance of the date such election is 
to take effect.
    3.2 Compliance with the sulfur dioxide emission limit under Sec. 
60.43(e) is determined on a continuous basis by performance testing 
using CEMs. Within 60 days after the initial operation of Units 1 and 2 
subject to the combined emission limit in Sec. 60.43(e), the owner or 
operator shall conduct an initial performance test, as required by Sec. 
60.8, to determine compliance with the combined emission limit. This 
initial performance test is to be scheduled so that the thirtieth boiler 
operating day of the 30 successive boiler operating days is completed 
within 60 days after initial operation subject to the 470 ng/J (1.1 lbs/
MMBTU) combined emission limit. Following the initial performance test, 
a separate performance test is completed at the end of each boiler 
operating day Unit 1 and Unit 2 are subject to Sec. 60.43(e), and a new 
30 day average emission rate calculated.
    3.2.1 Following the initial performance test, a new 30 day average 
emission rate is calculated for each boiler operating day the affected 
facility is subject to Sec. 60.43(e). If the owner or operator of the 
affected facility elects to comply with Sec. 60.43(e) after one or more 
periods of reverting to the 520 ng/J heat input (1.2 lbs/MMBTU) limit 
under Sec. 60.43(a)(2), as provided under 3.4, the 30 day average 
emission rate under Sec. 60.43(e) is calculated using emissions data of 
the current boiler operating day and data for the previous 29 boiler 
operating days when the affected facility was subject to Sec. 60.43(e). 
Periods of operation of the affected facility under Sec. 60.43(a)(2) 
are not considered boiler operating days. Emissions data collected 
during operation under Sec. 60.43(a)(2) are not considered relative to 
4.6 and emissions data are not included in calculations of emission 
under Sec. 60.43(e).
    3.2.2 When the affected facility is operated under the provisions of 
Sec. 60.43(e), the Unit 1 DAFGDS bypass damper must be fully closed. 
The DAFGDS bypass may be opened only during periods of DAFGDS startup, 
shutdown, malfunction or testing as described under Sections 3.5.1, 
3.5.2, 3.5.3, 3.5.4, and 4.8.2.
    3.3 Compliance with the sulfur dioxide emission limit set forth in 
Sec. 60.43(e) is based on the average combined hourly emission rate 
from Units 1 and 2 for 30 successive boiler operating days determined as 
follows:

[[Page 687]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.206

where:

n=the number of available hourly combined emission rate values in the 30 
successive boiler operating day period where Unit 1 and Unit 2 are 
subject to Sec. 60.43(e).
E30=average emission rate for 30 successive boiler operating days where 
Unit 1 and Unit 2 are subject to Sec. 60.43(e).
EC=the hourly combined emission rate from Units 1 and 2, in ng/J or lbs/
MMBTU.

    3.3.1 The average hourly combined emission rate for Units 1 and 2for 
each hour of operation of either Unit 1 or 2, or both, is determined as 
follows:

EC=[(E1)+(E2)]/[H1+H2]

where:

EC=the hourly combined SO<INF>2</INF> emission rate, lbs/MMBTU, from 
Units 1 and 2 when Units 1 and 2 are subject to Sec. 60.43(e).
E1=the hourly SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission, lb/hr, from Unit 1 as 
determined from CEMs data using the calculation procedures in section 4 
of this appendix.
E2=the hourly SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission, lb/hr, from Unit 2 as 
determined from CEMs data using the calculation procedures in section 4 
of this appendix.
H1=the hourly heat input, MMBTU/HR to Unit 1 as determined in section 4 
of this appendix.
H2=the hourly heat input, MMBTU/HR, to Unit 2 as determined by section 4 
of this appendix.

    3.3.2 If data for any of the four hourly parameters (E1, E2, H1and 
H2, under 3.3.1 are unavailable during an hourly period, the combined 
emission rate (EC) is not calculated and the period is counted as 
missing data under 4.6.1., except as provided under 3.5. and 4.4.2.
    3.4 After the date of initial operation subject to the combined 
emission limit, Units 1 and 2 shall remain subject to the combined 
emission limit and the owner or operator shall remain subject to the 
requirements of this Appendix until the initial performance test as 
required by 3.2 is completed and the owner or operator of the affected 
facility elects and provides notice to revert on a certain date to the 
520 ng/J heat input (1.2 lbs/MMBTU) limit of Sec. 60.43(a)(2) 
applicable separately at each unit. The Regional Administrator of the 
USEPA, Region 5 and the Director, of the IEPA shall be given written 
notification from CIPS as soon as possible of CIPs' decision to revert 
to the 520 ng/J heat input (1.2 lbs/MMBTU) limit of Sec. 60.43(a)(2) 
separately at each unit, but no later than 10 days in advance of the 
date such election is to take effect.
    3.5 Emission monitoring data for Unit 1 may be excluded from 
calculations of the 30 day rolling average only during the following 
times:
    3.5.1 Periods of DAFGDS startup.
    3.5.2 Periods of DAFGDS shutdown.
    3.5.3 Periods of DAFGDS malfunction during system emergencies as 
defined in Sec. 60.41a.
    3.5.4 The first 250 hours per calendar year of DAFGDS malfunctions 
of Unit 1 DAFGDS provided that efforts are made to minimize emissions 
from Unit 1 in accordance with Sec. 60.11(d), and if, after 16 hours 
but not more than 24 hours of DAFGDS malfunction, the owner or operator 
of the affected facility begins (following the customary loading 
procedures) loading into the Unit 1 coal bunker, coal with a potential 
SO<INF>2</INF> emission rate equal to or less than the emission rate of 
Unit 2 recorded at the beginning of the DAFGDS malfunction. Malfunction 
periods under 3.5.3 are not counted toward the 250 hour/yr limit under 
this section.
    3.5.4.1 The malfunction exemption in 3.5.4 is limited to the first 
250 hours per calendar year of DAFGDS malfunction.
    3.5.4.2 For malfunctions of the DAFGDS after the 250 hours per 
calendar year limit (cumulative), other than those defined in 3.5.3, the 
owner or operator of the affected facility shall combust lower sulfur 
coal or use any other method to comply with the 470 ng/J (1.1 lbs/MMBTU) 
combined emission limit.
    3.5.4.3 During the first 250 hours of DAFGDS malfunction per year or 
during periods of DAFGDS startup, or DAFGDS shutdown, CEMs emissions 
data from Unit 2 shall continue to be included in the daily calculation 
of the combined 30 day rolling average emission rate; that is, the load 
on Unit 1 is assumed to be zero (H1 and E1=O; EC=E2/H2).
    3.5.5-3.5.7 [Reserved]
    3.6 The provision for excluding CEMs data from Unit 1 during the 
first 250 hours of DAFGDS malfunctions from combined hourly emissions 
calculations supersedes the provisions of Sec. 60.11(d). However, the 
general purpose contained in Sec. 60.11(d) (i.e., following good 
control practices to minimize air pollution emission during 
malfunctions) has not been superseded.

                    4. Continuous Emission Monitoring

    4.1 The CEMs required under Section 3.2 are operated and data are 
recorded for all periods of operation of the affected facility including 
periods of the DAFGDS startup, shutdown and malfunction except for CEMs 
breakdowns, repairs, calibration checks, and zero and span adjustment. 
All provisions of Sec. 60.45 apply except as follows:
    4.2 The owner or operator shall install, calibrate, maintain, and 
operate CEMs and monitoring devices for measuring the following:
    4.2.1 For Unit 1:

[[Page 688]]

    4.2.1.1 Sulfur dioxide, oxygen or carbon dioxide, and volumetric 
flow rate for the Unit 1 DAFGDS stack.
    4.2.1.2 Sulfur dioxide, oxygen or carbon dioxide, and volumetric 
flow rate for the Unit 1 DAFGDS bypass stack.
    4.2.1.3 Moisture content of the flue gas must be determined 
continuously for the Unit 1 DAFGDS stack and the Unit 1 DAFGDS bypass 
stack, if the sulfur dioxide concentration in each stack is measured on 
a dry basis.
    4.2.2 For Unit 2, sulfur dioxide, oxygen or carbon dioxide, and 
volumetric flow rate.
    4.2.2.1 Moisture content of the flue gas must be determined 
continuously for the Unit 2 stack, if the sulfur dioxide concentration 
in the stack is measured on a dry basis.
    4.2.3 For Units 1 and 2, the hourly heat input, the hourly steam 
production rate, or the hourly gross electrical power output from each 
unit.
    4.3 For the Unit 1 bypass stack and the Unit 2 stack, the span value 
of the sulfur dioxide analyzer shall be equivalent to 200 percent of the 
maximum estimated hourly potential sulfur dioxide emissions of the fuel 
fired in parts per million sulfur dioxide. For the Unit 1 DAFGDS stack, 
the span value of the sulfur dioxide analyzer shall be equivalent to 100 
percent of the maximum estimated hourly potential emissions of the fuel 
fired in parts per million sulfur dioxide. The span value for volumetric 
flow monitors shall be equivalent to 125 percent of the maximum 
estimated hourly flow in standard cubic meters/minute (standard cubic 
feet per minute). The span value of the continuous moisture monitors, if 
required by 4.2.1.3 and 4.2.2.1, shall be equivalent to 100 percent by 
volume. The span value of the oxygen or carbon dioxide analyzers shall 
be equivalent to 25 percent by volume.
    4.3.1-4.3.2 [Reserved]
    4.4 The monitoring devices required in 4.2 shall be installed, 
calibrated, and maintained as follows:
    4.4.1 Each volumetric flow rate monitoring device specified in 4.2 
shall be installed at approximately the same location as the sulfur 
dioxide emission monitoring sample location.
    4.4.2 Hourly steam production rate and hourly electrical power 
output monitoring devices for Unit 1 and Unit 2 shall be calibrated and 
maintained according to manufacturer's specifications. The data from 
either of these devices may be used in the calculation of the combined 
emission rate in Section 3.3.1, only when the hourly heat input for Unit 
1 (H1) or the hourly heat input for Unit 2 (H2) cannot be determined 
from CEM data, and the hourly heat input to steam production or hourly 
heat input to electrical power output efficiency over a given segment of 
each boiler or generator operating range, respectively, varies by less 
than 5 percent within the specified operating range, or the efficiencies 
of the boiler/generator units differ by less than 5 percent. The hourly 
heat input for Unit 1 (H1) or the hourly heat input for Unit 2 (H2) in 
Section 3.3.1 may also be calculated based on the fuel firing rates and 
fuel analysis.
    4.4.3-4.4.5 [Reserved]
    4.5 The hourly mass emissions from Unit 1 (E1) and Unit 2 (E2) and 
the hourly heat inputs from Unit 1 (H1) and Unit 2 (H2) used to 
determine the hourly combined emission rate for Units 1 and 2 (EC) in 
Section 3.3.1 are calculated using CEM data for each respective stack as 
follows:
    4.5.1 The hourly SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission from each respective 
stack is determined as follows:

E=(C) (F) (D) (K)

Where:

E=SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission from the respective stack in lb per hour
C=SO<INF>2</INF> concentration from the respective stack ppm
F=flue gas flow rate from the respective stack in scfm
D=density of SO<INF>2</INF> in lb per standard cubic feet
K=time conversion, 60 mins./hr

    4.5.2 The hourly heat input from each respective stack is determined 
as follows:

H=[(F) (C) (K)/(F<INF>c</INF>)

where:

H=heat input from the respective stack in MMBTU per hour
C=CO<INF>2</INF> or O<INF>2</INF> concentration from the respective 
stack as a decimal
F=flue gas flow rate from the respective stack in scfm
K=time conversion, 60 mins./hr
F<INF>c</INF>=fuel constant for the appropriate diluent in scf/MMBTU as 
per Sec. Sec. 60.45(f) (4) and (5)

    4.5.3 The hourly SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission for Unit 1 in pounds 
per hour (E1) is calculated as follows, when leakage or diversion of any 
DAFGDS inlet gas to the bypass stack occurs:

E1=(EF)+(EB)

Where:

EF=Hourly SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission measured in DAFGDS stack, lb/hr, 
using the calculation in Section 4.5.1.
EB=Hourly SO<INF>2</INF> mass emission measured in bypass stack, lb/hr, 
using the calculation in Section 4.5.1.
Other than during conditions under 3.5.1, 3.5.2, 3.5.3, 3.5.4, or 4.8.2, 
the DAFGDS bypass damper must be fully closed and any leakage will be 
indicated by the bypass stack volumetric flow and SO<INF>2</INF> 
measurements, and when no leakage through the bypass damper is 
indicated:

E1=EF


[[Page 689]]


    4.5.4 The hourly heat input for Unit 1 in MMBTU per hour (H1) is 
calculated as follows, when leakage or diversion of any DAFGDS inlet gas 
to the bypass stack occurs:

H1=(HF)+(HB)

where:

HF=Hourly heat input as determined from the DAFGDS stack CEMs, in MMBTU 
per hour, using the calculation in Section 4.5.2
HB=Hourly heat input as determined from the DAFGDS bypass stack CEMs, in 
MMBTU per hour, using the calculation in Section 4.5.2

    4.6 For the CEMs required for Unit 1 and Unit 2, the owner or 
operator of the affected facility shall maintain and operate the CEMs 
and obtain combined emission data values (EC) for at least 75 percent of 
the boiler operting hours per day for at least 26 out of each 30 
successive boiler operating days.
    4.6.1 When hourly SO<INF>2</INF> emission data are not obtained by 
the CEMs because of CEMs breakdowns, repairs, calibration checks and 
zero and span adjustment, hourly emission data required by 4.6 are 
obtained by using Methods 6 or 6C and 3 or 3A, 6A, or 8 and 3, or by 
other alternative methods approved by the Regional Administrator of the 
USEPA, Region 5 and the Director, of the IEPA. Failure to obtain the 
minimum data requirements of 4.6 by CEMs, or by CEMs supplemented with 
alternative methods of this section, is a violation of performance 
testing requirements.
    4.6.2 Independent of complying with the minimum data requirements of 
4.6, all valid emissions data collected are used to calculate combined 
hourly emission rates (EC) and 30-day rolling average emission rates 
(E30) are calculated and used to judge compliance with 60.43(e).
    4.7 For each continuous emission monitoring system, a quality 
control plan shall be prepared by CIPS and submitted to the Regional 
Administrator of the USEPA, Region 5 and the Director, of the IEPA. The 
plan is to be submitted to the Regional Administrator of the USEPA, 
Region 5 and the Director, of the IEPA 45 days before initiation of the 
initial performance test. At a minimum, the plan shall contain the 
following quality control elements:
    4.7.1 Calibration of continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMs) 
and volumetric flow measurement devices.
    4.7.2 Calibration drift determination and adjustment of CEMs and 
volumetric flow measurement devices.
    4.7.3 Periodic CEMs, volumetric flow measurement devices and 
relative accuracy determinations.
    4.7.4 Preventive maintenance of CEMs and volumetric flow measurement 
devices (including spare parts inventory).
    4.7.5 Data recording and reporting.
    4.7.6 Program of corrective action for malfunctioning CEMs and 
volumetric flow measurement devices.
    4.7.7 Criteria for determining when the CEMs and volumetric flow 
measurement devices are not producing valid data.
    4.7.8 Calibration and periodic checks of monitoring devices 
identified in 4.4.2.
    4.8 For the purpose of conducting the continuous emission monitoring 
system performance specification tests as required by Sec. 60.13 and 
appendix B, the following conditions apply:
    4.8.1 The calibration drift specification of Performance 
Specification 2, appendix B shall be determined separately for each of 
the Unit 1 SO<INF>2</INF> CEMs and the Unit 2 SO<INF>2</INF> CEMs. The 
calibration drift specification of Performance Specification 3, appendix 
B shall be determined separately for each of the Unit 1 diluent CEMs and 
Unit 2 diluent CEMs.
    4.8.2 The relative accuracy of the combined SO<INF>2</INF> emission 
rate for Unit 1 and Unit 2, as calculated from CEMs and volumetric flow 
data using the procedures in 3.3.1, 4.5.1, 4.5.2 and 4.5.3 shall be no 
greater than 20 percent of the mean value of the combined emission rate, 
as determined from testing conducted simultaneously on the DAFGDS stack, 
the DAFGDS bypass stack and the Unit 2 stack using reference methods 2, 
3, or 3A and 6 or 6C, or shall be no greater than 10 percent of the 
emission limit in Sec. 60.43(e), whichever criteria is less stringent. 
The relative accuracy shall be computed from at least nine comparisons 
of the combined emission rate values using the procedures in section 7 
and the equations in section 8, Performance Specification 2, appendix B. 
Throughout, but only during, the relative accuracy test period the 
DAFGDS bypass damper shall be partially opened such that there is a 
detectable flow.
    4.8.3-4.8.3.4 [Reserved]
    4.9 The total monitoring system required by 4.2 shall be subject 
only to an annual relative accuracy test audit (RATA) in accordance with 
the quality assurance requirements of section 5.1.1 of 40 CFR part 60, 
appendix F. Each SO<INF>2</INF> and diluent CEMs shall be subject to 
cylinder gas audits (OGA) in accordance with the quality assurance 
requirements of section 5.1.2 of appendix F with the exception that any 
SO<INF>2</INF> or diluent CEMs without any type of probe or sample line 
shall be exempt from the OGA requirements.

                      5. Recordkeeping Requirements

    5.1 The plant owner or operator shall keep a record of each hourly 
emission rate, each hourly SO<INF>2</INF> CEMs value and hourly flow 
rate value, and each hourly Btu heat input rate, hourly steam rate, or 
hourly electrical power output, and a record of each hourly weighted 
average emission rate. These records shall be kept for all periods of 
operation of Unit 1 or

[[Page 690]]

2 under provisions of Sec. 60.43(e), including operations of Unit 1 
(E1) during periods of DAFGDS startup, shutdown, and malfunction when H1 
and E1 are assumed to be zero (0) (see 4.5).
    5.2 The plant owner or operator shall keep a record of each hourly 
gas flow rate through the DAFGDS stack, each hourly stack gas flow rate 
through the bypass stack during any periods that the DAFGDS bypass 
damper is opened or flow is indicated, and reason for bypass operation.

                        6. Reporting Requirements

    6.1 The owner or operator of any affected facility shall submit the 
written reports required under 6.2 of this section and subpart A to the 
Regional Administrator of the USEPA, Region 5 and the Director, of the 
IEPA for every calendar quarter. All quarterly reports shall be 
submitted by the 30th day following the end of each calendar quarter.
    6.2 For sulfur dioxide, the following data resubmitted to the 
Regional Administrator of the USEPA, Region 5 and the Director, of the 
IEPA for each 24-hour period:
    6.2.1 Calendar date
    6.2.2 The combined average sulfur dioxide emission rate (ng/J or lb/
million Btu) for the past 30 successive boiler operating days (ending 
with the last 30-day period in the quarter); and, for any noncompliance 
periods, reasons for noncompliance with the emission standards and 
description of corrective action taken.
    6.2.3 Identification of the boiler operating days for which valid 
sulfur dioxide emissions data required by 4.6 have not been obtained for 
75 percent of the boiler operating hours; reasons for not obtaining 
sufficient data; and description of corrective actions taken to prevent 
recurrence.
    6.2.4 Identification of the time periods (hours) when Unit 1 or Unit 
2 were operated but combined hourly emission rates (EC) were not 
calculated because of the unavailability of parameters E1, E2, H1, or H2 
as described in 3.2.
    6.2.5 Identification of the time periods (hours) when Unit 1 and 
Unit 2 were operated and where the combined hourly emission rate (EC) 
equalled Unit 2 (E2/H2) emissions because of the Unit 1 malfunction 
provisions under 3.5.3, and 3.5.4.
    6.2.6 Identification of the time periods (hours) when emissions from 
the Unit 1 DAFGDS have been excluded from the calculation of average 
sulfur dioxide emission rates because of Unit 1 DAFGDS startup, 
shutdown, malfunction, or other reasons; and justification for excluding 
data for reasons other than startup or shutdown. Reporting of hourly 
emission rate of Unit 1 (E1/H2) during each hour of the DAFGDS startup, 
malfunction under 3.5.1, 3.5.2, 3.5.3, and 3.5.4 (see 4.5).
    6.2.7 Identification of the number of days in the calendar quarter 
that the affected facility was operated (any fuel fired).
    6.2.8 Identify any periods where Unit 1 DAFGDS malfunctions occurred 
and the cumulative hours of Unit 1 DAFGDS malfunction for the quarter.
    6.2.9 Identify any periods of time that any exhaust gases were 
discharged to the DAFGDS bypass stack and the hourly gas flow rate 
through the DAFGDS stack and through the DAFGDS bypass stack during such 
periods and reason for bypass operation.
    6.2.10 [Reserved]

[52 FR 28955, Aug. 4, 1987, as amended at 58 FR 28785, May 17, 1993; 59 
FR 8135, Feb. 18, 1994]

                    Appendix H to Part 60 [Reserved]

        Appendix I to Part 60--Removable Label and Owner's Manual

                             1. Introduction

    The purpose of this appendix is to provide guidance to the 
manufacturer for compliance with the temporary labeling and owner's 
manual provisions of subpart AAA. Section 2 provides guidance for the 
content and presentation of information on the temporary labels. Section 
3 provides guidance for the contents of the owner's manual.

                           2. Temporary Labels

                               2.1 General

    Temporary labels shall be printed on 90 pound bond paper and shall 
measure 5 inches wide by 7 inches long. All labels shall be printed in 
black ink on one side of the label only. The type font that shall be 
used for all printing is helvetica. Specific instructions for drafting 
labels are provided below depending upon the compliance status of the 
wood heater model. Figures 1 through 7 illustrate the various label 
types that may apply.

                       2.2 Certified Wood Heaters

    The design and content of certified wood heaters vary according to 
the following:
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Catalyst or noncatalyst,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Measured or default thermal efficiency value, and
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Compliance with 1988 or 1990 emission limit.
    There are five parts of a label. These include:
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Identification and compliance status,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Emission value,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Efficiency value,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Heat output value, and
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Caveats.
    Instructions for drafting each of these five parts are discussed 
below in terms of the three variables listed above. Figures 1 and 2

[[Page 691]]

illustrate the variations in label design. Figure 1 is a temporary label 
for a hypothetical catalyst wood heater that meets the 1990 standard, 
has a certification test emission composite value of 3.5 g/h, and has a 
default efficiency of 72 percent. The label in Figure 2 is for a 
hypothetical noncatalyst wood heater with a certification test emission 
composite value of 7.8 g/h and a measured efficiency of 68 percent. It 
meets the 1988 but not the 1990 standard. All labels for wood heaters 
that have been certified and tested should conform as much as possible 
to the general layout, the type font and type size illustrated in 
Figures 1 and 2.

               2.2.1 Identification and Compliance Status

    The top 1.5 inches of the label should contain the following items 
(and location on the label):
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Manufacturer name (upper left hand corner,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Model name/number (upper left hand corner,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> The words ``U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
AGENCY'' (centered at top and enclosed in a box with rounded edges),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> For catalytic wood heaters, in large bold print 
the words ``CATALYST EQUIPPED'' (centered below the words ``U.S. 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY''),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Text indicating compliance status for catalytic 
wood heaters. For those catalytic wood heaters which comply with the 
1988 emission limits, but not the 1990 emission limits, the words: 
``Meets EPA particulate matter (smoke) control requirements for 
catalytic wood heaters built on or after July 1, 1988, and before July 
1, 1990.'' For those catalytic wood heaters which comply with the 1990 
emission limits, the words: ``Meets EPA particulate matter (smoke) 
control requirements for catalytic wood heaters built on or after July 
1, 1990.'' Finally, for all catalytic wood heaters, the following text 
should be included: ``See catalyst warranty. Illegal to operate when 
catalyst is not working. See owner's manual for operation and 
maintenance.''
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Text indicating compliance status for 
noncatalytic wood heaters. For those noncatalytic wood heaters that 
comply with the 1988 emission limits but not the 1990 emission limits, 
the words: ``Meets EPA particulate matter (smoke) control requirements 
for NONCATALYTIC wood heaters built on or after July 1, 1988, and before 
July 1, 1990.'' For those noncatalytic wood heaters that comply with 
1990 emission limits, the words: ``Meets EPA particulate matter (smoke) 
control requirements for NON CATALYTIC wood heaters built on or after 
July 1, 1990.''

                          2.2.2 Emission Value

    Between 1.5 and 3.0 inches down from the top of the label is the 
part that graphically illustrates the particulate matter, or smoke, 
emission value. This part consists of the word ``SMOKE'' in large bold 
print and a 3.0 inch line with words ``(grams per hour)'' centered 
beneath the line. A blunt end arrow with a base (blunt end) that spans 2 
g/hr shall be centered over the point on the emissions line that 
represents the composite emission value for the model as measured in the 
certification test.
    For catalyst equipped wood heaters the 3.0 inch line shall be 
labeled ``0'' on the left end of the line (centered below the end) and 
``5.5'' on the right end (centered below the end). To find where to 
center the large blunt end arrow, measure 0.55 inches from the left end 
for each g/h of the composite emission value. Thus, a 4 g/h value would 
be 2.2 inches from the left end. The base of the blunt end should always 
be 1.1 inches wide (2 g/hr). The words ``This Model'' should be centered 
above or within the blunt end arrow.
    For noncatalyst equipped wood heaters, the 3.0 inch line should be 
labeled ``0'' on the left end of the line (centered below the end) and 
``8.5'' on the right end of the line (centered below the end). To find 
where to center the large blunt end arrow, measure 0.35 inches from the 
left end for each g/h of the composite emission value. Thus, a 4 g/h 
value would be 1.4 inches from the left end. The base of the blunt end 
should always be 0.7 inches wide (2 g/h). The words ``This Model'' 
should be centered above or within the blunt end arrow.

                         2.2.3 Efficiency Value

    Between 3.0 and 4.75 inches down from the top of the label is the 
part that illustrates overall thermal efficiency value. The efficiency 
value may either be a measured value or a calculated or default value as 
provided in Sec. 60.536(i)(3) of the regulation. Regardless of how the 
efficiency is derived, the words ``EFFICIENCY'' shall be centered above 
a 4 inch line. The 4 inch line should be divided into 5 equal lengths 
(each 0.8 inches) and labeled ``50%,'' ``60%,'' * * * ``100%'' as 
indicated in Figures 1 and 2. As with the smoke line in 2.2.2, a blunt 
end arrow shall be centered over the point on the line where the 
efficiency value would be located. The base of the blunt end arrow shall 
be 0.48 inches wide (6 percentage points). To find where to center the 
blunt end arrow, measure 0.08 inches for each percentage point to the 
right of the nearest labeled value. For example, a value of 82 percent 
would be 0.16 inches to the right of the ``80%'' mark.
    For default efficiency values, an asterisk shall follow the word 
``EFFICIENCY'' as in Figure 1. The asterisk refers to a note in 
parentheses that shall say ``Not tested for efficiency. Value indicated 
is for similar catalyst equipped (or noncatalytic, as appropriate) wood 
heaters.''

[[Page 692]]

    For measured efficiency values measured with the method in appendix 
J, the words ``Tested Efficiency'' shall be centered above the blunt end 
arrow as in Figure 2.
    The last item required for this part is a sentence that says ``Wood 
heaters with higher efficiencies cost less to operate.''

                         2.2.4 Heat Output Value

    Between 4.75 and 6.0 inches down from the top of the label is the 
heat output part. The words ``HEAT OUTPUT'' in large bold print are 
centered above the Heat Output range numbers in Btu/hr, as derived from 
the certification test. The words ``Use this to choose the right size 
appliance for your needs. ASK DEALER FOR HELP'' should follow the heat 
output range numbers as in Figures 1 and 2. (Note that ``ASK DEALER FOR 
HELP'' is a single line, centered in the label.) The low end of the burn 
rate range indicated on the label should reflect the low end of the burn 
rate range achievable by the wood heater as sold and not as tested in 
the laboratory (see Sec. 60.536(i)(4)).

                              2.2.5 Caveats

    In the lower 0.75 inch of the label, the following text shall be 
presented:
    ``This wood heater will achieve low smoke output and high efficiency 
only if properly operated and maintained. See owner's manual.''

                          2.3 Coal-Only Heaters

    For those heaters which meet the definition of ``coal only heater'' 
in Sec. 60.531, the temporary label should contain the identical 
material (same layout and print font and size) as that illustrated in 
Figure 3, except that the hypothetical manufacturer and model name 
should be replaced with the appropriate actual names.

              2.4 Small Manufacturer Exempted Wood Heaters

    For those wood heaters exempted under Sec. 60.530(d), the small 
manufacturer exemption, the temporary label should contain the identical 
material (same layout and print font and size) as that illustrated in 
Figure 4, except that the hypothetical manufacturer and model name 
should be replaced with the appropriate actual names.

                 2.5 Wood Heaters that Are Not Certified

    For those wood heaters that do not meet applicable emission limits 
under Sec. 60.532 and are not otherwise exempted, the temporary label 
should contain the identical material (same layout and print font and 
size) as those illustrated in Figures 5, 6, and 7, as appropriate. The 
hypothetical manufacturer and model names should be replaced with the 
appropriate actual names.
    There are three kinds of wood heaters which fall into this category 
of ``not certified.'' Each requires a separate label. If a wood heater 
is tested but fails to meet the applicable limits, the label in Figure 5 
applies. Such a label should be printed on red rather than white paper. 
If a wood heater is tested and does meet the emission limit but is not 
subsequently certified, the label in Figure 6 applies. (An example would 
be a one-of-a-kind wood heater which is not part of a model line. 
Because of the costs of testing, this circumstance is not expected to 
arise often, if at all.) If a wood heater is not tested and is not 
certified, it should bear the label illustrated in Figure 7. As with 
Figure 5, this label should be printed on red paper.

       3.0 Guidance for Preparation of Wood Heater Owner's Manuals

                            3.1 Introduction

    Although the owner's manuals do not require premarket approval, EPA 
will monitor the contents to ensure that sufficient information is 
included to provide heater operation and maintenance information 
affecting emissions to consumers. The purpose of this section is to 
provide guidance to manufacturers in complying with the owner's manual 
provisions of Sec. 60.536(1). A checklist of topics and illustrative 
language is provided as a guideline. Owner's manuals should be tailored 
to specific wood heater models, as appropriate.

          3.2 Topics Required To Be Addressed in Owner's Manual

    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Wood heater description and compliance status,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Tamper warning,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Catalyst information and warranty (if catalyst 
equipped),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Fuel selection,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Achieving and maintaining catalyst light-off (if 
catalyst equipped),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Catalyst monitoring (if catalyst equipped),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Troubleshooting catalytic equipped heaters (if 
catalyst equipped),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Catalyst replacement (if catalyst equipped),
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Wood heater operation and maintenance, and
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Wood heater installation: achieving proper draft.

                      3.3 Sample Text/Descriptions

    The following are example texts and/or further descriptions 
illustrating the topics identified above. Although the regulation 
requires manufacturers to address (where applicable) the ten topics 
identified above, the exact language is not specified. Manuals should be 
written specific to the model and design of the wood heater. The 
following

[[Page 693]]

guidance is composed of generic descriptions and texts. If manufacturers 
choose to use the language provided in the example, the portion in 
italics should be revised as appropriate. Any manufacturer electing to 
use the EPA example language shall be in compliance with owner's manual 
requirements provided that the particular language is printed in full 
with only such changes as are necessary to ensure accuracy. Example 
language is not provided for certain topics, since these areas are 
generally heater specific. For these topics, manufacturers should 
develop text that is specific to the operation and maintenance of their 
particular products.

           3.3.1 Wood Heater Description and Compliance Status

    Owner's Manuals shall include:
    A. Manufacturer and model,
    B. Compliance status (exempt, 1988 std., 1990 std., etc.), and
    C. Heat output range (as indicated on temporary label).
    Example Text covering A, B, and C above:

``This manual describes the installation and operation of the Brand X, 
Model 0 catalytic equipped wood heater. This heater meets the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency's emission limits for wood heaters sold 
between July 1, 1990, and July 1, 1992. Under specific test conditions 
this heater has been shown to deliver heat at rates ranging from 8,000 
to 35,000 Btu/hr.''

                          3.3.2 Tamper Warning

    This consists of the following statement which must be included in 
the owner's manual for catalyst equipped units:
    Example Text covering legal prohibition on tampering:
    ``This wood heater contains a catalytic combustor, which needs 
periodic inspection and replacement for proper operation. It is against 
the law to operate this wood heater in a manner inconsistent with 
operating instructions in this manual, or if the catalytic element is 
deactivated or removed.''

                       3.3.3 Catalyst Information

    Included with or supplied in the owner's and warranty manuals shall 
be the following information:
    A. Catalyst manufacturer, model,
    B. Catalyst warranty details, and
    C. Instructions for warranty claims.
    Example Text covering A, B, and C:
    ``The combustor supplied with this heater is a Brand Z, Long Life 
Combustor. Consult the catalytic combustor warranty also supplied with 
this wood heater. Warranty claims should be addressed to:

Stove or Catalyst Manufacturer__________________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________________
Phone <greek-i>_________________________________________________________

This section should also provide clear guidance on how to exercise the 
warranty (how to package for return shipment, etc.).

                          3.3.4 Fuel Selection

    Owner's manuals shall include:
    A. Instructions on acceptable fuels, and
    B. Warning against inappropriate fuels.
    Example Text covering A and B:
    ``This heater is designed to burn natural wood only. Higher 
efficiencies and lower emissions generally result when burning air dried 
seasoned hardwoods, as compared to softwoods or to green or freshly cut 
hardwoods.
    DO NOT BURN:
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Treated Wood.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Coal.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Garbage.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Cardboard.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Solvents.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Colored Paper.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Trash.
    Burning treated wood, garbage, solvents, colored paper or trash may 
result in release of toxic fumes and may poison or render ineffective 
the catalytic combustor.
    Burning coal, cardboard, or loose paper can produce soot, or large 
flakes of char or fly ash that can coat the combustor, causing smoke 
spillage into the room, and rendering the combustor ineffective.''

           3.3.5 Achieving and Maintaining Catalyst Light-Off

    Owner's manuals shall describe in detail proper procedures for:
    A. Operation of catalyst bypass (stove specific),
    B. Achieving catalyst light-off from a cold start, and
    C. Achieving catalyst light-off when refueling.
    No example text is supplied for describing operation of catalyst 
bypass mechanisms (Item A) since these are typically stove-specific. 
Manufacturers however must provide instructions specific to their model 
describing:
    1. Bypass position during start-up,
    2. Bypass position during normal operation, and
    3. Bypass position during reloading.
    Example Text for item B:
    ``The temperature in the stove and the gases entering the combustor 
must be raised to between 500[deg] to 700 [deg]F for catalytic activity 
to be initiated. During the start-up of a cold stove, a medium to high 
firing rate must be maintained for about 20 minutes. This ensures that 
the stove, catalyst, and fuel are all stabilized at proper operating 
temperatures. Even though it is possible to have gas temperatures reach 
600 [deg]F within two to three minutes after a fire is started, if the 
fire is allowed to die down immediately it may go out or the combustor 
may

[[Page 694]]

stop working. Once the combustor starts working, heat generated in it by 
burning the smoke will keep it working.''
    Example Text for item C:
    REFUELING:
    ``During the refueling and rekindling of a cool fire, or a fire that 
has burned down to the charcoal phase, operate the stove at a medium to 
high firing rate for about 10 minutes to ensure that the catalyst 
reaches approximately 600 [deg]F.''

                        3.3.6 Catalyst Monitoring

    Owner's manuals shall include:
    A. Recommendation to visually inspect combustor at least three times 
during the heating season,
    B. Discussion on expected combustor temperatures for monitor-
equipped units, and
    C. Suggested monitoring and inspection techniques.
    Example Text covering A, B, and C:
    ``It is important to periodically monitor the operation of the 
catalytic combustor to ensure that it is functioning properly and to 
determine when it needs to be replaced. A non-functioning combustor will 
result in a loss of heating efficiency, and an increase in creosote and 
emissions. Following is a list of items that should be checked on a 
periodic basis.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Combustors should be visually inspected at least 
three times during the heating season to determine if physical 
degradation has occurred. Actual removal of the combustor is not 
recommended unless more detailed inspection is warranted because of 
decreased performance. If any of these conditions exist, refer to 
Catalyst Troubleshooting section of this owner's manual.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> This catalytic heater is equipped with a 
temperature probe to monitor catalyst operation. Properly functioning 
combustors typically maintain temperatures in excess of 500 [deg]F, and 
often reach temperatures in excess of 1,000 [deg]F. If catalyst 
temperatures are not in excess of 500 [deg]F, refer to Catalyst 
Troubleshooting section of this owner's manual.
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> You can get an indication of whether the catalyst 
is working by comparing the amount of smoke leaving the chimney when the 
smoke is going through the combustor and catalyst light-off has been 
achieved, to the amount of smoke leaving the chimney when the smoke is 
not routed through the combustor (bypass mode).
    Step 1--Light stove in accordance with instructions in 3.3.5.
    Step 2--With smoke routed through the catalyst, go outside and 
observe the emissions leaving the chimney.
    Step 3--Engage the bypass mechanism and again observe the emissions 
leaving the chimney.
    Significantly more smoke should be seen when the exhaust is not 
routed through the combustor (bypass mode). Be careful not to confuse 
smoke with steam from wet wood.''

                     3.3.7 Catalyst Troubleshooting

    The owner's manual should provide clear descriptions of symptoms and 
remedies to common combustor problems. It is recommended that 
photographs of catalyst peeling, plugging, thermal cracking, mechanical 
cracking, and masking be included in the manual to aid the consumer in 
identifying problems and to provide direction for corrective action.

                       3.3.8 Catalyst Replacement

    The owner's manual should provide clear step-by-step instructions on 
how to remove and replace the catalytic combustor. The section should 
include diagrams and/or photographs.

               3.3.9 Wood Heater Operation and Maintenance

    Owner's manual shall include:
    A. Recommendations about building and maintaining a fire,
    B. Instruction on proper use of air controls,
    C. Ash removal and disposal,
    D. Instruction on gasket replacement, and
    E. Warning against overfiring.
    No example text is supplied for A, B, and D since these items are 
model specific. Manufacturers should provide detailed instructions on 
building and maintaining a fire including selection of fuel pieces, fuel 
quantity, and stacking arrangement. Manufacturers should also provide 
instruction on proper air settings (both primary and secondary) for 
attaining minimum and maximum heat outputs and any special instructions 
for operating thermostatic controls. Step-by-step instructions on 
inspection and replacement of gaskets should also be included. 
Manufacturers should provide diagrams and/or photographs to assist the 
consumer. Gasket type and size should be specified.
    Example Text for item C:
    ``Whenever ashes get 3 to 4 inches deep in your firebox or ash pan, 
and when the fire has burned down and cooled, remove excess ashes. Leave 
an ash bed approximately 1 inch deep on the firebox bottom to help 
maintain a hot charcoal bed.''
    ``Ashes should be placed in a metal container with a tight-fitting 
lid. The closed container of ashes should be placed on a noncombustible 
floor or on the ground, away from all combustible materials, pending 
final disposal. The ashes should be retained in the closed container 
until all cinders have thoroughly cooled.''
    Example Text covering item E:
    ``DO NOT OVERFIRE THIS HEATER''
    ``Attempts to achieve heat output rates that exceed heater design 
specifications can

[[Page 695]]

result in permanent damage to the heater and to the catalytic combustor 
if so equipped.''

         3.3.10 Wood Heater Installation: Achieving Proper Draft

    Owner's manual shall include:
    A. Importance of proper draft,
    B. Conditions indicating inadequate draft, and
    C. Conditions indicating excessive draft.
    Example Text for Item A:
    ``Draft is the force which moves air from the appliance up through 
the chimney. The amount of draft in your chimney depends on the length 
of the chimney, local geography, nearby obstructions, and other factors. 
Too much draft may cause excessive temperatures in the appliance and may 
damage the catalytic combustor. Inadequate draft may cause backpuffing 
into the room and `plugging' of the chimney or the catalyst.''
    Example text for Item B:
    ``Inadequate draft will cause the appliance to leak smoke into the 
room through appliance and chimney connector joints.''
    Example text Item C:
    ``An uncontrollable burn or a glowing red stove part or chimney 
connector indicates excessive draft.''

[[Page 696]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.297


[[Page 697]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.298


[[Page 698]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.299


[[Page 699]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.300


[[Page 700]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.301


[[Page 701]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.302


[[Page 702]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN92.303


[53 FR 5913, Feb. 26, 1988]


[[Page 703]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 705]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of July 1, 2005)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


40 CFR (PART 60 APPENDICES):

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                                                  40 CFR


American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, 
and Water Pollution Control Federation

  1015 Fifteenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20005; 
  Telephone: (202) 777-APHA
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and    Appendix A to Part 
  Wastewater, 16th ed. (1985), Method 308 F.       60, Method 29, pars. 
                                                      4.2.2, 4.4.2, and 
                                                                   4.5.6


American Society for Testing and Materials

  100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 
  19428-2959; Telephone: (610) 832-9585, FAX 
  (610): 832-9555
ASTM D129-64, 78, 95, Standard Test Method for       Appendix A to Part 
  Sulfur in Petroleum Products (General Bomb             60, Method 19, 
  Method).                                            Section 12.5.2.2.3
ASTM D240-76, 92 Standard Test Method for Heat of    Appendix A to Part 
  Combustion of Liquid Hydrocarbon Fuels by Bomb         60, Method 19, 
  Calorimeter.                                        Section 12.5.2.2.3
ASTM D270-65 (Reapproved 1975), Standard Method of   Appendix A to Part 
  Sampling Petroleum and Petroleum Products.               60, Method 19

[[Page 706]]

ASTM D1193-77, 91, Standard Specification for        Appendix A to Part 
  Reagent Water.                                   60, Method 5, Section 
                                                      7.1.3; Method 5E, 
                                                   Section 7.2.1, Method 
                                                      5F, Method 7.2.1; 
                                                      Method 6, Section 
                                                       7.1.1; Method 7, 
                                                   Section 7.1.1; Method 
                                                     7C, Section 7.1.1; 
                                                     Method 7D, Section 
                                                     7.1.1; Method 10A, 
                                                   Section 7.1.1; Method 
                                                     11, Section 7.1.3; 
                                                     Method 12, Section 
                                                     7.1.3; Method 13A, 
                                                   Section 7.1.2; Method 
                                                     26, Section 7.1.2; 
                                                    Method 26A, Section 
                                                      7.1.2; Method 29, 
                                                         Section 7.2.2; 
                                                     Appendix B of Part 
                                                        61; Method 101, 
                                                   Section 7.1.1; Method 
                                                   101A, Section 7.1.1; 
                                                    Method 104, Section 
                                                       7.1; Method 108, 
                                                   Section 7.1.3; Method 
                                                   108A, Section 7.1.1; 
                                                   Method 108B, Section 
                                                    7.1.1; Method 108C, 
                                                   Section 7.1.1; Method 
                                                      111, Section 7.3; 
                                                     Appendix A of Part 
                                                        63; Method 306, 
                                                     Sections 7.1.1 and 
                                                                  7.4.2.
ASTM D1475-60, 80, 90, Standard Test Method for      Appendix A to Part 
  Density of Paint, Varnish Lacquer, and Related         60, Method 24, 
  Products.                                            Section 6.1, and 
                                                   Method 24A, Sections 
                                                             6.5 and 7.1

[[Page 707]]

ASTM D1552-83, Standard Test Method for Sulfur in    Appendix A to Part 
  Petroleum Products (High-Temperature Method).          60, Method 19, 
                                                      Section 12.5.2.2.3
ASTM D1608-77, Standard Test Method for Oxides of   Method 7, par. 3.2.2
  Nitrogen in Gaseous Combustion Products (Phenol-
  Disulfonic Acid Procedures).
ASTM D1826-77, Standard Test Method for Calorific    Appendix A: Method 
  Value of Gases in Natural Gas Range by            19, Section 12.3.2.4
  Continuous Recording Calorimeter.
ASTM D2013-72, 86, Standard Method of Preparing      Appendix A to Part 
  Coal Samples for Analysis.                             60; Method 19, 
                                                      Section 12.5.2.1.3
ASTM D2015-77, (Reapproved 1978), 96, Standard       Appendix A to Part 
  Test Method for Gross Calorific Value of Solid         60, Method 19, 
  Fuel by the Adiabatic Bomb Calorimeter.             Section 12.5.2.1.3
ASTM D2016-74 (Reapproved 1983), Standard Text       Appendix A to Part 
  Methods for Moisture Content of Wood.                    60, Method 28
ASTM D2234-76, 96, 97a, 97b, 98, Standard Methods    Appendix A to Part 
  for Collection of a Gross Sample of Coal.              60, Method 19, 
                                                      Section 12.5.2.1.1
ASTM D2369-81, 87, 90, 92, 93, 95, Standard Test     Appendix A to Part 
  Method for Volatile Content of Coatings.               60, Method 24, 
                                                             Section 6.2
ASTM D2986-71 (Reapproved 1978), 95a, Standard       Appendix A to Part 
  Method for Evaluation of Air, Assay Media by the 60, Method 5, Section 
  Monodisperse DOP (Dioctyl Phthalate) Smoke Test.    7.1.1; Method 12, 
                                                   Section 7.1.1; Method 
                                                    13A, Section 7.1.1.2
ASTM D 2986-95A, Standard Practice for Evaluation    Appendix A to Part 
  of Air Assay Media by the Monodisperse DOP       60, Method 315, par. 
  (Dioctyl Phthalate) Smoke Test.                                  7.1.1
ASTM D3173-73, 87, Standard Test Method for          Appendix A to Part 
  Moisture in the Analysis Sample of Coal and            60, Method 19, 
  Coke.                                               Section 12.5.2.1.3
ASTM D3176-74, 89, Standard Method for Ultimate      Appendix A to Part 
  Analysis of Coal and Coke.                             60, Method 19, 
                                                                12.3.2.3
ASTM D3177-75, 89, Standard Test Method for Total    Appendix A to Part 
  Sulfur in the Analysis Sample of Coal and Coke.        60, Method 19, 
                                                      section 12.5.2.1.3
ASTM D3286-85, 96, Standard Test Method for Gross    Appendix A to Part 
  Calorific Value of Coal and Coke by the                60, Method 19, 
  Isothermal-Jacket Bomb calorimeter.                 Section 12.5.2.1.3
ASTM D3431-80, Standard Test Method for Trace        Appendix A to Part 
  Nitrogen in Liquid Petroleum Hydrocarbons                60, Method 19
  (Microcoulometric Method).
ASTM D3792-79, 91, Standard Test Method for Water    Appendix A to Part 
  Content of Water-Reducible Paints by Direct            60, Method 24, 
  Injection Into a Gas Chromatograph.                        Section 6.3
ASTM D4017-81, 90, 96a, Standard Test Method for     Appendix A to Part 
  Water in Paints and Paint Materials by the Karl        60, Method 24, 
  Fischer Titration Method.                                  Section 6.4
ASTM D4057-81, Standard Practive for Manual          Appendix A to Part 
  Sampling of Petroleum and Petroleum Products.            60, Method 19

[[Page 708]]

ASTM D4239-85, 94, 97, Standard Test Methods for     Appendix A to Part 
  Sulfur in the Analysis Sample of Coal and Coke         60, Method 19, 
  Using High Temperature Tube Furnace Combustion      Section 12.5.2.1.3
  Methods.
ASTM D4442-84, 92, Standard Test Methods for         Appendix A to Part 
  Direct Moisture Content Measurement of Wood and        60, Method 28, 
  Wood-base Materials.                                    Section 16.1.1
ASTM D4457-85, (Reapproved 1991), Test Method for    Appendix A to Part 
  Determination of Dichloromethane and 1,1,1-            60, Method 24, 
  Trichloroethane in Paints and Coatings by Direct           Section 6.5
  Injection into a Gas Chromatograph.
ASTM D 6216-98, Standard Practice for Opacity        Appendix B to Part 
  Monitor Manufacturers To Certify Conformance     60, Specification 1, 
  with Design and Performance Specifications.                Section 8.2


U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

  401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460
Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/   Appendix A to Part 
  Chemical Methods, EPA Publication SW-846 Third   60, Method 29, pars. 
  Edition (November, 1986), as amended by Updates    2.2.1, 2.3.1, 2.5, 
  I (July 1992), II (September 1994), IIA (August   3.3.12.1, 3.3.12.2, 
  1993) and IIB (January 1995).                         3.3.13, 3.3.14, 
                                                       5.4.3, 6.2, 6.3, 
                                                      7.2.1, 7.2.3, and 
                                                              Table 29-2

[[Page 709]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of July 1, 2005)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  [Reserved]
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements [Reserved]


                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)

[[Page 710]]

        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Part 6501)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Part 6601)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Part 7701)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Part 8301)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)

[[Page 711]]

    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)
     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Part 
                9701)

                      Title 6--Homeland Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)

[[Page 712]]

        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

[[Page 713]]

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Part 1800)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 714]]

        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 715]]

        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
                Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

[[Page 716]]

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 717]]

        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)

[[Page 718]]

        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

[[Page 719]]

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)

[[Page 720]]

    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Part 1501)

[[Page 721]]

       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                301--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)

[[Page 722]]

       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10010)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 723]]

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)

[[Page 724]]

        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  [Reserved]
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)

[[Page 725]]

        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1400--1499)
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)

[[Page 726]]

        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 727]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of July 1, 2005)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development, United      22, II
     States
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 728]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII

[[Page 729]]

  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I, IV, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II

[[Page 730]]

  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5

[[Page 731]]

  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V; 42, I
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V; 42, I
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General

[[Page 732]]

  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I, XI; 40, 
                                                  IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A

[[Page 733]]

  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
   Commission
[[Page 734]]

Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of            
</pre></body></html>
