<html><body><pre>
[Title 22 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - April 1, 2000 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]

          
<R02>
                    22


          Part 300 to end

                         Revised as of April 1, 2000

Foreign Relations

<R03>



          Containing a Codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect
          As of April 1, 2000
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

As a Special Edition of the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 2000



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................      vi

  Title 22:
          Chapter III--Peace Corps                                   3
          Chapter IV--International Joint Commission, United 
          States and Canada                                         95
          Chapter V--Broadcasting Board of Governors               105
          Chapter VII--Overseas Private Investment Corporation     227
          Chapter IX--Foreign Service Grievance Board 
          Regulations                                              271
          Chapter X--Inter-American Foundation                     287
          Chapter XI--International Boundary and Water 
          Commission, United States and Mexico, United States 
          Section                                                  329
          Chapter XII--United States International Development 
          Cooperation Agency                                       377
          Chapter XIII--Board for International Broadcasting       397
          Chapter XIV--Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; 
          Federal Labor Relations Authority; General Counsel 
          of the Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the 
          Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel                   417
          Chapter XV--African Development Foundation               471
          Chapter XVI--Japan-United States Friendship 
          Commission                                               515
          Chapter XVII--United States Institute of Peace           517

[[Page iv]]

  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     537
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     555
      Redesignation Table.....................................     565
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     567



[[Page v]]


      


                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code:  CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 22 CFR 301.1 refers 
                       to title 22, part 301, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page vi]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, April 1, 2000), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vii]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I). A list of CFR titles, chapters, 
and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents and 
the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic format at 
www.access.gpo.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For more information, contact 
Electronic Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government Printing 
Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-mail, 
gpoaccess@gpo.gov.

[[Page viii]]

    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.nara.gov/fedreg. The NARA 
site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

April 1, 2000.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 22--Foreign Relations is composed of two volumes. The first 
volume, Parts 1 to 299 contains Chapter I--Department of State 
regulations and Chapter II--Agency for International Development 
regulations. The second volume, Part 300 to End is composed of Chapter 
III--Peace Corps; Chapter IV--International Joint Commission, United 
States and Canada; Chapter V--Broadcasting Board of Governors; Chapter 
VII--Overseas Private Investment Corporation; Chapter IX--Foreign 
Service Grievance Board Regulations; Chapter X--Inter-American 
Foundation; Chapter XI--International Boundary and Water Commission, 
United States and Mexico, United States Section; Chapter XII--United 
States International Development Cooperation Agency; Chapter XIII--Board 
for International Broadcasting; Chapter XIV--Foreign Service Labor 
Relations Board; Federal Labor Relations Authority; General Counsel of 
the Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign Service Impasse 
Disputes Panel; Chapter XV--African Development Foundation; Chapter 
XVI--Japan-United States Friendship Commission; and Chapter XVII--United 
States Institute of Peace. The contents of these volumes represent all 
current regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of April 1, 
2000.

    Redesignation tables appear in the Finding Aids section of these 
volumes.

    For this volume, Jonn V. Lilyea was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>



[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                       TITLE 22--FOREIGN RELATIONS


<R02>

                  (This book contains part 300 to End)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter iii--Peace Corps....................................         301


chapter iv--International Joint Commission, United States 
  and Canada................................................         401


chapter v--Broadcasting Board of Governors..................         501


chapter vii--Overseas Private Investment Corporation........         705


chapter ix--Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations.....         901


chapter x--Inter-American Foundation........................        1001


chapter xi--International Boundary and Water Commission, 
  United States and Mexico, United States Section...........        1100


chapter xii--United States International Development 
  Cooperation Agency........................................        1201


chapter xiii--Board for International Broadcasting..........        1300


chapter xiv--Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal 
  Labor Relations Authority; General Counsel of the Federal 
  Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign Service Impasse 
  Disputes Panel............................................        1411


chapter xv--African Development Foundation..................        1500


chapter xvi--Japan-United States Friendship Commission......        1600


chapter xvii--United States Institute of Peace..............        1701

Cross References: U.S. Customs Service, Department of the Treasury: See 
  Customs Duties, 19 CFR chapter I.

  International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce: See 
Commerce and Foreign Trade, 15 CFR chapter III.

[[Page 2]]


  Foreign-Trade Zones Board: See Commerce and Foreign Trade, 15 CFR 
chapter IV.

  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of Justice: See 
Aliens and Nationality, 8 CFR chapter I.

  Taxation pursuant to treaties: See Internal Revenue, 26 CFR 1.894-1.

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
                        CHAPTER III--PEACE CORPS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
301             Public access to classified material........           5
302             Organization................................           5
303             Inspection and copying of records: Rules for 
                    compliance with Freedom of Information 
                    Act.....................................           8
304             Claims against Government under Federal Tort 
                    Claims Act..............................          18
305             Eligibility and standards for Peace Corps 
                    volunteer service.......................          21
306             Volunteer discrimination complaint procedure          24
307             Peace Corps standards of conduct............          24
308             Implementation of the Privacy Act of 1974...          38
309             Claims collection...........................          47
310             Governmentwide debarment and suspension 
                    (nonprocurement) and governmentwide 
                    requirements for drug-free workplace 
                    (grants)................................          64
311             New restrictions on lobbying................          82

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
PART 301--PUBLIC ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED MATERIAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301.1  Introduction.
301.2  Requests for mandatory declassification review.
301.3  Action on requests for declassification review.

    Authority: E.O. 12356, 43 FR 14874 dated April 2, 1982.

    Source: 49 FR 13692, Apr. 6, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301.1  Introduction.

    The following regulations implement Executive Order 12356 and 
provide guidance for members of the public desiring a review for 
declassification of a document of the Peace Corps.


<R05>
Sec. 301.2  Requests for mandatory declassification review.

    (a) All information originally classified by the Peace Corps shall 
be subject to review for declassification.
    (b) Requests for review of such information for declassification 
shall be in writing, addressed to the Peace Corps Director of Security, 
Peace Corps, Washington, DC 20526, and reasonably describe the 
information sought with sufficient specificity to enable its location 
with a reasonable amount of effort. Only requests made by a United 
States citizen or a permanent resident alien, a Federal agency or a 
State or local government will be considered.
    (c) Requests relating to information, either derivatively classified 
by the Peace Corps or originally classified by another agency but in the 
possession of the Peace Corps, shall be forwarded, together with a copy 
of the record, to the originating agency. The transmittal may contain in 
Peace Corps recommendation for action.


<R05>
Sec. 301.3  Action on requests for declassification review.

    (a) The Director of Security shall present each request for 
declassification to the Peace Corps Classification Review Committee, 
which shall consist of the Associate Director for International 
Operations, the Associate Director for Management and the General 
Counsel, or their designees, together with his or her recommendation for 
action.
    (b) Every effort will be made to complete action on each request 
within 60 days of receipt thereof.
    (c) Information shall be declassified or downgraded as soon as 
national security considerations permit. If the Classification Review 
Committee determines that the material for which review is requested no 
longer requires this protection, it shall be declassified and made 
available to the requester unless withholding is otherwise authorized by 
law.
    (d) If the Peace Corps Classification Review Committee determines 
that requested information must remain classified, the requester shall 
be given prompt notice of the decision and, if possible, a brief 
explanation of why the information cannot be declassified.
    (e) The Peace Corps may refuse to confirm or deny the existence or 
non-existence of requested information whenever the fact of its 
existence or non-existence is itself classified under E.O. 12356.
    (f) A requester may appeal a refusal to declassify information to 
the Director of the Peace Corps, or the Director's designee. Appeals 
shall be in writing, addressed to the Director of the Peace Corps, 
Washington, DC 20526, and shall briefly state the reasons why the 
requester believes that the Peace Corps Classification Review Committee 
decision is in error. Appeals must be submitted within 30 days after 
receipt of notice of the Classification Review Committee decision. The 
decision of the Peace Corps Director, or designee, will be based on the 
entire record, and will be rendered in writing within 60 days after 
receipt of an appeal. The decision of the Director or Director's 
designee is the final Peace Corps action on a request.


<R03>
PART 302--ORGANIZATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302.1  Introduction.
302.2  Central and field organization, established places at which, the 
          officers from whom, and the methods whereby the public may 
          secure information, make submittals, or request, or obtain 
          decisions; and statements of the general course and

[[Page 6]]

          methods by which its functions are channeled and determined.
302.3  Rules of procedure, description of forms available, the places at 
          which forms may be obtained, and instructions as to the scope 
          and content of all papers, reports, or examinations.
302.4  Substantive rules of general applicability adopted as authorized 
          by law, and statements of general policy or interpretation of 
          general applicability formulated and adopted by the agency.

    Authority: Sec. 4, Pub. L. 87-239, Stat. 612 (22 U.S.C. 2503, as 
amended); 5 U.S.C. 552; E.O. 12137,

[[Page 535]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Redesignation Table
  List of CFR Sections Affected



[[Page 537]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 2000)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1-49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50-299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400-500)

                          Title 2 [Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100-199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1-99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100-299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1-1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200-1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300-1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500-1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600-1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700-1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800-1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900-1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400-2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500-2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600-2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100-3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)

[[Page 538]]

     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900-3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000-
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100-4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300-6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Part 8301)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6 [Reserved]

              

[[Page 539]]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0-26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27-209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210-299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400-499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500-599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600-699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700-799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800-899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900-999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000-1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200-1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300-1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400-1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500-1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600-1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700-1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800-
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600-2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700-2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800-2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900-2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000-3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100-3199)

[[Page 540]]

     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200-3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300-3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400-
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500-3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600-3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700-3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800-3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200-
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1-599)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1-199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200-299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300-599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0-199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200-699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700-999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 1000-
                1099)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700-
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1-9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1-199)

[[Page 541]]

        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200-299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400-
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500-599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600-699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700-799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800-899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900-999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100-1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400-
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500-1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800-1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1-199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400-499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500-599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1-199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200-399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400-499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200-1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0-29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30-199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200-299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300-399)

[[Page 542]]

        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400-499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700-799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800-899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900-999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100-1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300-1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400-1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000-2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300-2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0-999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000-1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1-199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200-399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400-499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1-399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400-499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700-799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800-899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300-1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1-199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200-299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300-399)

[[Page 543]]

                          Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1-199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200-399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400-499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500-599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600-699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700-799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 800-
                899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900-999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000-1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1-1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300-1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400-
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1-199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200-299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300-399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400-499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500-599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700-
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900-999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000-1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100-1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200-1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300-1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400-1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500-1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 1600-
                1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700-1799)

[[Page 544]]

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1-999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200-1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300-1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0-99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100-199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200-299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400-499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500-599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600-699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700-
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800-899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900-999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700-1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000-2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200-3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100-
                4199)

[[Page 545]]

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1-299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300-399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500-599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700-799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1-799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1-299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0-199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300-399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500-
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600-699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700-799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 0-
                99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100-199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200-299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400-499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500-899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900-999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200-1299)

[[Page 546]]

       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400-1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600-
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900-1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200-2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500-2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700-2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000-4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1-199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200-299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400-499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600-699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700-999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0-50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51-199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 200-
                399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 400-
                499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500-599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600-699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700-799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800-899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1-399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400-699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700-799)

[[Page 547]]

       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800-1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200-1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600-1699)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800-1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900-1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000-
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100-2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400-
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700-2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800-2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1-
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 200-
                399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400-499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1-99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100-199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200-299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400-499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500-599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600-699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700-799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200-1299)

[[Page 548]]

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1-299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1-199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200-
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 300-
                399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400-499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500-599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700-799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800-
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900-999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000-1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100-1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200-1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Part 1501)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1-199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200-299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400-499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500-599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0-99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1-999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000-3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1-799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500-1599)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700-1799)

[[Page 549]]

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300.99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-70)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1-199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400-499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000-1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1-199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands

[[Page 550]]

         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200-499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000-9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000-10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0-399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400-499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1-199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200-299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300-399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400-499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500-599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600-699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700-799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800-899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000-1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100-1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200-1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300-1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600-1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700-1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800-
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100-2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400-2499)

[[Page 551]]

       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500-2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1-
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200-399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400-499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500-599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0-199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200-299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300-
                399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1-99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200-299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400-499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500-599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600-699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700-799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800-899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900-999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000-1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200-1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300-1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400-1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500-1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600-1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700-1799)
        18  National Aero
</pre></body></html>
