<html><body><pre>
[Title 35 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - July 1, 1997 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          35


<R02>
          Panama Canal

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          Revised as of July 1, 1997
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF JULY 1, 1997
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 35:
    Chapter I--Panama Canal Regulations.......................       3
  Finding Aids:
    Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference..........     197
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     199
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     215
    Redesignation Tables......................................     225
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     299

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    

   Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                                                
   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part                       
   and section number. Thus, 35 CFR 3.1 refers to title                        
   35, part 3, section 1.                                                      
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, July 1, 1997), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 523-4534.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.

[[Page vii]]

    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

July 1, 1997.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 35--Panama Canal is composed of one volume. The contents of 
this volume represent all current regulations of the Panama Canal 
Commission as of July 1, 1997.

    On October 1, 1979, the United States relinquished and Panama 
assumed plenary jurisdiction over what was the Canal Zone. Pursuant to 
the Panama Canal Act of 1979, Pub. L. 96-70, the statute implementing 
the new treaty, the Canal Zone Government was disestablished and the 
Panama Canal Company was replaced by a new United States Government 
agency, the Panama Canal Commission, which will operate the waterway 
until the termination of the treaty on December 31, 1999.

    Redesignation tables appear in the Finding Aids section of this 
volume.

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 
[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                         TITLE 35--PANAMA CANAL


<R02>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part
Chapter i--Panama Canal Regulations.........................           3

[[Page 3]]




<R02>
                CHAPTER I--PANAMA CANAL REGULATIONS<SUP>1


<R03>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

  1</SUP>  Pursuant to Pub. L. 96-70 and a document published at 44 FR 
75306, Dec. 19, 1979, the chapter heading has been adjusted to read 
``Panama Canal Regulations.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  Editorial Note: Upon entry into force on October 1, 1979, of the 
Panama Canal Treaty of 1977, the United States relinquished and Panama 
assumed plenary jurisdiction over what was the Canal Zone. Pursuant to 
the Panama Canal Act of 1979, Pub. L. 96-70, the statute implementing 
the new treaty, the Canal Zone Government was disestablished and the 
Panama Canal Company was replaced by a new United States Government 
agency, the Panama Canal Commission, which will operate the waterway 
until the termination of the treaty on December 31, 1999. Many of the 
functions performed by the two former Canal agencies will not be 
undertaken by the Panama Canal Commission.
  As a result of the Treaty and Pub. L. 96-70, the regulations published 
in Title 35, have to be rewritten in accordance with the substantially 
different authority and responsibilities which the new agency has.
  It should be noted that those regulations which have not been revised 
since October 1, 1979 must be read in light of the new definitions 
provided by section 3 of Pub. L. 96-70, which states in part as follows:

  (b) Subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, for 
purposes of applying the Canal Zone Code or other laws of the United 
States and regulations issued pursuant to such Code or other laws with 
respect to transactions, occurrences, or status on or after the 
effective date of this Act--
  (1) ``Canal Zone'' shall be deemed to refer to the areas and 
installations in the Republic of Panama made available to the United 
States pursuant to the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and related 
agreements;
  (2) ``Canal Zone waters'' and ``waters of the Canal Zone'' shall be 
deemed to refer to ``Panama Canal waters'' and ``waters of the Panama 
Canal'', respectively;
  (3) ``Government of the Canal Zone'' or ``Canal Zone Government'' 
shall be deemed to refer to the United States of America;
  (4) ``Governor of the Canal Zone'' or ``Governor'', wherever the 
reference is to the Governor of the Canal Zone, shall be deemed to refer 
to the Panama Canal Commission;
  (5) ``Panama Canal Company'' or ``Company'' wherever the reference is 
to the Panama Canal Company, shall be deemed to refer to the Panama 
Canal Commission;
  (6) In chapter 57 of title 5 of the Canal Zone Code, ``hospitals'' and 
``Health Bureau'' shall be deemed to refer, respectively, to the 
hospitals operated by the United States in the Republic of Panama, and 
to the organizational unit operating such hospitals; and
  (7) In chapter 57 of title 5 of the Canal Zone Code, in section 4784 
of title 6 of such Code, and in section 2 of title 7 of such Code, 
``health director'' shall be deemed to refer to the senior official in 
charge of the hospitals operated by the United States in the Republic of 
Panama.
  (c) Any reference set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall 
apply except as otherwise provided in this Act or unless (1) such 
reference is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, (2) in the 
context in which a term is used such reference is clearly not intended, 
or (3) a term refers to a time before the effective date of this Act.

  Parts 1, 5, 53, 57, 59, 63, 65, 69, 127, and 129 have been removed 
because they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Panama Canal 
Treaty of 1977 and related

[[Page 4]]

agreements or with Pub. L. 96-70. Other parts have been amended, revised 
or recodified to comply with the new statutory basis and agency 
organization.

              SUBCHAPTER A--ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Part                                                                Page
3               Organization of Panama Canal Commission.....           7
7               Claims of employees of Panama Canal 
                    Commission under Military Personnel and 
                    Civilian Employees' Claims Act of 1964, 
                    as amended..............................           8
9               Organization, functions, and availability of 
                    records--Panama Canal Commission........          11
10              Access to information about individuals.....          21
                    SUBCHAPTER B--GENERAL REGULATIONS

60              Classified information......................          32
61              Health, sanitation, and communicable disease 
                    surveillance............................          47
67              Canal Zone postal money orders and savings 
                    certificates............................          59
70              Procedures for changing rules of measurement 
                    or rates of tolls.......................          66
                  SUBCHAPTER C--SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION

101             Arriving and departing vessels: Various 
                    communication, documentation, sanitation 
                    and admeasurement requirements..........          69
103             General provisions governing vessels........          72
104             Vessel transit reservation system...........          85
105             Pilotage....................................          88
107             Manning of vessels: Requirements concerning 
                    officers and crew.......................          89
109             Entering and preparing to enter the locks...          91
111             Rules for the prevention of collisions......          94
113             Dangerous cargoes...........................         108
115             Board of Local Inspectors: Composition and 
                    functions...............................         114
117             Marine accidents: Investigations; control; 
                    responsibility..........................         115
119             Licensing of officers.......................         117
121             Inspection and registration of vessels......         126
123             Radio communication.........................         139
125             Sanitary requirements: Vessel wastes; 
                    garbage; ballast........................         142
131             Neutrality of canal.........................         142
133             Tolls for use of canal......................         142

[[Page 5]]

135             Rules for measurement of vessels............         145
                        SUBCHAPTER D--[RESERVED]

SUBCHAPTER E--EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION UNDER THE PANAMA CANAL EMPLOYMENT SYSTEM

251             Regulations of the Secretary of the Army 
                    (Panama Canal Employment System)--
                    Personnel policy........................         159
253             Regulations of the Secretary of the Army 
                    (Panama Canal Employment System)--
                    Employment policy.......................         166
255       [Reserved]
256             Salary offset for Federal employees who are 
                    indebted to the United States...........         180
257             Enforcement of nondiscrimination on the 
                    basis of handicap in programs or 
                    activities conducted by Panama Canal 
                    Commission..............................         188

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
              SUBCHAPTER A--ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION

<R05>


<R03>
PART 3--ORGANIZATION OF PANAMA CANAL COMMISSION--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: Issued under the authority vested in President by 
provisions of 3 U.S.C. 301; 22 U.S.C. 3811; EO 12215, dated May 27, 
1980, 45 FR 36043.


<R04>
             Subpart A--Delegation of Panama Canal Functions


<R05>
Sec. 3.1  Text of Executive Order 12215 of May 27, 1980.

    By the authority vested in me as President of the United States of 
America by the Panama Canal Code (76A Stat. 1), as amended, by the 
Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 452; 22 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.), and by 
section 301 of Title 3 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered 
as follows:
    1-1. The Secretary of Defense.
    1-101. The Secretary of Defense shall develop for the President's 
consideration an appropriate legislative proposal as required by section 
3(d) of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 456; 22 U.S.C. 3602(d)). 
The Secretary of Defense shall coordinate development of this proposal 
with the Secretary of State and the heads of other interested Executive 
agencies.
    1-102. The function vested in the President by section 1212(d)(1) of 
the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 464; 22 U.S.C. 3652(d)(1)) to 
exclude employees of, or positions within, the Department of Defense 
from coverage under any provision of subchapter II, chapter 2 of title I 
of the Panama Canal Act of 1979, is delegated to the Secretary of 
Defense.
    1-103. The function vested in the President by section 1281(b) of 
Title 6 of the Panama Canal Code (76A Stat. 455; 6 P.C.C. 1281(b)), as 
amended, with respect to areas and installations made available to the 
United States pursuant to the Agreement in Implementation of Article IV 
of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 is delegated to the Secretary of 
Defense.
    1-104. The function vested in the President by section 1701 of the 
Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 492; 22 U.S.C. 3801), with respect to 
regulations applicable within the areas and installations made available 
to the United States pursuant to the Agreement in Implementation of 
Article IV of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977, is delegated to the 
Secretary of Defense.
    1-105. The functions vested in the President by sections 1243(c)(1) 
and 2401 of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 474 and 495; 22 
U.S.C. 3681(c)(1) and 3851) are delegated to the Secretary of Defense.
    1-106. The functions vested in the President by section 1502(a) of 
the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 488; 22 U.S.C. 3782(a)) are 
delegated to the Secretary of Defense.
    1-2. Coordination of Pay and Employment Practices.
    1-201. In order to coordinate the policies and activities of 
agencies under subchapter II of chapter 2 of title I of the Panama Canal 
Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 463; 22 U.S.C. 3651 et seq.), each agency shall 
periodically consult with the Secretary of Defense with respect to the 
establishment of rates of pay, in order to develop compatible or unified 
systems for basic pay. In addition, each agency shall consult with the 
Secretary of Defense on such other matters as the Secretary may deem 
appropriate in order to develop compatible or unified employment 
practices.
    1-202. The head of each agency shall, upon approval by the Secretary 
of Defense, adopt a schedule of basic pay pursuant to section 1215 of 
the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 465; 22 U.S.C. 3655) and adopt 
regulations governing other matters relating to pay and employment 
practices.
    1-203. The authority vested in the President by section 1223(a) of 
the Panama Canal Act of 1979 to coordinate the policies and activities 
of agencies (93 Stat. 467; 22 U.S.C. 3663(a)) is delegated to the 
Secretary of Defense. The Secretary shall exercise such functions in a 
manner which is in accord with the provisions of sections 1-201 and 1-
202 of this Order.
    1-3. Panama Canal Commission.
    1-301. The functions vested in the President and delegated to the 
Secretary of Defense in this section 1-3 of

[[Page 8]]

this Order shall be carried out by the Secretary of Defense, who shall, 
in carrying out the said functions, provide, by redelegation or 
otherwise, for their performance, in a manner consistent with paragraph 
3 of Article III of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977, by the Panama Canal 
Commission.
    1-302. The authority of the President under section 1104 of the 
Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 457; 22 U.S. 3614) to fix the 
compensation of and to define the authorities and duties of the Deputy 
Administrator and the Chief Engineer is delegated to the Secretary of 
Defense.
    1-303. The functions vested in the President by sections 1418, 1801, 
and 2206 of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 487, 492, and 494; 22 
U.S.C. 3778, 3811, and 3844) are delegated to the Secretary of Defense.
    1-304. The authority of the President under section 1701 of the 
Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 492; 22 U.S.C. 3801) with respect to 
regulations applicable within the areas and installations made available 
to the United States pursuant to the Agreement in Implementation of 
Article III of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 is delegated to the 
Secretary of Defense.
    1-305. The function vested in the President by section 1281(b) of 
Title 6 of the Panama Canal Code (76A Stat. 455; 6 P.C.C. 1281(b)), as 
amended, with respect to areas and installations in the Republic of 
Panama made available to the United States pursuant to the Agreement in 
Implementation of Article III of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 is 
delegated to the Secretary of Defense.
    1-306. The functions vested in the President by sections 82 and 86 
of Title 3 of the Panama Canal Code (76A Stat. 54 and 55; 3 P.C.C. 82 
and 86), as amended, are delegated to the Secretary of Defense.
    1-307. The functions vested in the President by subsections (a), (b) 
and (c) of section 8146 of Title 5 of the United States Code, as they 
apply to the employees of the Panama Canal Commission, are delegated to 
the Secretary of Defense.
    1-308. Except to the extent heretofore delegated, the functions 
vested in the President pursuant to subchapter II of chapter 2 of title 
I of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 463) are hereby delegated to 
the Secretary of Defense.
    1-4. Other Agencies.
    1-401. The functions vested in the President by sections 1111 and 
3301 of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 459 and 497; 22 U.S.C. 
3621 and 3871), are delegated to the Secretary of State. The Secretary 
shall perform these functions in coordination with the Secretary of 
Defense.
    1-402. The functions vested in the President by sections 1112(d), 
1344(b), and 1504(b) of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 460, 484, 
and 488; 22 U.S.C. 3622(d), 3754(b), and 3784(b)) are delegated to the 
Secretary of State.
    1-403. The functions vested in the President by section 1243(a)(1) 
of the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 473; 22 U.S.C. 3681(a)(1)) are 
delegated to the Director of the Office of Personnel Management.
    1-404. Paragraphs (22) and (23) of section 1 of Executive Order No. 
11609, as amended, and Executive Order No. 11713 are revoked.

[51 FR 21359, June 12, 1986]


<R03>
PART 7--CLAIMS OF EMPLOYEES OF PANAMA CANAL COMMISSION UNDER MILITARY PERSONNEL AND CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES' CLAIMS ACT OF 1964, AS AMENDED--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
7.1  Definitions.
7.2  Applicability and scope.
7.3  Claimants.
7.4  Conditions.
7.5  Principal types of claims payable.
7.6  Principal types of claims not payable
7.7  Types and quantity of property.
7.8  Computation of award.
7.9  Claims procedure.
7.10  Supporting papers.
7.11  Settlement.
7.12  Agents' or attorneys' fees.

    Authority: Sec. 3, 78 Stat. 767; 31 U.S.C. 241.

    Source: 31 FR 12406, Sept. 17, 1966, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 7.1   Definitions.

    As used in this part:

[[Page 9]]

    (a) The Act means the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees' 
Claims Act of 1964, as amended (78 Stat. 767; 79 Stat. 789);
    (b) Employee means an employee of the Panama Canal Commission (also 
referred to as the Commission) and includes a member of the uniformed 
services assigned to duty with the Commission;
    (c) Government means the Panama Canal Commission unless the context 
indicates a broader meaning;
    (d) Chief Financial Officer means the Chief Financial Officer of the 
Panama Canal Commission acting for and in behalf of the Commission;
    (e) Chief Accountant means Chief Accountant of the Panama Canal 
Commission acting for and in behalf of the Commission;
    (f) Chief, Claims Branch, means the Chief of the Claims Branch, 
Accounting Division, of the Panama Canal Commission acting for and in 
behalf of the Commission.

[31 FR 12406, Sept. 17, 1966, as amended at 44 FR 75308, Dec. 19, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 7.2  Applicability and scope.

    Pursuant to the Act, the Government will settle and pay claims by 
employees for the loss of or damage to personal property which occurs 
incident to Government service. Each such claim must be substantiated 
and the possession of the property must be shown to have been 
reasonable, useful, or proper under the circumstances. The maximum 
amount allowable on any claim is $15,000. In lieu of a cash settlement, 
property may be replaced in kind at the option of the Government.

[42 FR 17875, Apr. 4, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 7.3   Claimants.

    A claim may be filed by an employee or in his name by his spouse, as 
authorized agent, or by any other authorized agent or legal 
representative of the employee. If the employee is dead, the claim may 
be filed by his (a) spouse, (b) children, (c) father or mother, or both, 
or (d) brothers or sisters, or both. Payments in settlement of claims to 
survivors of employees will be made in the order of precedence set forth 
in this section.


<R05>
Sec. 7.4   Conditions.

    As prescribed by the Act, a claim is not allowable if:
    (a) Claimant fails to present it in writing within 2 years after it 
accrues, except that if the claim accrues in time of war or in time of 
armed conflict in which any armed force of the United States is engaged 
or if such a war or armed conflict intervenes within 2 years after it 
accrues, and if good cause is shown, the claim may be presented not 
later than 2 years after that cause ceases to exist, or 2 years after 
the war or armed conflict is terminated, whichever is earlier;
    (b) The loss occurred at quarters occupied by the claimant within 
the 50 States or the District of Columbia unless such quarters were 
assigned to the employee or otherwise provided in kind by the 
Government; or
    (c) The loss was caused wholly or partly by the negligent or 
wrongful act of the claimant, his agent, or his employee.


<R05>
Sec. 7.5   Principal types of claims payable.

    The following examples are illustrative of the circumstances or 
situations out of which compensable claims may arise. Loss or damage due 
to other causes may also be payable under these regulations.
    (a) Damage to or loss of property by fire, flood, hurricane or other 
unusual occurrence, or by theft, while located at:
    (1) Quarters, wherever situated, if assigned or provided in kind by 
the Government.
    (2) Quarters outside the 50 States and the District of Columbia 
without regard to whether assigned or provided in kind by the 
Government, unless the employee involved is a local or native resident.
    (3) Any warehouse, or other place designated by a responsible 
official for the storage of the property.
    (b) Damage to or loss of property due to a marine, rail, or aircraft 
accident, or other unusual occurrence.
    (c) Damage to or loss of property, including vehicles, trailers, and 
property contained therein, which:
    (1) Is incident to the performance of duty and is sustained as a 
result of or in connection with civil disturbance,

[[Page 10]]

public disorder, efforts to save human life or Government property, or a 
natural or other disaster; or
    (2) Occurs in areas and installations in the Republic of Panama made 
available to the United States pursuant to the Panama Canal Treaty of 
1977 and related agreements and results from vandalism that is 
determined to have been politically motivated.
    (d) Damage to or loss of property which is incident to the 
performance of duty, Provided, That such damage or loss results from an 
incident that is not attributable to a common or usual risk of the 
claimant's employment.
    (e) Damage to or loss of property used for the benefit of the 
Government at the direction of a responsible official.
    (f) Money deposited with an authorized Government agent for 
safekeeping.
    (g) Damages to or loss of property incident to transportation or 
storage pursuant to orders or in connection with travel under orders, 
including property in the custody of--
    (1) A common or contract carrier or other commercial carrier under 
contract with the Government;
    (2) An agent or agency of the Government; or
    (3) The claimant, or while in a public or private conveyance in 
which he is being transported while in official travel status.

(Sec. 3(b)(1), Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 455)

[31 FR 12406, Sept. 17, 1966, as amended at 42 FR 17875, Apr. 4, 1977; 
44 FR 75308, Dec. 19, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 7.6   Principal types of claims not payable.

    The following are examples of types and categories of property for 
which compensation will not be allowed:
    (a) Losses or damages totaling less than one dollar.
    (b) Money or currency except when deposited with an authorized 
Government agent for safekeeping or except when lost incident to a 
marine, rail, aircraft, or other common disaster, or a natural disaster 
such as a fire, flood, hurricane, etc.
    (c) Small items of substantial value such as cameras, watches, 
jewelry, and furs, which are lost, damaged, or stolen during shipment by 
ordinary means, e.g., with household goods or hold luggage.
    (d) Articles being worn (unless allowable under Sec. 7.5 (c) or (d 
)).
    (e) Intangible property such as bank books, checks, notes, stock 
certificates, money orders, travelers checks, etc.
    (f) Property owned by the United States, unless employee is 
financially responsible for it to another Government agency.
    (g) Claims for loss or damage to motor vehicles or trailers or 
personal property contained therein (unless allowable under Sec. 7.5 
(c), (d) or (g)).
    (h) Losses of insurers and subrogees.
    (i) Losses recovered or recoverable from insurers and carriers.
    (j) Losses recovered or recoverable pursuant to contract.
    (k) Claims for damage or loss caused, in whole or in part, by the 
negligence or wrongful act of the employee or his agent.
    (l) Property used for business or profit.
    (m) Theft from the possession of the employee unless due care was 
used to protect possession.
    (n) Property acquired, posessed or transported in violation of law 
or regulations.
    (o) Loss in quarters located within the 50 States or the District of 
Columbia not assigned or otherwise provided in kind by the Government.

[31 FR 12406, Sept. 17, 1966, as amended at 42 FR 17875, Apr. 4, 1977; 
44 FR 75308, Dec. 19, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 7.7   Types and quantity of property.

    Claims are allowable only for such types and quantities of tangible 
personal property as to which its possession is determined to have been 
reasonable, useful, or proper under the attendant circumstances at the 
time of the loss or damage.


<R05>
Sec. 7.8  Computation of award.

    (a) Lost or destroyed property.The amount allowable for an item of 
property that is lost or destroyed may not exceed its actual value at 
the time the loss occurs. Such value may be based upon the replacement 
cost at the place where claimant resides when award is

[[Page 11]]

made, subject to appropriate depreciation to reflect the age and 
condition of the item at the time of loss and to reduction for salvage 
value, if any. Property is considered ``destroyed'', for purposes of 
this section, if the cost of repairs would exceed the value of the 
property immediately prior to the incident out of which the claim arose.
    (b)  Damaged property. Normally the amount allowable for damaged 
property will be the cost of repairs, unless it is determined to be in 
the best interests of the Government to authorize a higher award.
    (c) Special limitations. There is reserved to the Chief, Claims 
Branch, subject to the supervision of the Chief Accountant, the 
authority to fix the maximum amount payable for specific classes of 
articles, to establish limitations on the maximum quantity of an item 
for which payment will be allowed, and, when appropriate, to require 
that repairs be made by the Government.

[42 FR 17875, Apr. 4, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 7.9  Claims procedure.

    The claimant must submit his claim in writing on a prescribed form 
covering employees claims for loss of or damage to personal property.

The form should be sent to the Panama Canal Commission, Chief, Claims 
Branch, Office of Financial Management, Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or 
Balboa, Republic of Panama).

[44 FR 75308, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 59 FR 26122, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 7.10  Supporting papers.

    In addition to the information provided on the claim form, the 
claimant may be required to furnish the following:
    (a) Detailed estimates of the value of the property immediately 
before the incident out of which the claim arose and detailed estimates 
of the repair costs.
    (b) With respect to claims involving thefts or losses in quarters or 
other places where the property was reasonably kept:
    (1) A statement as to location of place where the theft or loss 
occurred;
    (2) A statement as to what security precautions were taken to 
protect the property involved; and
    (3) An explanation of the facts and circumstances surrounding the 
loss or theft.
    (c) With respect to claims involving property being used for the 
benefit of the Government, a statement by the employee's supervisor 
evidencing that the claimant was required to provide such property or 
that his providing it was in the interest of the Government.
    (d) As respects a claim filed by an agent or survivor, a power of 
attorney or other satisfactory evidence of authority to file.

[31 FR 12406, Sept. 17, 1966, as amended at 42 FR 17875, Apr. 4, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 7.11  Settlement.

    Upon receipt of a claim under the regulations in this part, the 
Chief, Claims Branch, subject to the supervision of the Chief 
Accountant, shall make a determination with respect to its merits and, 
if allowable, authorize payment. If the claim is disallowed in whole or 
in part, the claimant shall be advised in writing as to the reason for 
the disallowance. The settlement determination by the Chief, Claims 
Branch, is final and conclusive.

[42 FR 17875, Apr. 4, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 7.12   Agents' or attorneys' fees.

    As provided by the Act, fees payable to any agent or attorney in 
connection with services rendered in connection with a claim hereunder 
shall not exceed 10 per centum of the amount paid in settlement of such 
claim. Any person violating the provisions of the Act, as therein 
provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction 
thereof is liable to a fine of up to $1,000.


<R03>
PART 9--ORGANIZATION, FUNCTIONS, AND AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS--PANAMA CANAL COMMISSION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Subpart A--Organization and Functions of the Commission; Availability of 
                    Information and Official Records

Sec.

[[Page 12]]

9.1  Purpose of this subpart.
9.2  Organization.
9.3  Functions.
9.4  How to request general information or publications.
9.5  The Freedom of Information Act.
9.6  How to make a Freedom of Information Act request.
9.7  How your Freedom of Information Act request will be handled.
9.8  How to make an appeal under the Freedom of Information Act.
9.9  How your Freedom of Information Act appeal will be handled.
9.10  How the Commission may extend the time to respond to your request 
          or appeal.
9.11  Fees for Freedom of Information Act requests.
9.12  Definitions.
9.13  Classifying requests for fee purposes.
9.14  Current index.
9.15  Annual report.
9.16  Predisclosure notification procedures for confidential commercial 
          information.

                   Subpart B--Vital Statistics Records

9.31  Definitions.
9.32  Administration.
9.33  Functions of the Vital Statistics Unit.
9.34  Supplementary certificate upon adoption.
9.35  New birth certificate upon legitimation.
9.36  Delayed filing of birth certificate.
9.37  Altered certificates.
9.38  Certified copies of records.
9.39  Disclosure of records.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552, as amended by Pub. L. 99-570, 100 Stat. 
3207; 22 U.S.C. 3611; E.O. 12600, 52 FR 23781, 3 CFR, 1987 Comp., p. 
235.

    Source: 44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
Subpart A--Organization and Functions of the Commission; Availability of 
                    Information and Official Records


<R05>
Sec. 9.1  Purpose of this subpart.

    This subpart describes the organization and functions of the Panama 
Canal Commission (referred to in this part as ``the Commission'' or 
``Agency'') and explains how a member of the public may request records 
from this agency under the Freedom of Information Act.


<R05>
Sec. 9.2  Organization.

    The principal office of the Panama Canal Commission is located at 
Balboa Heights, Republic of Panama. The Office of the Secretary of the 
Panama Canal Commission is located at International Square, 1825 I 
Street, NW., suite 1050, Washington, DC 20006-5402. The Commission also 
maintains a procurement office at 4400 Dauphine Street, New Orleans, LA 
70146-6800.

[52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988, as amended at 59 
FR 26122, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 9.3  Functions.

    (a) The Panama Canal Commission, which replaced the Canal Zone 
Government and the Panama Canal Company effective October 1, 1979, is 
established in the executive branch of the United States by the Panama 
Canal Act of 1979 (Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 452) as an agency of the 
United States, for the purpose of maintaining and operating the Panama 
Canal and the facilities and appurtenances related thereto. As provided 
in section 1101 of that Act, the authority of the President with respect 
to the Commission is exercised through the Secretary of Defense.
    (b) As provided in the Panama Canal Act of 1979, the supervision of 
the Commission is vested in a Board composed of nine members, one of 
whom is the Secretary of Defense or an officer of the Department of 
Defense designated by the Secretary. Not fewer than five members of the 
Board are nationals of the United States; the remaining members are 
nationals of the Republic of Panama.
    (c) The President appoints the members of the Board. The members of 
the Board who are United States nationals are appointed by and with the 
advice and consent of the Senate. Each member of the Board holds office 
at the pleasure of the President.
    (d) The Administrator of the Commission, who is appointed by the 
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, holds 
office at the pleasure of the President.
    (e) The Commission maintains and operates the Panama Canal and 
facilities and appurtenances related thereto, including electric power, 
water, and

[[Page 13]]

telephone systems; procurement and storehouse facilities; motor 
transportation services; an agency press and duplicating center; marine 
and general repair shop; and an employees' housing system.

(The Panama Canal Act of 1979, secs. 1101, 1102, 1103, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 
Stat. 456, 457)


<R05>
Sec. 9.4  How to request general information or publications.

    The Commission has an Office of Public Affairs which is responsible 
for providing information about the agency to members of the public and 
the press. If you are interested in general information about the 
Commission's activities, or copies of its publications, you should 
write, visit, or call this office. Address letters to: Panama Canal 
Commission, Office of Public Affairs, Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or 
Balboa, Republic of Panama).

[46 FR 48659, Oct. 2, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 53 
FR 16256, May 6, 1988; 59 FR 26122, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 9.5  The Freedom of Information Act.

    (a) The Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) is a law which 
creates a procedure for any person to request official records from 
United States Government agencies. The rest of the rules in this subpart 
explain how you may request official records from the Panama Canal 
Commission.
    (b) The Freedom of Information Act requires every United States 
Government agency to make official records available to any person who 
requests them, unless the records that the person requests fall within 
one of more of the exceptions to availability listed in the law. For 
more details about these exceptions, see subsection (b) of section 552, 
Title 5, United States Code, available in libraries.
    (c) The Freedom of Information Act does not require an agency to 
create records or compile information that you would like to have. The 
law deals only with making existing records available.

[44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 
53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 9.6  How to make a Freedom of Information Act request.

    (a) To make a request for a record using the Freedom of Information 
Act, you must:
    (1) Write to the Panama Canal Commission, Agency Records Officer 
(Chief, Administrative Services Division), Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 
(or Balboa, Republic of Panama); and
    (2) State in your letter that you are making a request under the 
Freedom of Information Act, and clearly mark the envelope ``Freedom of 
Information Act Request''. A request under 5 U.S.C. 552 which is not 
properly addressed and is not marked in this way shall not be considered 
to be received by the agency until it has actually been received by the 
Agency Records Officer.
    (3) In your letter, reasonably describe the records you are seeking. 
Be as specific in describing the records as you can. Although it is not 
required, it will be helpful if, whenever possible, you supply in your 
letter specific information regarding dates, titles, file designations, 
the office where you believe the records may be found, and other 
information which may help to identify the records.
    (b) The Panama Canal Commmission may request that you furnish 
information as to the purpose of your request. Such information is 
required to assist agency officials in categorizing your request in 
order to accurately assess fees.

[44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 
53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988; 59 FR 26122, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 9.7  How your Freedom of Information Act request will be handled.

    (a) The official responsible for deciding whether your request will 
be granted is the Agency Records Officer. That official must make the 
decision and send you notification of it within ten working days after 
the Commission receives your request. In unusual circumstances, the 
Commission may extend the time for responding to your request. For 
details, see Sec. 9.10 of this part.
    (b) If the Agency Records Officer denies your request, in whole or 
in part, the letters sent to you to notify you of this decision must:

[[Page 14]]

    (1) Tell you why the request is being denied;
    (2) Tell you that you have the right, by appealing the decision, to 
require the agency to reconsider its decision; and
    (3) Tell you how to make an appeal.
    (c) If you request records or information which is in the files of 
the Commission but which originated in another Federal agency, the 
Agency Records Officer may refer your request to that agency. In that 
case, the Agency Records Officer will inform you that your request has 
been referred to the originating agency.


<R05>
Sec. 9.8  How to make an appeal under the Freedom of Information Act.

    (a) If you are not satisfied with the decision of the Agency Records 
Officer, you may require the Commission to reconsider that decision. 
This is called ``making an appeal.''
    (b) To make an appeal, you must:
    (1) Write to the Panama Canal Commission, Director, Office of 
Executive Administration, Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or Balboa, 
Republic of Panama); and
    (2) State in your letter that you are making an appeal under the 
Freedom of Information Act, and clearly mark the envelope ``Freedom of 
Information Act Appeal''; and
    (3) Mail or deliver the letter of appeal within ten working days 
after you receive the letter from the Agency Records Officer.
    (c) Although it is not required, it may be helpful if you clearly 
indicate in your appeal the reasons why you disagree with the decision 
on your request and your reasons for wanting the records.

[44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 46 FR 48659, Oct. 2, 1981; 52 
FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988; 59 FR 26122, May 19, 
1994]


<R05>
Sec. 9.9  How your Freedom of Information Act appeal will be handled.

    (a) The official responsible for deciding whether to grant your 
appeal is the Director, Office of Executive Administration of the Panama 
Canal Commission. That official must make that decision and send you 
notification of it within 20 working days after receiving your appeal. 
In unusual circumstances, the Commission may extend the time for 
responding to your appeal. For details, see Sec. 9.10 of this part.
    (b) If the Director, Office of Executive Administration denies your 
appeal, in whole or in part, the letter sent to you to notify you of 
this decision must:
    (1) Tell you why the appeal is being denied;
    (2) Tell you that this denial is the Commission's final decision; 
and
    (3) Tell you that you have the right to request a U.S. District 
Court to review the denial of your appeal, as provided by 5 U.S.C. 
552(a)(4)(B), as amended.

[44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 46 FR 48659, Oct. 2, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 9.10  How the Commission may extend the time to respond to your request or appeal.

    (a) In unusual circumstances, the Commission may extend the time for 
making a decision about your request or about your appeal. If the 
Commission does extend the time, it will do so by sending you a written 
notice signed by the Agency Records Officer. The notice will:
    (1) Tell you why it is necessary to extend the time;
    (2) Tell you how long the time has been extended; and
    (3) Tell you the date when you can expect the decision about your 
request or your appeal to be sent to you.
    (b) The Commission may extend the time for making a decision about 
your request or your appeal by a total of ten working days. The 
extension period may be split between the request and the appeal, but it 
may not exceed ten working days overall.
    (c) The unusual circumstances which may reasonably require an 
extension of time for the proper handling of your request or appeal are:
    (1) The need to search for and collect the requested records from 
field facilities or other establishments that are separate from the 
office processing the request; or
    (2) The need to search for, collect, and appropriately examine a 
voluminous quantity of separate and distinct

[[Page 15]]

records which are demanded in a single request; or
    (3) The need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all 
practicable speed, with another agency having a substantial interest in 
the determination of the request or among two or more components of the 
Commission having substantial subject matter interest in the request.


<R05>
Sec. 9.11  Fees for Freedom of Information Act requests.

    (a) The following are fees charged by the Commission for document 
search and reproduction.
    (1) Search for records: $7.10 per hour of search conducted by 
clerical personnel, and $23.50 per hour of search conducted by 
supervisory or professional personnel.
    (2) Search requiring computers: $185.94 for the first two hours or 
fraction of the first two hours; $92.97 for each additional hour.
    (3) Copying: $0.13 per page for the first copy of a record. The word 
``page'' refers to a paper copy of a standard agency size which is 8\1/
2\'' x 11'' or 11'' x 14''. For additional copies, you will be charged 
the official Panama Canal Commmission tariff rate for reproduction.
    (4) Converting microfilm to paper copy: $0.13 per page for the first 
copy of a record. For additional copies, you will be charged the 
official Panama Canal Commission tariff rate for reproduction. Microfilm 
search charges will be at the clerical rate.
    (5) Duplication of tape recordings: (i) Labor costs: $10.65 per \1/
2\ hour for 40 channel tape recording; $7.30 per \1/2\ hour for basic 
tape recording; $9.35 per \1/2\ hour for video tape recording. Minimum 
charge for taping is \1/2\ hour.
    (ii) Material costs: No cost will be assessed to tapes if provided 
by requester. If agency furnishes tapes, the requester will be charged 
direct purchasing costs.
    (6) Duplication of photographs: Black and white, up to 8'' x 10'', 
$2.55 per print; color, up to 8'' x 10", $9.20 per print.
    (7) Duplication of canal sounding and engineering charts, graphs, 
and drawings (reproducible and non-reproducible) at cost recovery rate.
    (8) Other services: If there is no specific fee listed in this 
section for a service necessary for handling your request, you will be 
charged the official agency tariff for that service. If no tariff exists 
for that service, the Agency Records Officer is authorized to charge the 
direct cost to the Commission of that service.
    (b) Review fees are chargeable only when a request is for a 
commercial use, as defined in Sec. 9.12. Review fees will be charged in 
accordance with the search fee rates set forth in Sec. 9.11(a)(1).
    (c) If the Commission estimates that search charges are likely to 
exceed $25.00, and the requester has not previously agreed to pay fees 
as high as those anticipated, the agency will notify the requester of 
the estimated amount of fees, and offer the requester the opportunity to 
revise the request.
    (d) The Panama Canal Commission may require a requester to pay fees 
in advance only if the estimated charges are likely to exceed $250.00, 
or the requester has previously failed to pay a fee in a timely fashion 
(i.e., within 30 days of the date of billing).
    (1) If the requester has a history of prompt payment, and the 
estimated charges are likely to exceed $250.00, the Commission will 
notify the requester of the estimated cost and obtain satisfactory 
assurance of full payment.
    (2) If the requester has no prior payment history, and the estimated 
charges are likely to exceed $250.00, the agency may require an advance 
payment of an amount up to the full amount of estimated charges.
    (3) If the requester has a poor payment history, the agency may 
require advance payment of the full amount of the estimated fees, as 
well as any amount currently owed, plus interest on the delinquent 
amount, before the agency begins to process a new or pending request 
from that requester.
    (4) When the agency acts under this subsection, the administrative 
time limits prescribed in Secs. 9.7(a) and 9.9(a) will begin only after 
receipt of the required fee payments.
    (e) If you wish to request a waiver or reduction of fees, you must 
do so in writing to the Chief, Administrative Services Division, Agency 
Records Officer, Panama Canal Commission, Unit

[[Page 16]]

2300, APO AA 34011-2300. The Agency Records Officer may waive or reduce 
the fees if the official decides that providing the records you request 
would be in the public interest because it is likely to contribute 
significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of 
the government, and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the 
requester. Requests for a waiver or reduction of fees shall be 
considered on a case-by-case basis.
    (1) In order to determine whether disclosure of the information is 
in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly 
to public understanding of the operations or activities of the 
government, the Agency Records Officer will consider the following four 
factors:
    (i) The subject of the request: Whether the subject of the requested 
records concerns the operations or activities of the government;
    (ii) The informative value of the information to be disclosed: 
Whether the disclosure is likely to contribute to an understanding of 
government operations or activities;
    (iii) The contribution to an understanding of the subject by the 
general public likely to result from disclosure: Whether disclosure of 
the requested information will contribute to public understanding; and
    (iv) The significance of the contribution to public understanding: 
Whether the disclosure is likely to contribute significantly to public 
understanding of government operations or activities.
    (2) In order to determine whether disclosure of the information is 
not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester, the Agency 
Records Officer will consider the following two factors:
    (i) The existence and magnitude of a commercial interest: Whether 
the requester has a commercial interest that would be furthered by the 
requested disclosure; and, if so
    (ii) The primary interest in disclosure: Whether the magnitude of 
the identified commercial interest of the requester is sufficiently 
large, in comparison with the public interest in disclosure, that 
disclosure is primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.
    (3) The Agency Records Officer will not consider waiver or reduction 
of fees for requesters (persons or organizations) from whom unpaid fees 
remain due to the Agency for another information access request.
    (4) The Agency's decision to refuse to waive or reduce fees as 
requested under this section may be appealed to the Director, Office of 
Executive Administration, Panama Canal Commission, Unit 2300, APO AA 
34011-2300. Appeals should contain as much information and documentation 
as possible to support the request for a waiver or reduction of fees. 
The requester will be notified within thirty working days from the date 
on which the Agency received the appeal.
    (f) This agency will assess interest charges on an unpaid bill 
starting on the 31st day following the day on which the bill was sent. 
Interest will be computed at the rate prescribed in Section 3717 of 
Title 31, United States Code, and will accrue from the date of the 
billing.

[52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988; 59 
FR 26122, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 9.12  Definitions.

    Commercial use refers to a request or a requester seeking 
information for a use or purpose that furthers the commercial, trade, or 
profit interests of the requester or the person on whose behalf the 
request is made.
    Duplication refers to the process of making a copy of document 
necessary to respond to a Freedom of Information Act request. Such 
copies can take the form of paper copy, microfilm, audio-visual 
materials, or machine readable documentation (e.g., magnetic tape or 
disk), among others. The copy provided will be in a form that is 
reasonably usable by the requester.
    Educational institution refers to a preschool, a public or private 
elementary or secondary school, an institution of graduate higher 
education, an institution of undergraduate higher education, an 
institution of professional education, and an institution of vocational 
education, which operates programs of scholarly research.

[[Page 17]]

    Non-commercial scientific institution refers to an institution that 
is not operated on a commercial basis and which is operated solely for 
the purpose of conducting scientific research, the results of which are 
not intended to promote any particular product or industry.
    Representative of the news media refers to any person actively 
gathering news for an entity that is organized and operated to publish 
or broadcast news to the public. As used herein, the word ``news'' means 
information that is about current events or that would be of current 
interest to the public.
    Review refers to the process of examining documents located in 
response to a request that is for a commercial use to determine whether 
any portion of any document located is permitted to be withheld. It also 
includes the time spent processing any documents for disclosure; i.e., 
doing all that is necessary to delete unreleasable portions and prepare 
documents for release. Review does not include time spent resolving 
general legal or policy issues regarding the application of exemptions.
    Search time is the time spent by the agency to identify the 
documents requested and will be charged in accordance with 
Sec. 9.11(a)(1) and (2).

[52 FR 31398, Aug. 20, 1987; 53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 9.13  Classifying requests for fee purposes.

    (a) When the Panama Canal Commission receives a request for 
documents that appears to be for commercial use, fees will be assessed 
for the total search time, review time, and all duplication of the 
documents. Requestors must reasonably describe the records sought. When 
the agency has reasonable cause to doubt the stated use of the 
documents, or where the use is not clear from the request itself, the 
agency can seek additional clarification. Requesters should note that 
the Panama Canal Commission may assess fees for search and review even 
if no documents are determined to be releasable under the Freedom of 
Information Act.
    (b) Educational institution requesters will be provided the first 
100 pages of duplication without charge and will not be charged for 
search time. To be eligible for this reduction in fees, the requester 
must show that the request is being made under the auspices of a 
qualifying institution and that the records are being sought to further 
scholarly research and not for commercial use. The requester must 
reasonably describe the records sought.
    (c) Non-commercial scientific institution requesters will be 
provided the first 100 pages without charge and will not be charged for 
search time. To be eligible for this reduction in fees, the requester 
must show that the request is being made under the auspices of a 
qualifying institution and that the records are being sought to further 
scientific research and not for commercial use. The requester must 
reasonably describe the records sought.
    (d) Representatives of the news media will be provided the first 100 
pages without charge and will not be charged for search time. To be 
eligible for reduction in fees, the requester must meet the criteria 
prescribed in Sec. 9.12 and the request must not be for commercial use. 
A request for records supporting the news dissemination function of the 
requester will not be considered to be a request that is for a 
commercial use. The requester must reasonably describe the records 
sought.
    (e) For all other requesters who do not fit into the above 
categories, fees will be charged which recover the full reasonable 
direct cost of searching for and reproducing records that are responsive 
to the request, except that the first 100 pages of reproduction and the 
first two hours of search time will be furnished without charge. The 
requester must reasonably describe the records sought.
    (f) Those requesters searching for records about themselves will be 
treated under the Privacy Act of 1974 and will only be charged for 
reproduction costs.
    (g) A requester may not file multiple requests solely in order to 
avoid payment of fees. When the agency reasonably believes that a 
requester is attempting to separate a request into a series of requests 
for the purpose of evading the assessment of fees, the

[[Page 18]]

agency may aggregate any such requests and charge accordingly.

[52 FR 31398, Aug. 20, 1987; 53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 9.14  Current index.

    (a) The Commission maintains and will make available for public 
inspection and copying a current index of the agency's opinions, policy 
statements, administrative staff manuals, and instructions to staff that 
affect a member of the public.
    (b) The Commission has decided that it is not necessary to publish 
this index.
    (c) On request, the Commission will provide copies of this index to 
members of the public. The charges for the copies will be no greater 
than those set out in Sec. 9.11.

[44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979. Redesignated at 52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 
53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 9.15  Annual report.

    On or before March 1 of each calendar year, the Panama Canal 
Commission sends to both Houses of Congress a report of its activities 
in connection with the Freedom of Information Act during the preceding 
calendar year. The Freedom of Information Act requires each agency to 
make this report and to include in it such information as: how many 
requests were denied and why; how many denials were appealed and the 
result of those appeals; the name and title of each official who denied 
a request; and other information showing how the agency administered the 
Freedom of Information Act during the period covered by the report.

[44 FR 75309, Dec. 19, 1979. Redesignated at 52 FR 31397, Aug. 20, 1987; 
53 FR 16256, May 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 9.16  Predisclosure notification procedures for confidential commercial information.

    (a) In general. Confidential commercial information provided to the 
Panama Canal Commission by a submitter shall not be disclosed pursuant 
to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request except in accordance with 
this section. The following definitions apply:
    (1) Confidential commercial information means records provided to 
the Commission by a submitter that arguably contain material exempt from 
release under Exemption 4 of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 
552(b)(4), because disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause 
substantial competitive harm.
    (2) Submitter means any person or entity who provides confidential 
commercial information to the Commission. The term ``submitter'' 
includes, but is not limited to, corporations, state governments, and 
foreign governments.
    (b) Notice to submitters. The Panama Canal Commission shall provide 
a submitter with prompt notice of receipt of a Freedom of Information 
Act request encompassing its confidential commercial information 
whenever required in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, and 
except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section. The written notice 
shall either describe the exact nature of the information requested or 
provide copies of the records or portions of records containing the 
requested information.
    (c) When notice is required. (1) For confidential commercial 
information submitted prior to January 1, 1988, the Panama Canal 
Commission shall provide a submitter with notice of receipt of a FOIA 
request whenever:
    (i) the records are less than 10 years old and the information has 
been designated by the submitter as confidential commercial information;
    (ii) The Panama Canal Commission has reason to believe that 
disclosure of the information could reasonably result in commercial or 
financial harm to the submitter; or
    (iii) The information is subject to the prior express commitment of 
confidentiality given by the Commission to the submitter.
    (2) For confidential commercial information submitted on or after 
January 1, 1988, the Commission shall provide a submitter with notice of 
receipt of a FOIA request whenever:
    (i) The submitter has in good faith designated the information as 
commercially or financially sensitive; or
    (ii) The Commission has reason to believe that disclosure of the 
information

[[Page 19]]

could reasonably result in commercial or financial harm to the 
submitter.
    (3) Notice of a request for confidential commercial information 
falling within paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section shall be required for 
a period of not more than ten years after the date of submission unless 
the submitter requests, and provides acceptable justification for, a 
specific notice period of greater duration.
    (4) Whenever possible, the submitter's claim of confidentiality 
shall be supported by a statement or certification by an officer or 
authorized representative of the company that the information in 
question is in fact confidential commercial or financial information and 
that the information has not been disclosed to the public.
    (5) When notice is given to a submitter under this section, the 
Commission shall at the same time provide written notice to the 
requester that it is affording the submitter a reasonable period of time 
within which to object to disclosure and that, therefore, there will be 
a delay in responding to the request because of the overseas location of 
the agency and the time requirements to obtain responses from the 
submitters.
    (d) Opportunity to object to disclosure. (1) The notice required by 
paragraph (b) of this section shall afford a submitter ten (10) working 
days within which to provide the Commission with a detailed statement of 
any objection to disclosure. Such statement must specify all grounds for 
withholding information under any exemption of the Freedom of 
Information Act and, in the case of Exemption 4, must demonstrate why 
the information is contended to be a trade secret or commercial or 
financial information which is considered privileged or confidential and 
capable of causing competitive damage if disclosed. Information provided 
by a submitter pursuant to this paragraph may itself be subject to 
disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
    (e) Notice of intent to disclose. The Commission will carefully 
consider the submitter's objections to release prior to determining 
whether or not to disclose the information. Whenever the Commission 
decides to disclose information over the objection of the submitter, the 
Commission will forward a written notice to the submitter which shall 
include:
    (1) A statement of the reasons for which the submitter's disclosure 
objections were not sustained;
    (2) A description of the confidential commercial information to be 
disclosed; and,
    (3) A specific disclosure date, which shall be ten (10) working days 
after the notice of the final decision to release the requested 
information has been mailed to the submitter.
    (4) When notice is given to a submitter under this section, the 
Commission will notify the requester that such notice has been given to 
the submitter and the proposed date for disclosure.
    (f) Notice of lawsuit. (1) Whenever a requester brings legal action 
seeking to compel disclosure of information covered by paragraph (c) of 
this section, the Commission shall promptly notify the submitter.
    (2) Whenever a submitter brings legal action seeking to prevent 
disclosure of information covered by paragraph (c) of this section, the 
Commission shall notify the requester.
    (g) Exception to notice requirement. The notice requirements of 
paragraph (c) of this section shall not apply if:
    (1) The Panama Canal Commission determines that the information 
should not be disclosed;
    (2) The information has been published or otherwise officially made 
available to the public;
    (3) Disclosure of the information is required by law (other than 5 
U.S.C. 552); or
    (4) The information was acquired in the course of a lawful 
investigation of a possible violation of criminal law.

[56 FR 11373, Mar. 18, 1991]


<R04>
                   Subpart B--Vital Statistics Records


<R05>
Sec. 9.31  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Live Birth means the birth of a child who shows evidence of life 
after the child is entirely outside the mother.
    Stillbirth means a birth after 20 weeks of gestation which is not a 
live birth.
    Physician means a person legally authorized to practice medicine 
before

[[Page 20]]

October 1, 1979, in the area then known as the Canal Zone.
    Vital Statistics includes the registration, preparation, 
transcription and preservation of data pertaining to marriages, births, 
adoptions, legitimations, deaths, stillbirths, and data incidental 
thereto.
    Vital Statistics Unit means the organizational unit charged by the 
Administrator of the Panama Canal Commission with the function of vital 
statistics.


<R05>
Sec. 9.32  Administration.

    The Vital Statistics Unit shall administer this subpart, under the 
supervision of the Administrator or his designee.


<R05>
Sec. 9.33  Functions of the Vital Statistics Unit.

    The Vital Statistics Unit is the keeper of the vital statistics 
records of the Canal Zone Government. Some of the functions previously 
performed by that unit were discontinued on October 1, 1979, when the 
Canal Zone and its civil government ceased to exist. The Vital 
Statistics Unit now performs the residual functions of recordkeeping; 
i.e., it is limited to performing the following:
    (a) Maintaining all vital statistics records of the Canal Zone 
Government.
    (b) Performing the vital statistics functions as defined in 
Sec. 9.31 of this part for those events which occurred in the Canal Zone 
before October 1, 1979, and which were not previously registered in that 
unit. This includes the delayed registration of a birth that occurred 
prior to October 1, 1979.
    (c) The alteration of records which are filed in that unit.
    (d) The issuance of copies of documents filed in that unit.

(Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and related agreements and Pub. L. 96-70, 
93 Stat. 452)


<R05>
Sec. 9.34  Supplementary certificate upon adoption.

    Upon receipt of a certified copy of an order or decree of adoption, 
the Vital Statistics Unit shall prepare a supplementary certificate in 
the new name of the adopted person and shall seal and file the original 
certificate of birth with such certified copy attached thereto. The 
sealed documents may be opened only upon the demand of the adopted 
person, if of legal age, or by an order of court. Upon receipt of a 
certified copy of a court order of annulment of the adoption, the 
original certificate shall be restored to its original place in the 
file.


<R05>
Sec. 9.35  New birth certificate upon legitimation.

    In cases of legitimation the Vital Statistics Unit, upon receipt of 
proof thereof, shall prepare a new certificate of birth in the new name 
of the legitimated child. The evidence upon which the new certificate is 
made and the original certificate shall be sealed and filed and may be 
opened only upon the demand of the person involved, if of legal age, or 
by an order of court.

    Cross Reference: Legitimation of child, see 8 P.C.C. 335, 387, 76A 
Stat. 689, 691. See also 7 P.C.C. 576, 76A Stat. 571.


<R05>
Sec. 9.36  Delayed filing of birth certificate.

    (a) When a live birth occurred in the Canal Zone (prior to October 
1, 1979), a certificate of live birth should have been filed with the 
Vital Statistics Unit within five days after the birth by the physician, 
midwife, or other legally authorized person in attendance at the birth 
or, if the birth was not so attended, by one of the parents. If a 
certificate of live birth in the Canal Zone was not filed during that 
time, it may still be possible to file a delayed certificate of birth by 
following the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) A delayed certificate of live birth may be filed upon the 
submission to, and receipt by, the Vital Statistics Unit of such 
evidence, in the form of affidavits or otherwise, as the Vital 
Statistics Unit deems sufficient to establish satisfactorily the truth 
of the facts alleged in support of the request for delayed filing. 
Certificates accepted more than six months after the time prescribed for 
filing in paragraph (a) of this section shall contain the date of the 
delayed filing and shall be marked ``delayed.'' A summary statement of 
the evidence submitted in support of the acceptance for delayed filing 
shall be endorsed on the certificate. Such

[[Page 21]]

evidence shall be kept in a special permanent file.


<R05>
Sec. 9.37  Altered certificates.

    Certificates of marriage, birth, stillbirth, or death filed in the 
Vital Statistics Unit may be altered upon the submission to, and receipt 
by, the Vital Statistics Unit of such evidence, in the form of 
affidavits or otherwise, as that unit deems sufficient to establish 
satisfactorily the truth of the facts alleged in support of the request 
for alteration. Certificates which are altered after being filed shall 
contain the date of the alteration and shall be marked ``altered.'' A 
summary statement of the evidence submitted in support of the acceptance 
for alteration shall be endorsed on the certificate. Such evidence shall 
be kept in a special permanent file.


<R05>
Sec. 9.38  Certified copies of records.

    Subject to the restrictions contained in Sec. 9.39, a certified copy 
of a certificate on file or any part thereof shall be furnished to any 
applicant upon request. The person designated by the Administrator or by 
the Administrator's designee to act as Vital Statistics Clerk shall be 
the person to certify copies of such certificates or parts thereof. 
Charges shall be made for certified copies of vital statistics records 
at the rate prescribed in the official Panama Canal Commission tariff.


<R05>
Sec. 9.39  Disclosure of records.

    Inspection of a vital statistics record is not permitted, and a 
certified copy of a certificate or part thereof may not be issued, 
unless the Vital Statistics Unit is satisfied that the applicant has a 
direct and legitimate interest in the matter recorded or that the 
information therein contained is necessary for the determination of 
personal or property rights.


<R03>
PART 10--ACCESS TO INFORMATION ABOUT INDIVIDUALS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
10.1  Purpose of this part.
10.2  The Privacy Act of 1974.
10.3  Definitions.
10.4  When this part applies.
10.5  How to make a Privacy Act request.
10.6  How to identify yourself.
10.7  How your Privacy Act request will be handled.
10.8  When, where, and under what conditions you may review the records.
10.9  Special procedures for medical records.
10.10  How to request review of a system manager's denial of access.
10.11  Fees for Privacy Act requests.
10.12  How to request amendment of your record under the Privacy Act.
10.13  How your Privacy Act request for amendment will be handled.
10.14  How to appeal a refusal to amend a record under the Privacy Act.
10.15  How your Privacy Act appeal will be handled.
10.16  Rights of parents and legal guardians.
10.17  Conditions under which the Commission may disclose an 
          individual's record to other persons.
10.18  Accounting of certain disclosures.
10.19  Records about deceased persons.
10.20  Penalties for noncompliance with the Act.
10.21  General exemptions.
10.22  Specific exemptions.

Appendix A to Part 10--General Routine Uses

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552a.

    Source: 44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 10.1  Purpose of this part.

    The purpose of this part is to establish Panama Canal Commission 
policies and procedures for implementing the Privacy Act of 1974 (Pub. 
L. 93-579), and particularly the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a.


<R05>
Sec. 10.2  The Privacy Act of 1974.

    The Privacy Act of 1974 (referred to in this part as ``the Privacy 
Act'') is a law which provides safeguards against the invasion of an 
individual's personal privacy. The Privacy Act creates a procedure for 
an individual to request access to or amendment of a record about 
himself or herself that is maintained by an agency of the United States 
Government. It also places certain restrictions on the disclosure of 
records containing information about an individual to other persons. The 
rest of the rules in this part:
    (a) Explain how you may request access to or amendment of records 
about yourself that are maintained by the Panama Canal Commission 
(referred to in this part as ``the Commission'' or ``the agency'');

[[Page 22]]

    (b) Explain the conditions under which the Commission may disclose 
information about an individual to others without the individual's 
consent; and
    (c) List the systems of records maintained by the Commission which 
are exempt from certain provisions of the Privacy Act, including the 
provisions for access and amendment.


<R05>
Sec. 10.3  Definitions.

    (a) All terms used in this part which are defined in the Privacy Act 
(5 U.S.C. 552a(a)) shall have the same meanings as they do in that Act.
    (b) Agency Records Officer means the Chief, Administrative Services 
Division, Panama Canal Commission.
    (c) Director of Executive Administration means the Director, Office 
of Executive Administration of the Panama Canal Commission.
    (d) System Manager means the official designated in the most recent 
Notice of Systems of Records published in the Federal Register, as 
having responsibility for a given system of records.

[44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 46 FR 48659, Oct. 2, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 10.4  When this part applies.

    (a) This part applies only to information about individuals that is 
maintained by the Panama Canal Commission in a system of records which 
has been described in a notice published in the Federal Register. This 
means that these regulations apply only to information about an 
individual that can be retrieved from a group of records by the 
individual's name or other personal identifier (such as an employee 
identification number).
    (b) Where another agency (such as the Office of Personnel 
Management) has published a notice describing a system of records that 
is partially under the control of the Panama Canal Commission, the 
Privacy Act regulations of that agency take precedence over the 
regulations in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 10.5  How to make a Privacy Act request.

    (a) You may find it helpful to review the descriptions of Commission 
systems of records, as published in the Federal Register, before you 
make a request. You may review these in the annual compilation of 
``Privacy Act Issuances,'' available at libraries, or, upon request, at 
the Records Management Branch, Administration Building, Balboa Heights, 
Republic of Panama.
    (b) To find out whether a particular system of records contains 
information about you, or to request access to records about yourself, 
you must:
    (1) Write or visit the system manager or the Agency Records Officer. 
The title and address of the system manager are given in the Notice of 
System of Records published in the Federal Register. The office of the 
Agency Records Officer is located in the Administration Building, Balboa 
Heights, Republic of Panama, and that official's mailing address is: 
Panama Canal Commission, Agency Records Officer, Unit 2300, APO AA 
34011-2300 (or Balboa, Republic of Panama).
    (2) Reasonably identify the system of records or the type of 
information, or records, you are interested in. Be as specific as you 
can. If you do not know which system of records is involved, it will be 
helpful if you identify the office where you believe the records may be 
located.
    (3) Adequately identify yourself in accordance with the requirements 
contained in Sec. 10.6 of this part.
    (c) If you make your request in writing, state in your letter that 
you are making a request under the Privacy Act and clearly mark the 
envelope with the words ``Privacy Act Request.'' A request under 5 
U.S.C. 552a which is not properly addressed and is not marked in this 
way shall not be considered to have been received by the agency until it 
has actually been received by the system manager or the Agency Records 
Officer.

[44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 59 FR 26123, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 10.6  How to identify yourself.

    (a) If you make your request in person, or if you wish to review 
your records in person, you must identify yourself to the system manager 
or the Agency Records Officer (or to a person designated by one of those 
officials) by showing at least one identification document containing 
your picture (for example, employee identification card,

[[Page 23]]

driver's license, passport), or at least two identification documents 
containing your signature, or other identification acceptable to the 
official concerned.
    (b) If you make your request in writing, you must supply information 
that will help to verify your identity (for example, signature, employee 
identification number, date and place of birth), and you may also be 
required to provide the certificate of a notary public or other official 
authorized to administer oaths.
    (c) Whether making your request in person or in writing, if you 
cannot identify yourself to the satisfaction of the system manager or 
the Agency Records Officer (or the person designated by one of those 
officials), you may be asked to make and sign a written statement 
asserting your identity and indicating that you understand that 
knowingly and willfully requesting or obtaining access to any record 
about another individual under false pretenses is a misdemeanor 
punishable by a fine of up to $5,000 (5 U.S.C. 552a(i)(3)).


<R05>
Sec. 10.7  How your Privacy Act request will be handled.

    (a) The system manager or the Agency Records Officer will 
acknowledge receipt of your request within ten working days. At the same 
time, or as soon as possible after acknowledging receipt, that official 
will:
    (1) Tell you that a record about you is maintained in the system of 
records you identified and tell how you may review it, or get a copy; or
    (2) Tell you that no record about you is maintained in the system of 
records you identified; or
    (3) Tell you that your inquiry cannot be answered or your request 
cannot or will not be granted because you have not adequately identified 
yourself or the system of records; because the system of records in 
question is exempt from the access provisions of the Privacy Act; or 
because the record or system of records in question is not under the 
control of the Commission.
    (b) When the system manager or the Agency Records Officer makes a 
decision to grant you access to the records you requested, you normally 
may see the records or get copies of them right away. If, for any 
reason, the records cannot be provided immediately, that official will 
arrange with you a mutually acceptable time and place for you to review 
and copy the records. If that official cannot make the records available 
to you within 30 working days of receipt of your request, that official 
will advise you in writing of the reason for the delay.


<R05>
Sec. 10.8  When, where, and under what conditions you may review the records.

    (a) If you want to review your records in person, you will normally 
be required to go during regular working hours to the location specified 
in the Notice of the System of Records or to the office of the Agency 
Records Officer, in the administration Building, Balboa Heights, 
Republic of Panama. If you cannot go in person during regular working 
hours, you should telephone or write the system manager or the Agency 
Records Officer so that appropriate arrangements can be made for you to 
review the records.
    (b) You must identify yourself to the system manager or the Agency 
Records Officer (or to a person designated by one of those officials) in 
accordance with the requirements contained in Sec. 10.6 of this part.
    (c) If you have been told that you may review your records in 
person, you may, upon your request, be accompanied by a person of your 
choosing. You will however, have to provide the system manager with a 
written signed statement authorizing disclosure of the records about you 
to that person, and authorizing discussion of your records in the 
presence of that person. 
    (d) You may be shown a copy of a record rather than the original 
record itself when the record is not maintained at, or cannot be 
transferred to, a location which is accessible to you. In that event, 
you will be charged for the copies only if you choose to retain them. If 
copies are made at your request, the agency will charge you the cost of 
making the copies, as stated in Sec. 10.11 of this part.
    (e) No one shall be allowed to inspect original agency records 
except under

[[Page 24]]

the immediate supervision of the system manager, or the Agency Records 
Officer, or a person designated by one of those officials.


<R05>
Sec. 10.9  Special procedures for medical records.

    (a) If you request medical records about yourself, including 
psychiatric and psychological records, the records will be made 
available to you only after the Director of Health and Safety, or that 
official's designee, determines that release of the records would not be 
likely to have an adverse effect on you. If they are not made available 
to you, upon your written request the medical records which are not 
otherwise exempt from disclosure may be reviewed by a licensed medical 
practitioner designated by you.
    (b) School records of a psychological nature may be shown to the 
student who is the subject of the records or to the parent or guardian 
of the student only if the Director of Health and Safety, or that 
official's designee, determines that the release would not be likely to 
have an adverse effect on the individual who is the subject of the 
records.


<R05>
Sec. 10.10  How to request review of a system manager's denial of access.

    (a) If the system manager denies your request for records, in whole 
or in part, you may ask the Agency Records Officer to review that 
decision. The denial is not considered a final agency decision unless it 
has been reviewed and confirmed in writing by the Agency Records 
Officer.
    (b) To request review of a system manager's denial, you must:
    (1) Write to the Panama Canal Commission, Agency Records Officer, 
Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or Balboa, Republic of Panama); and
    (2) State in your letter that you are requesting review of the 
system manager's denial and clearly mark the envelope ``Privacy Act 
Request for Review''; and
    (3) Mail or deliver the request for review within ten working days 
after you receive the system manager's denial.
    (c) Although it is not required, it may be helpful if you state in 
your request for review the reasons why you disagree with the decision 
on your request for access and your reasons for wanting the records.

[44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 59 FR 26123, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 10.11  Fees for Privacy Act requests.

    (a) The fees for copies of records made at your request under this 
section will be the same as the fees provided in Sec. 9.11(a) (3), (4), 
(5), (6), (7); (c); and (e) of this title for copies of materials 
provided under the Freedom of Information Act.
    (b) If your request for copies of records or portions of records is 
expected to involve fees of more than $50, the Commission will not treat 
your request as having been received until:
    (1) The Commission has sent you a written notification of the 
estimated fees; and
    (2) You agree in writing to pay at least the estimated fees; and
    (3) You pay part of the estimated fees in advance, if the agency 
requires such a deposit before it will begin to copy the records you 
have requested.


<R05>
Sec. 10.12  How to request amendment of your record under the Privacy Act.

    After you have reviewed your record, you may ask the Commission to 
correct or amend any portion of the record that you believe is not 
accurate, timely, relevant, or complete. To make a request for 
amendment, you must:
    (a) Write to the Panama Canal Commission, Agency Records Officer, 
Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or Balboa, Republic of Panama).
    (b) State in your letter that you are requesting amendment of a 
record under the Privacy Act, and clearly mark the envelope ``Privacy 
Act Request for Amendment.'' A request for amendment of a record under 5 
U.S.C. 552a which is not properly addressed and is not marked in this 
way shall not be considered to be received by the Commission until it 
has actually been received by the Agency Records Officer.
    (c) In your letter, identify the system of records involved, if you 
can, and identify the particular record or portion of the record you 
wish to have corrected or amended. If possible, attach a copy of the 
record in question.

[[Page 25]]

    (d) Explain in your letter why you believe the record or portion of 
the record is not accurate, timely, relevant, or complete, and provide 
any evidence available to support your request.
    (e) Include in your letter any other information that may be 
necessary for proper processing of your request.

[44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 59 FR 26123, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 10.13  How your Privacy Act request for amendment will be handled.

    (a) The Agency Records Officer (or that official's designee) will 
decide whether your request for amendment of a record should be granted. 
That official (or the designee) will acknowledge receipt of your request 
within ten working days and will either notify you of the decision or 
tell you when you can expect to have the decision. If a decision cannot 
be made within 30 working days of the receipt of your request, the 
Agency Records Officer (or the designee) will advise you in writing of 
the circumstances causing the delay.
    (b) If your request for amendment is granted, in whole or in part:
    (1) The Agency Records Officer (or that official's designee) will 
notify you of this decision;
    (2) The system manager will promptly correct the record; and
    (3) Where an accounting of disclosures has been maintained, the 
system manager will advise all previous recipients of the record that 
the correction has been made.
    (c) If your request for amendment is denied, in whole or in part, 
the Agency Records Officer (or that official's designee) will notify you 
of this decision and will:
    (1) Tell you why the request is being denied;
    (2) Tell you that you have the right to request further review by 
appealing the decision; and
    (3) Tell you how to make an appeal.


<R05>
Sec. 10.14  How to appeal a refusal to amend a record under the Privacy Act.

    (a) If the Agency Records Officer (or that official's designee) has 
denied your request to amend a record, you may request the Executive 
Secretary to review that decision. This is called ``making an appeal.''
    (b) To make an appeal, you must:
    (1) Write to the Panama Canal Commission, Director, Office of 
Executive Administration, Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or Balboa, 
Republic of Panama); and
    (2) State in your letter that you are appealing a denial of a 
request for amendment under the Privacy Act, and clearly mark the 
envelope ``Privacy Act Appeal''; and
    (3) Mail or deliver the letter of appeal within ten working days 
after you receive the initial agency denial.

[44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 46 FR 48659, Oct. 2, 1981; 59 
FR 26123, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 10.15  How your Privacy Act appeal will be handled.

    (a) The official responsible for deciding whether to grant your 
appeal is the Director of Executive Administration of the Panama Canal 
Commission. The Director of Executive Administration will review the 
refusal to amend your record and will advise you of his decision within 
30 working days or receipt of your appeal.
    (b) If the Director of Executive Administration grants your appeal, 
in whole or in part:
    (1) That official will notify you of the decision;
    (2) The system manager will promptly correct the record; and
    (3) Where an accounting of disclosures has been maintained, the 
system manager will advise all previous recipients of the record that 
the correction has been made.
    (c) If the Director of Executive Administration denies your appeal, 
in whole or in part, the letter sent to notify you of this decision 
must:
    (1) Tell you why the appeal is being denied;
    (2) Tell you that this denial of your appeal is a final agency 
decision;
    (3) Tell you that you have the right to file a concise statement of 
your reasons for disagreeing with the decision of the agency; and
    (4) Tell you that you have the right to request a U.S. District 
Court to review this denial of your appeal, as provided by 5 U.S.C. 
552a(g).

[[Page 26]]

    (d) The Administrator of the Panama Canal Commission may extend the 
30-working-day period specified in paragraph (a) of this section for 
good cause shown. In that case, the Agency Records Officer will notify 
you in writing of the reason for the delay and will tell you when you 
can expect a decision on your appeal.
    (e) If you choose to file a concise statement of your reasons for 
disagreeing with the agency's refusal to amend your record:
    (1) The system manager shall cause a notation to be made on the 
disputed portion of the record;
    (2) Copies of your statement of disagreement will be provided to 
anyone to whom the disputed record is subsequently disclosed and (to the 
extent that an accounting of disclosures has been maintained) to any 
previous recipients of the disputed record; and
    (3) The Commission may, at its discretion, make a brief summary of 
its reasons for not amending the record and may provide this summary, 
along with your statement of disagreement, to previous or subsequent 
recipients of the disputed record.

[44 FR 75312, Dec. 19, 1979, as amended at 46 FR 48659, Oct. 2, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 10.16  Rights of parents and legal guardians.

    The parent of legal guardian of a minor or the legal guardian of an 
individual who has been declared incompetent may request access to, or 
amendment of, a record on behalf of that individual. To do so, a parent 
will be required to show a certified or authenticated copy of the 
minor's birth certificate, and a legal guardian will be required to show 
a certified or authenticated copy of the court order establishing 
guardianship. In some cases, the parent or legal guardian of a minor may 
be asked to provide evidence that the minor is in the parent's or 
guardian's custody, that the minor has consented to disclosure of the 
information to the parent or guardian, or that the parent or guardian 
has authority to act on the minor's behalf.


<R05>
Sec. 10.17  Conditions under which the Commission may disclose an individual's record to other persons.

    (a) The Commission shall not disclose information about an 
individual that is contained in one of its systems of records to any 
person or to another agency, except by written request of, or with the 
prior written consent of, the individual who is the subject of the 
record, unless the disclosure is authorized by paragraph (b) of this 
section or is required by other applicable law.
    (b) Under 5 U.S.C. 552a, the Commission may disclose information 
contained in its systems of records, without the consent of the 
individual who is the subject of the record, if the disclosure of the 
information, or record, would be:
    (1) To the parent or legal guardian of any minor, or to the legal 
guardian of any individual who has been declared to be incompetent by a 
court of competent jurisdiction, where such person is acting on the 
individual's behalf (5 U.S.C. 552a(h));
    (2) To those officers and employees of the Commission who have a 
need for the information in the performance of their duties (5 U.S.C. 
552a(b)(1));
    (3) Required under 5 U.S.C. 552, the Freedom of Information Act (5 
U.S.C. 552a(b)(2));
    (4) For a routine use as defined in 5 U.S.C. 552a(a)(7) and as 
described for all systems of records in Appendix A of this part and for 
specific systems of records in the Notice of Systems of Records 
published in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(3));
    (5) To the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying 
out a census or survey or related activity under the provisions of Title 
13, U.S. Code (5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(4));
    (6) To a recipient who has provided the Commission with advance 
adequate written assurance that the record will be used solely as a 
statistical research or reporting record, and the record is to be 
transferred in a form that is not individually identifiable (5 U.S.C. 
552a(b)(5));
    (7) To the National Archives of the United States as a record which 
has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued 
preservation by the United States Government, or for

[[Page 27]]

evaluation by the Administrator of General Services or that official's 
designee to determine whether the record has such value (5 U.S.C. 
552a(b)(6));
    (8) To another agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental 
jurisdiction within or under the control of the United States for a 
civil or criminal law enforcement activity if the activity is authorized 
by law, and if the head of the agency or instrumentality has made a 
written request to the Commission specifying the particular portion 
desired and the law enforcement activity for which the record is sought 
(5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(7));
    (9) To a person pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances 
affecting the health or safety of an individual, if upon such disclosure 
notification is transmitted to the last known address of such individual 
(5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(8));
    (10) To either House of Congress, or, to the extent of matter within 
its jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint 
committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee (5 
U.S.C. 552a(b)(9));
    (11) To the Comptroller General, or any of his authorized 
representatives, in the course of the performance of the duties of the 
General Accounting Office (5 U.S.C. 552a(b)(10)); or
    (12) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction (5 
U.S.C. 552a(b)(11)).


<R05>
Sec. 10.18  Accounting of certain disclosures.

    (a) The system manager or his designee shall keep an accurate 
accounting of each disclosure of personal information about an 
individual from a system of records under his control which is made in 
accordance with Sec. 10.17(b) of this part, except if that disclosure is 
to officers and employees of the Commission (Sec. 10.17(b)(2)) or is 
required under the Freedom of Information Act (Sec. 10.17(b)(3)).
    (b) This accounting of disclosure shall include:
    (1) The date, nature, and purpose of each such disclosure; and
    (2) The name and address of the person or agency to whom the 
disclosure is made.
    (c) The system manager shall retain this accounting of disclosure 
for at least five years after the disclosure or for the life of the 
record, whichever is longer.
    (d) The Commission shall make the accounting of disclosure available 
to the individual named in the record, at that individual's request, 
except when the disclosure was made under Sec. 10.17(b)(8) of this part 
or when the record in question is exempt from the access provisions of 
the Privacy Act under Secs. 10.21 and 10.22 of this part. An individual 
may request access to the accounting of disclosure by the procedure for 
requesting access to records that is explained in Secs. 10.5 through 
10.10 of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 10.19  Records about deceased persons.

    A record about a deceased person is not covered by the rules in this 
part, except to the extent that the deceased person's record contains 
information about a living individual. In disclosing information about a 
deceased person, the Commission will make every effort to avoid any 
infringement of the privacy rights of a living individual.


<R05>
Sec. 10.20  Penalties for noncompliance with the Act.

    Subsections (g) and (i) of 5 U.S.C. 552a provide civil remedies and 
criminal penalties for noncompliance with the provisions of the Privacy 
Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579) or regulations implementing that Act. In 
addition, adverse or disciplinary action may be taken against any 
officer or employee who willfully or negligently fails to comply with 
the requirements of the Privacy Act or the regulations in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 10.21  General exemptions.

    (a) The following systems of records are eligible for exemption 
under 5 U.S.C. 552a(j)(2) because each system is maintained by a 
component of the agency, or subcomponent, which performs as its 
principal function the enforcement of criminal laws, and which contains 
investigatory material compiled for criminal law enforcement purposes. 
Accordingly, these systems are exempt from the following sections of 
552a of 5 U.S.C.: (c) (3) and (4); (d); (e)

[[Page 28]]

(1), (2) and (3); (e)(4) (G) and (H); (e) (5); (e)(8); (f); (g); and 
(h).
    (1) PCC/GSCP-2, Canal Protection Division Incident Report Files;
    (2) PCC/OIG-1, Investigative Files of the Office of Inspector 
General;
    (3) PCC/OIG-2, Allegation/Complaint Files of the Office of Inspector 
General;
    (4) PCC/OIG-3, Cash Audit Files.
    (b) The systems of records listed below, although no longer actively 
in use, continue to be subject to general exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
552a(j)(2) because they were compiled by a component, or subcomponent, 
of the agency which performed as its principal function the enforcement 
of criminal laws, and which contain investigatory material compiled for 
criminal law enforcement purposes. Accordingly, the following systems of 
records are exempt from subsections (c)(3) and (4); (d); (e)(1), (2) and 
(3); (e)(4) (G) and (H); (e)(5); (e)(8); (f); (g); and (h) of 5 U.S.C. 
552a:
    (1) PCC/AEPR-1, Probation and Parole Unit Child Custody Reports;
    (2) PCC/AEPR-2, Presentence and Preparole Investigation Reports;
    (3) PCC/AEPR-3, Probation and Parole Unit Statistical File;
    (4) PCC/GSPL-1, Law Enforcement Case Report File;
    (5) PCC/GSPL-2, Police Headquarters Confidential File;
    (6) PCC/GSPL-3, Detective Confidential Files;
    (7) PCC/GSPL-4, Convict Files;
    (8) PCC/GSPL-6, Police Photo Files;
    (9) PCC/GSPL-7, Fingerprint File;
    (10) PCC/GSPL-10, Master Name File;
    (c) Exemptions from the particular subsections are justified for the 
following reasons:
    (1) From (c)(3) because release of an accounting of disclosures to 
an individual who is the subject of an investigation could reveal the 
nature and scope of the investigation and could result in the altering 
or destruction of evidence, improper influencing of witnesses and other 
evasive action that could impede or compromise the investigation.
    (2) From (c)(4) because this subsection is inapplicable to the 
extent that an exemption is being claimed for subsection (d).
    (3) From subsection (d) because access to the records contained in 
these systems would inform the subject of a criminal or civil 
investigation, matter or case of the existence of such, and provide the 
subject with information that might enable him or her to avoid 
detection, apprehension or legal obligations, and present a serious 
impediment to law enforcement and other civil remedies. Amendment of the 
records would impose an impossible administrative burden by requiring 
investigations to be continuously reinvestigated.
    (4) From subsection (e)(1) because it is often impossible to 
determine relevance or necessity of information in the early stages of 
an investigation. The value of such information is a question of 
judgment and timing; what appears relevant and necessary when collected 
may ultimately be evaluated and viewed as irrelevant and unnecessary to 
an investigation. In addition, information may be obtained concerning 
the violation of laws other than those within the scope of its 
jurisdiction. In the interest of effective law enforcement, information 
should be retained because it may aid in establishing patterns of 
unlawful activity and provide leads for other law enforcement agencies. 
Further, in obtaining evidence during an investigation, information may 
be provided which relates to matters incidental to the main purpose of 
the investigation but which may be pertinent to the investigative 
jurisdiction of another agency. Such information cannot readily be 
identified.
    (5) From subsection (e)(2) because in a law enforcement 
investigation it is usually counterproductive to collect information to 
the greatest extent practicable directly from the subject thereof. It is 
not always feasible to rely upon the subject of an investigation as a 
source for information which may implicate him or her in illegal 
activities. In addition, collecting information directly from the 
subject could seriously compromise an investigation by prematurely 
revealing its nature and scope, or could provide the subject with an 
opportunity to conceal criminal activities, or intimidate potential 
sources, in order to avoid apprehension.

[[Page 29]]

    (6) From subsection (e)(3) because providing such notice to the 
subject of an investigation, or to other individual sources, could 
seriously compromise the investigation by prematurely revealing its 
nature and scope, or could inhibit cooperation, or permit the subject to 
evade apprehension.
    (7) From (e)(4) (G) and (H); (f); (g); and (h) because these 
provisions concern an individual's access to records which concern him 
and such access to records in this system would compromise 
investigations, reveal investigatory techniques and confidential 
informants, and invade the privacy of private citizens who provide 
information in connection with a particular investigation.
    (8) From subsection (e)(5) because in the collection of information 
for law enforcement purposes it is impossible to determine what 
information is accurate, relevant, timely, and complete. With the 
passage of time, seemingly irrelevant or untimely information may 
acquire new significance as further investigation brings new details to 
light and the accuracy of such information can only be determined in a 
court of law. The restrictions of subsection (e)(5) would restrict the 
ability of trained investigators to exercise their judgment in reporting 
on investigations and impede the development of information necessary 
for effective law enforcement.
    (9) From subsection (e)(8) because the application of this provision 
could prematurely reveal an ongoing criminal investigation to the 
subject of the investigation and could reveal investigative techniques, 
procedures or evidence.

[59 FR 9089, Feb. 25, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 10.22  Specific exemptions.

    (a) The following systems of records are eligible for exemption 
under 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2) because they contain investigatory material 
compiled for law enforcement purposes, other than material within the 
scope of subsection (j)(2) of 5 U.S.C. 552a. Provided, however, that if 
any individual is denied any right, privilege or benefit that he would 
otherwise be eligible, as a result of the maintenance of such material, 
such material shall be provided to such individual, except to the extent 
that the disclosure of such material would reveal the identity of a 
source who furnished information to the Government under an express 
promise that the identify of the source would be held in confidence, or 
prior to January 1, 1975, under an implied promise that the identity of 
the source would be held in confidence. Accordingly, the following 
systems of records are exempt from (c)(3); (d); (e)(1); (e)(4) (G) and 
(H); (f); (g); and (h) of 5 U.S.C. 552a.
    (1) PCC/GSCP-2, Canal Protection Division Incident Report Files;
    (2) PCC/OIG-1, Investigative Files of the Office of Inspector 
General;
    (3) PCC/OIG-2, Allegation/Complaint Files of the Office of Inspector 
General;
    (4) PCC/OIG-3, Cash Audit Files.
    (5) PCC/FMAC-1, Embezzlements, Burglaries, and Cash Shortages;
    (6) PCC/EO-2, Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint File;
    (7) PCC/GCCL-1, Marine Accident/Miscellaneous General Claims Files;
    (8) PCC/GSCS-2, Housing Complaints Files;
    (9) PCC/GSCX-1, Administrative Reports, Transfer of Custody and 
Official Complaint Files.
    (10) PCC/AEPR-1, Probation and Parole Unit Child Custody Reports;
    (11) PCC/AEPR-2, Presentence and Preparole Investigation Reports;
    (12) PCC/AEPR-3, Probation and Parole Unit Statistical File;
    (13) PCC/CAPS-2, Case Investigations;
    (14) PCC/GSPL-1, Law Enforcement Case Report Files;
    (15) PCC/GSPL-2, Police Headquarters Confidential File;
    (16) PCC/GSPL-3, Detective Confidential Files;
    (17) PCC/GSPL-4, Convict Files;
    (18) PCC/GSPL-6, Police Photo Files;
    (19) PCC/GSPL-7, Fingerprint File;
    (20) PCC/GSPL-10, Master Name File;
    (21) PCC/CZG-HL-2, Medical Administration System.
    (b) Exemptions from the particular subsections are justified for the 
following reasons:
    (1) From subsection (c)(3) because the release of the accounting of 
disclosures would permit the subject of a criminal investigation and/or 
civil case or matter under investigation, in litigation,

[[Page 30]]

or under regulatory or administrative review or action to obtain 
valuable information concerning the nature of that investigation, case 
or matter and present a serious impediment to law enforcement or civil 
legal activities.
    (2) From (d); (e)(4) (G) and (H); (f); (g); and (h) because these 
provisions concern an individual's access to records which concern him 
and such access to records in this system would compromise 
investigations, reveal investigatory techniques and confidential 
informants, and invade the privacy of private citizens who provide 
information in connection with a particular investigation.
    (3) From subsection (e)(1) because it is often impossible to 
determine relevancy or necessity of information in the early stages of 
an investigation. The value of such information is a question of 
judgment and timing; what appears relevant and necessary when collected 
may ultimately be evaluated and viewed as irrelevant and unnecessary to 
an investigation. In addition, information may be obtained concerning 
the violation of laws other than those within the scope of its 
jurisdiction. In the interest of effective law enforcement, this 
information should be retained because it may aid in establishing 
patterns of unlawful activity and provide leads for other law 
enforcement agencies. Further, in obtaining evidence during an 
investigation, information may be provided which relates to matters 
incidental to the main purpose of the investigation but which may be 
pertinent to the investigative jurisdiction of another agency. Such 
information cannot readily be identified.
    (c) The following systems of records are eligible for exemption 
under 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5) because they contain investigatory material 
compiled solely for the purpose of determining suitability, eligibility 
or qualifications for Federal civilian employment, military service, 
Federal contracts, or access to classified information, but only to the 
extent that the disclosure of such material would reveal the identity of 
a source who furnished information to the Government under an express 
promise that the identity of the source would be held in confidence, or, 
prior to January 1, 1975, under an implied promise that the identity of 
the source would be held in confidence. Accordingly, these systems of 
records are exempt from 5 U.S.C. 552a(c)(3) and (d).
    (1) PCC/FMAC-1, Embezzlements, Burglaries, and Cash Shortages;
    (2) PCC/PB-2, Appeals, Grievances, Complaints and Assistance 
Records;
    (3) PCC/PB-3, Personnel Investigation Records;
    (4) PCC/PR-5, Recruiting and Placement Records;
    (5) PCC/PR-7, Personnel Reference Unit Files.
    (6) PCC/OIG-1, Investigative Files of the Office of Inspector 
General;
    (7) PCC/OIG-2, Allegation/Complaint Files of the Office of Inspector 
General;
    (8) PCC/OIG-3, Cash Audit Files.
    (d) Exemptions from the particular subsections are justified for the 
following reasons:
    (1) From (c)(3) because release of an accounting of disclosure to an 
individual who is the subject of an investigation could compromise the 
investigation.
    (2) From (d) because access to or amendment of records in these 
systems would reveal the identity(ies) of the source(s) of information 
collected in the course of a background investigation. Such knowledge 
might violate the explicit or implicit promise of confidentiality made 
to the source during the investigation or constitute an unwarranted 
invasion of the personal privacy of third parties, or reveal sensitive 
investigative techniques and procedures. Such breaches could restrict 
the free flow of information vital to a determination of a candidate's 
qualifications and suitability.
    (e) The following systems of records are eligible for exemption 
under 5 U.S.C. 552a (k)(6) because they contain testing or examination 
material used solely to determine individual qualifications for 
appointment or promotion in the Federal service, the disclosure of which 
would compromise the objectivity or fairness of the testing or 
examination process. Accordingly, these systems of records are exempt 
from 5 U.S.C. 552a(d).
    (1) PCC/CZG/BRAE-1, Canal Zone Board of Registration for Architects

[[Page 31]]

and Professional Engineers Reference Files;
    (2) PCC/MRBL-1, Marine License Files;
    (3) PCC/MRNA-1, Admeasurer Examination File;
    (f) Exemptions from the particular subsections are justified for the 
following reasons:
    (1) The exemption from (d) is justified because portions of records 
in these systems relate to testing or examining materials and are used 
solely to determine individual qualifications for appointment or 
promotion in the Federal service. Access to or amendment of this 
information would compromise the objectivity and fairness of the testing 
or examining process.

[59 FR 9090, Feb. 25, 1994]

               Appendix A to Part 10--General Routine Uses

    Information about an individual which is maintained in any system of 
records under the control of the Panama Canal Commission is subject to 
disclosure, as a routine use of such information, to any of the 
following persons or agencies under the circumstances described:
    1. Information indicating a violation or potential violation of law 
(whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether involving 
a statute or regulation or a rule or order issued pursuant thereto) may 
be referred to the federal, state, local, foreign, or international 
agency charged with investigating or prosecuting such violations or 
charged with implementing or enforcing the particular statute, or 
regulations, rule, or order, which is pertinent thereto.
    2. Information which has a bearing on matters which may be in 
dispute may be disclosed in the course of presenting evidence or 
argument to a court or administrative tribunal, a judicial official, or 
counsel for a party in connection with litigation or administrative 
proceedings in which the agency, or its officers or employees, are or 
may become involved.
    3. Information may be provided to persons or agencies from whom 
information is solicited, to the extent necessary to elicit facts which 
may be relevant to a financial audit or an agency decision to hire or 
retain an employee, issue a security clearance, award a contract, grant 
a license, or otherwise provide a benefit or incur an obligation.
    4. Information may be disclosed to a Federal agency, in response to 
its request in a particular case or in a category of cases, in 
connection with that agency's (a) decision in a personnel matter; (b) 
financial audits and accounting; (c) issuance of a security clearance; 
(d) investigation of an individual employed or formerly employed by the 
Panama Canal Commission (or its predecessors); or (e) decision to award 
a contract, grant a license, or otherwise provide a benefit or incur an 
obligation.
    5. Information may be supplied in response to an inquiry from a 
Member of Congress on behalf of an individual or, at any stage of the 
legislative coordination and clearance process, to the Office of 
Management and Budget in connection with the review of private relief 
legislation.
    6. Information which has a bearing on the qualifications of 
professional personnel (such as architects, attorneys, engineers, 
medical practitioners, pilots, and teachers) who have been employed by 
the agency or have had professional dealings with the agency may be 
provided to the appropriate authorities such as professional licensing 
and certifying boards and grievance committees.
    7. To the extent necessary for implementation of the Panama Canal 
Treaty of 1977 and related agreements, information may, upon approval by 
the Agency Records Officer (Chief, Administrative Services Division) or 
that official's designee, be disclosed to officials of the Government of 
the Republic of Panama and to U.S. Government agencies which, under the 
Treaty, assumed functions formerly performed by the Panama Canal Company 
or the Canal Zone Government.

[[Page 32]]


<R03>
                    SUBCHAPTER B--GENERAL REGULATIONS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 60--CLASSIFIED INFORMATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
60.1  Authority, scope and definitions.
60.2  Compliance with Executive Order 12356 and implementing directives.
60.3  Classification levels, categories, and limitations.
60.4  Limitations on original classification authority.
60.5  Use of derivative classification.
60.6  Requirements for classification guides.
60.7  Duration of classification.
60.8  Identification and markings.
60.9  Declassification and downgrading.
60.10  Access to classified information.
60.11  Top Secret, Secret, and Confidential Control Officer.
60.12  Mandatory review for declassification.
60.13  Custody and storage.
60.14  Security investigations; training and orientation of employees.
60.15  Debriefing upon termination of employment.
60.16  Responsibility of individual employees.
60.17  Loss or compromise; destruction of nonrecord classified 
          information.
60.18  Procedures for receiving and transmitting classified documents.
60.19  Reproduction of classified documents.

    Authority: E.O. 12356, 47 FR 14874; 32 CFR part 2001 (Directive 
No.1, Information Security Oversight Office), 47 FR 27836; E.O. 10450, 
18 FR 2489; 22 U.S.C. 3611.

    Source: 53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 60.1  Authority, scope, and definitions.

    (a) Executive Order 12356, dated April 2, 1982 (47 FR 14874, April 
6, 1982) and 32 CFR part 2001 (Directive No. 1 of the Information 
Security Oversight Office, approved by the National Security Council on 
June 22, 1982, 47 FR 27836, June 25, 1982), set forth uniform standards 
for the identification, classification, downgrading, declassification, 
and safeguarding of security information affecting the national defense 
and foreign relations of the United States. The regulations contained in 
this part are adopted pursuant to that Executive Order (which became 
effective on August 1, 1982) and implement its provisions within the 
Panama Canal Commission.
    (b) Definitions:
    (1) Commission refers to the Panama Canal Commission.
    (2) Information means any information or material, regardless of its 
physical form or characteristics, that is owned by, produced by or for, 
or is under the control of the United States Government.
    (3) National security information means information that has been 
determined pursuant to this Order or any predecessor order to require 
protection against unauthorized disclosure and that is so designated.
    (4) Foreign government information means:
    (i) Information provided by a foreign government or governments, an 
international organization of governments, or any element thereof with 
the expectation, expressed or implied, that the information, the source 
of the information, or both, be held in confidence; or
    (ii) Information produced by the United States pursuant to or as a 
result of a joint arrangement with a foreign government or governments 
or an international organization of governments, or any element thereof, 
requiring that the information, the arrangement, or both, be held in 
confidence.
    (5) National security means the national defense or foreign 
relations of the United States.
    (6) Confidential source means any individual or organization that 
has provided, or that may reasonably be expected to provide, information 
to the United States on matters pertaining to the national security with 
the expectation, expressed or implied, that the information or 
relationship or both be held in confidence.
    (7) Original classification means an initial determination that 
information requires, in the interest of national security, protection 
against unauthorized disclosure, together with a classification 
designation signifying the level of protection required.
    (8) Deputy Administrator means the U.S. citizen incumbent of that 
position or the U.S. citizen temporarily designated to assume the 
responsibilities set forth under this part. In the event

[[Page 33]]

that the regular incumbent is not serving in the position, a senior U.S. 
citizen official of the Commission listed in Sec. 60.4(a) will designate 
an eligible U.S. citizen to assume the duties and responsibilities of 
the position as set forth in this part.
    (9) Director, Office of Executive Administration, ``Deputy Director, 
Office of Executive Administration,'' ``Deputy Personnel Director,'' and 
``Chief, Administrative Services,'' are similarly defined to mean the 
U.S. citizen(s) temporarily designated to assume the responsibilities of 
the position as set forth in this part.
    (10) DUSD(P) refers to the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense 
(Policy).

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.2  Compliance with Executive Order 12356 and implementing directives.

    (a) The Director, Office of Executive Administration is designated 
the senior agency official to direct and administer the information 
security program for the Commission, including an active oversight and 
security education program to ensure effective implementation of 
Executive Order 12356 and any implementing directives published by the 
Information Security Oversight Office.
    (b) The Director, Office of Executive Administration will establish 
procedures to prevent unnecessary access to classified information, 
including procedures that:
    (1) Require that a demonstrable need for access to classified 
information is established before initiating administrative clearance 
procedures, and
    (2) Ensure that the number of persons granted access to classified 
information is limited to the minimum consistent with operational and 
security requirements and needs.
    (c) The Deputy Personnel Director will direct the conduct of 
investigations relative to the issuance of security clearances in 
accordance with the standards and criteria of Executive Order 10450.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.3  Classification levels, categories, and limitations.

    (a) Classification levels. Official information which requires 
protection against unauthorized disclosure in the interest of the 
national security shall be classified Top Secret, Secret, or 
Confidential depending upon the degree of its significance to national 
security. No other terms or phrases of classification shall be used to 
identify such information except as otherwise expressly provided by 
statute. If there is reasonable doubt about the need to classify 
information, it shall be safeguarded as if it were classified pending a 
determination by one of the original classification authorities listed 
in Sec. 60.4(a), who shall make this determination within thirty (30) 
days. If there is reasonable doubt about the appropriate level of 
classification, it shall be safeguarded at the higher level of 
classification pending a determination by one of the original 
classification authorities, who shall make this determination within 
thirty (30) days.
    (1) Top Secret shall be applied to information, the unauthorized 
disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally 
grave damage to the national security. The Commission does not have the 
authority to classify information originally as Top Secret.
    (2) Secret shall be applied to information, the unauthorized 
disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage 
to the national security.
    (3) Confidential shall be applied to information, the unauthorized 
disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the 
national security.
    (b) Classification categories. Information shall be considered for 
classification if it concerns:
    (1) Military plans, weapons, or operations;
    (2) The vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, 
projects, or plans relating to the national security;
    (3) Foreign government information;
    (4) Intelligence activities (including special activities), or 
intelligence sources or methods;
    (5) Foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

[[Page 34]]

    (6) Scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to the 
national security;
    (7) United States Government programs for safeguarding nuclear 
materials or facilities;
    (8) Cryptology;
    (9) A confidential source; or
    (10) Other categories of information that are related to the 
national security and that require protection against unauthorized 
disclosure as determined by the President or by agency heads or other 
officials who have been delegated original classification authority by 
the President. Any determination made under this subsection shall be 
reported promptly to the Director of Information Security, Office of the 
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Policy).
    (c) Information that is determined to concern one or more of the 
categories in Sec. 60.3(b) shall be classified when one of the original 
classification authorities listed in Sec. 60.4(a) also determines that 
its unauthorized disclosure, either by itself or in the context of other 
information, reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the 
national security. Classification on the basis of combination or 
association with other (classified or unclassified) information shall be 
supported by a written explanation which shall be maintained with the 
record copy of such information.
    (d) Unauthorized disclosure of foreign government information, the 
identity of a confidential foreign source, or intelligence sources or 
methods is presumed to cause damage to the national security.
    (e) Information classified in accordance with Sec. 60.3 shall not be 
declassified automatically as a result of any unofficial publication or 
inadvertent or unauthorized disclosure in the United States or abroad of 
identical or similar information, see Sec. 60.11(e).
    (f) Limitations on classification.
    (1) In no case shall information be classified in order to conceal 
violations of law, inefficiency, or administrative error; to prevent 
embarrassment to a person, an organization, or the Panama Canal 
Commission or other agency; to restrain competition; or to prevent or 
delay the release of information that does not require protection in the 
interest of national security.
    (2) Basic scientific research information not clearly related to the 
national security may not be classified.
    (3) The President or the officials designated by the President in 
the Federal Register may reclassify information previously declassified 
and disclosed if it is determined in writing that:
    (i) The information requires protection in the interest of national 
security; and
    (ii) The information may reasonably be recovered. These 
reclassification actions shall be reported promptly to the Office of the 
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Policy) for subsequent reporting to 
the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office.
    (4) Information in the custody of the Panama Canal Commission may be 
classified or reclassified after an agency has received a request for it 
under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or the Privacy Act 
of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a), or the mandatory review provisions of Executive 
Order 12356 if such classification meets the requirements of that 
Executive Order and is accomplished personally and on a document-by-
document basis by the officials identified in Sec. 60.4(a) or an 
official with original Top Secret classification authority.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.4   Limitations on original classification authority.

    (a) The authority to classify information originally under this part 
shall be limited to the categories of Secret and Confidential. Only the 
following officials of the Panama Canal Commission are authorized to 
classify information or material originally:
    (1) The Deputy Administrator;
    (2) The Director, Office of Executive Administration; and
    (3) The Secretary, Washington Office.
    (b) Other officials and employees of the Panama Canal Commission 
originating documents which, in their opinion, should be classified as 
Secret or Confidential prior to dispatch, shall forward these documents 
to the Director, Office of Executive Administration

[[Page 35]]

with recommendation for appropriate classification. Such documents shall 
be protected by a cover sheet (such as Panama Canal Commission Forms 
165-Conf or 165-B Secret) of the classification recommended by the 
originator, and shall be handled and safeguarded as if classified, see 
Sec. 60.8(a).
    (c) All information originated within the Commission which is 
believed to require classification as Top Secret (within the meaning of 
this part and Executive Order 12356) shall be hand carried by the 
originator to the Director, Office of Executive Administration who will 
determine the appropriate level of classification. If the information 
warrants Top Secret classification, that official shall transmit the 
information promptly under appropriate safeguards to the agency which 
has appropriate subject matter interest and classification authority in 
accordance with the procedures established by Sec. 60.18 of this part. 
If it is not clear which agency should get the information, it shall be 
sent to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office for a 
determination.
    (d) Intra-office documents, such as longhand notes or draft papers, 
that contain information affecting the national security shall be 
distinctly marked with the proper classification at top and bottom, by 
hand, by the originator, and shall be protected and destroyed in the 
same manner as an inter-office or inter-agency classified documents. 
Such intra-office documents shall be forwarded to the Office of 
Executive Administration for destruction as soon as the content has been 
included in a formal classified paper or as soon as the note or draft is 
no longer required.
    (e) A holder of classified information or material shall observe and 
respect the classification assigned by the originator.
    (f) Exceptional Cases. When an employee, contractor, licensee, or 
grantee of an agency that does not have original classification 
authority originates information believed by that person to require 
classification, the information shall be protected in a manner 
consistent with Executive Order 12356 and its implementing directives. 
The information shall be transmitted promptly as provided under the 
Order or its implementing directives to the agency that has appropriate 
subject matter interest and classification authority with respect to 
this information. That agency shall decide within thirty (30) days 
whether to classify this information. If it is not clear which agency 
has classification responsibility for this information, it shall be sent 
to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office. The 
Director shall determine the agency having primary subject matter 
interest and forward the information, with appropriate recommendations, 
to that agency for a classification determination.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.5   Use of derivative classification.

    (a) Derivative classification is: (1) the determination that 
information is in substance the same as information currently 
classified; and (2) the application of the same classification markings. 
Persons who only reproduce, extract, or summarize classified 
information, or who only apply classification markings derived from 
source material or as directed by a classification guide, need not 
possess original classification authority.
    (b) Persons who apply derivative classification markings shall:
    (1) Observe and respect original classification decisions; and
    (2) Carry forward to any newly created documents any assigned 
authorized markings. The declassification date or event that provides 
the longest period of classification shall be used for documents 
classified on the basis of multiple sources.
    (c) If a person who applies derivative classification markings 
believes that the process of reproducing, extracting, paraphrasing, 
restating or summarizing may have changed the level of or removed the 
basis for classification, an appropriate official of the originating 
agency or the office of origin who has the authority to upgrade, 
downgrade or declassify the information must be consulted.
    (d) Paper copies of derivatively classified documents shall be 
marked at the time of origination as follows:

[[Page 36]]

    (1) Classification authority. (i) The authority for classification 
shall be shown as follows:

    CLASSIFIED BY (description of source document on classification 
guide).

    (ii) If a document is classified on the basis of more than one 
source document or classification guide, the authority for 
classification shall be shown as follows:

    CLASSIFIED BY MULTIPLE SOURCES

    In these cases the derivative classifier shall maintain the 
identification of each source with the file or record copy of the 
derivatively classified document. A document derivatively classified on 
the basis of a source document that is marked ``CLASSIFIED BY MULTIPLE 
SOURCES'' shall cite the source document in its ``CLASSIFIED BY'' line 
rather than the term ``MULTIPLE SOURCES.''
    (2) Declassification and downgrading instructions. Dates or events 
for automatic declassification or downgrading, or the notation 
``ORIGINATING AGENCY'S DETERMINATION REQUIRED'' to indicate that the 
document is not to be declassified automatically, shall be carried 
forward from the source document, or as directed by a classification 
guide, and shown on a ``DECLASSIFY ON'' line as follows:

    DECLASSIFY ON (date; description of event) or ORIGINATING AGENCY'S 
DETERMINATION REQUIRED (OADR)

    (3) Any additional markings or abbreviations described in paragraphs 
(b) through (m) of Sec. 60.8 of this part appearing on the source 
material shall be carried forward to the new material when appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 60.6  Requirements for classification guides.

    (a) Classification guides used to direct derivative classification 
and issued pursuant to Section 2.2 of Executive Order 12356 and 
Sec. 60.5 of this part shall, at a minimum:
    (1) Identify or categorize the elements of information to be 
protected;
    (2) State which of the classification designations (i.e., Top 
Secret, Secret, or Confidential) applies to each element or category of 
the information;
    (3) Prescribe declassification instructions for each element or 
category of information in terms of:
    (i) A period of time,
    (ii) The occurrence of an event, or
    (iii) A notation that the information shall not be declassified 
automatically without the approval of the originating agency; and
    (4) Indicate how the designation, time limits, markings, and other 
requirements of Executive Order 12356 and this part are to be applied.
    (b) Each classification guide shall be kept current and shall be 
reviewed at least once every two years and updated as necessary. The 
Office of Executive Administration shall compile and maintain a list of 
classification guides in current use.
    (c) Each guide shall be approved personally and in writing by the 
Director, Office of Executive Administration.
    (d) The Deputy Administrator may, for good cause, grant and revoke 
waivers of the requirement to prepare classification guides for 
specified classes of documents or information. A decision to waive the 
requirement should be based, at minimum, on an evaluation of the 
following factors:
    (1) The ability to segregate and describe the elements of 
information;
    (2) The practicality of producing or disseminating the guide because 
of the nature of the information;
    (3) The anticipated usage of the guide as a basis for derivative 
classification; and
    (4) The availability of alternative sources for derivatively 
classifying the information in a uniform manner. The Director of the 
Information Security Oversight Office shall be notified of any waivers.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.7  Duration of classification.

    (a) Information shall be classified as long as required by national 
security considerations. When it can be determined, a specific date or 
event for declassification shall be set by the original classification 
authority at the time the information is originally classified.
    (b) Automatic declassification determinations under predecessor 
orders

[[Page 37]]

shall remain valid unless the classification is extended by an 
authorized official of the originating agency. These extensions may be 
by individual documents or categories of information. The originating 
agency shall be responsible for notifying holders of the information of 
such extensions.
    (c) Information classified under predecessor orders and marked for 
declassification review shall remain classified until reviewed for 
declassification under the provisions of Executive Order 12356.


<R05>
Sec. 60.8  Identification and markings.

    (a) At the time of original classification, the following 
information shall be shown on the face of all classified documents, or 
clearly associated with other forms of classified information in a 
manner appropriate to the medium involved, unless this information 
itself would reveal a confidential source or relationship not otherwise 
evident in the document or information:
    (1) One of the three classification levels defined in Sec. 60.3;
    (2) If the original classification authority is other than the 
approving or signing official, the identity shall be shown as follows:

    CLASSIFIED BY (identification of original classification authority)

    (3) Agency and office of origin. If the identity of the originating 
agency and office is not apparent on the face of a document, it shall be 
placed below the ``CLASSIFIED BY'' line.
    (4) Declassification and downgrading instructions. Declassification 
and, as applicable, downgrading instructions shall be shown as follows:
    (i) For information to be declassified automatically on a specific 
date:

    DECLASSIFY ON: (date)

    (ii) For information to be declassified automatically upon 
occurrence of a specific event:

DECLASSIFY ON: (description of event)

    (iii) For information not to be declassified automatically:

DECLASSIFY ON: ORIGINATING AGENCY'S DETERMINATION REQUIRED or ``OADR''

    (iv) For information to be downgraded automatically on a specific 
date or upon occurrence of a specific event:

DOWNGRADE TO (classification level) ON (date or description of event)

    (b) Each classified document shall by marking or other means, 
indicate which portions are classified, with the applicable 
classification level, and which portions are not classified. The Deputy 
Administrator may, for good cause, grant and revoke waivers of this 
requirement for specified classes of documents or information. The 
Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall be notified 
of any waivers.
    (c) Marking designations implementing the provisions of Executive 
Order 12356, including abbreviations, shall conform to the standards 
prescribed in implementing directives issued by the Information Security 
Oversight Office.
    (d) Foreign government information shall either retain its original 
classification or be assigned a United States classification that shall 
ensure a degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by 
the entity that furnished the information.
    (e) Information assigned a level of classification under predecessor 
Executive Orders shall be considered as classified at that level of 
classification despite the omission of other required markings. Omitted 
markings may be inserted on a document by the officials listed in 
Sec. 60.4(a) of this part.
    (f) The overall classification of a document, whether or not 
permanently bound, or any copy or reproduction thereof, shall be 
conspicuously marked or stamped at the top and bottom of the outside of 
the front cover (if any), on the title page (if any), on the first page, 
on the back page, and on the outside of the back cover (if any). Each 
interior page of a classified document shall be marked or stamped at the 
top and bottom either according to the highest classification of the 
content of the page, including the designation ``Unclassified'' when 
appropriate, or according to the highest classification of the document. 
In any case, the classification marking of the page shall not supersede 
the classification marking of

[[Page 38]]

portions of the page marked with lower levels of classification.
    (g) Whenever practicable, subjects and titles shall be selected so 
as not to require classification. When the subject or title is 
classified, an unclassified identifier may be assigned to facilitate 
receipt and reference.
    (h) Classifiers shall identify the level of classification of each 
classified portion of a document (including subjects and titles), and 
those portions that are not classified. Portion marking shall be 
accomplished by placing a parenthetical designator immediately preceding 
or following the text that it governs. The symbols ``(TS)'' for Top 
Secret, ``(S)'' for Secret, ``(C)'' for Confidential, and ``(U)'' for 
Unclassified, shall be used for this purpose. If individual portion 
marking is impracticable, the document shall contain a description 
sufficient to identify the information that is classified and the level 
of such classification. The officials listed in Sec. 60.4(a) may for 
good cause, request from the DUSD(P) a waiver of the portion marking 
requirement for specified classes of documents or information. The 
Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall be notified 
by the DUSD(P) of any waivers.
    (i) The classification and associated markings prescribed by this 
part for documents shall, where practicable, be affixed to material 
other than documents by stamping, tagging, or other means. If this is 
not practicable, recipients shall be made aware of the classification 
and associated markings by notification or other means.
    (j) A transmittal document shall indicate on its face the highest 
classification of any information transmitted by it. It shall also 
include the following or similar instruction:
    (1) For an unclassified transmittal document:

UNCLASSIFIED WHEN CLASSIFIED ENCLOSURE IS REMOVED

    (2) For a classified transmittal document:

UPON REMOVAL OF ATTACHMENTS THIS DOCUMENT IS (classification level of 
the transmittal document standing alone)

    (k) Documents that contain foreign government information shall 
include either the marking ``FOREIGN GOVERNMENT INFORMATION,'' or a 
marking that otherwise indicates that the information is foreign 
government information. If the fact that information is foreign 
government information must be concealed, the marking shall not be used 
and the document shall be marked as if it were wholly of U.S. origin. 
Documents classified by a foreign government or an international 
organization of governments shall, if the foreign classification is not 
in English, be marked with the equivalent United States classification. 
Foreign government information not classified by a foreign government or 
an international organization of governments but provided to the United 
States in confidence by a foreign government or by an international 
organization of governments, shall be classified at an appropriate level 
and shall be marked with the United States classification accordingly.
    (l) In addition to the marking requirement in paragraphs (a) through 
(k) of this section, the additional markings provided in paragraphs 
(l)(1)-(3) of this section shall, as appropriate, be displayed 
prominently on classified information. When display of these additional 
markings is not practicable, their applicability to the information 
shall be included in the written notification of the assigned 
classification.
    (1) For classified information containing Restricted Data or 
Formerly Restricted Data as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended, such markings as may be prescribed by the Department of Energy 
in regulations issued under the Act shall be applied.
    (2) For classified information involving intelligence sources or 
methods:

WARNING NOTICE--INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED.

    (3) For classified information that, pursuant to Executive Order 
12356, the originator has determined should be subject to special 
dissemination or reproduction limitations, or both, a statement placing 
the user on notice of the restrictions shall be included in the text of 
the document or on its cover

[[Page 39]]

sheet; e.g., ``Reproduction requires approval of originator,'' or 
``Further dissemination only as directed by the Director, Office of 
Executive Administration.''
    (m) National security information that is transmitted electronically 
shall be marked as follows:
    (1) The highest level of classification shall appear before the 
first line of text;
    (2) A ``CLASSIFIED BY'' line is not required;
    (3) The duration of classification shall appear as follows:
    (i) For information to be declassified automatically on a specific 
date:

DECL:(date)

    (ii) For information to be declassified upon occurrence of a 
specific event:

DECL:(description of event)

    (iii) For information not to be automatically declassified which 
requires the originating agency's determination, see Sec. 60.7(a):

DECL: OADR

    (iv) For information to be automatically downgraded:
DNG (abbreviation of classification level to which the information is to 
be downgraded and date or description of event on which downgrading is 
to occur).

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.9  Declassification and downgrading.

    (a) Information shall be declassified or downgraded as soon as 
national security considerations permit. Review of classified 
information shall be coordinated with other agencies that have a direct 
interest in the subject matter. Information that continues to meet the 
classification requirements prescribed by Sec. 60.3 of this part, 
despite the passage of time, will continue to be protected in accordance 
with Executive Order 12356 and this part.
    (b) Information shall be declassified or downgraded by the official 
who authorized the original classification, if that official is still 
serving in the same position; by the originator's successor; by a 
supervisory official of either; or by officials delegated such 
authority, in writing, by an official listed in Sec. 60.4(a).
    (c) In the case of classified information transferred in conjunction 
with a transfer of functions, and not merely for storage purposes, the 
receiving agency shall be deemed to be the originating agency for 
purposes of Executive Order 12356 and this part.
    (d) In the case of classified information that is not officially 
transferred as described in Sec. 60.9(c), but that originated in an 
agency that has ceased to exist and for which there is no successor 
agency, each agency in possession of such information shall be deemed to 
be the originating agency for purposes of Executive Order 12356 and this 
part. Such information may be declassified or downgraded by the agency 
in possession after consultation with any other agency that has an 
interest in the subject matter of the information.
    (e) The Commission shall maintain a current listing of officials 
delegated declassification or downgrading authority by name or position.
    (f) Classified information accessioned into the National Archives of 
the United States from the Commission shall be declassified or 
downgraded by the Archivist of the United States in accordance with 
Executive Order 12356, the directives of the Information Security 
Oversight Office, and guidelines established by the Director, Office of 
Executive Administration of the Panama Canal Commission. Such guidelines 
shall be reviewed and updated, if necessary, at least every five years, 
unless earlier review is requested by the Archivist.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59882, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.10  Access to classified information.

    (a) A person is eligible for access to classified information 
provided that a determination of trustworthiness has been made and that 
such access is essential to the accomplishment of lawful and authorized 
Government purposes. The determinations of eligibility and 
trustworthiness, referred to in this part as a security clearance, shall 
be based on such investigations as the Panama Canal Commission may 
require. The Deputy Personnel Director

[[Page 40]]

shall be responsible for conducting investigations relative to the 
issuance of security clearances in accordance with the standards and 
criteria of Executive Order 10450, and will maintain a list showing the 
level of security clearances granted to each person. Security clearances 
will be granted by the Director, Office of Executive Administration, as 
provided in Sec. 60.14 of this part.
    (b) In addition to a security clearance, a person must have a need 
for access to the particular classified information or material sought 
in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or 
contractual obligations, except in those instances provided for in 
paragraph (d) of this section. The determination of that need shall be 
made by the Director, Office of Executive Administration in coordination 
with officials having responsibility for the classified information or 
material.
    (c) When a person no longer requires access to classified 
information or material in connection with the performance of that 
person's official duties or contractual obligations, the security 
clearance shall be withdrawn. Likewise, when a person no longer needs 
access to a particular security classification category, that person's 
security clearance shall be adjusted to the classification category 
still required for the performance of that person's duties and 
obligations. In both instances, such action shall be without prejudice 
to the person's eligibility for a security clearance should the need 
again arise.
    (d) Persons engaged in historical research projects and former 
Presidential appointees who occupied policy-making positions may be 
authorized access to classified information or material originating 
within the Panama Canal Commission. In such cases, the requirement in 
section 60.10(a) that access to classified information may be granted 
only as is essential to the accomplishment of lawful and authorized 
Government purposes, may be waived, but only if the Commission has 
jurisdiction over the information and:
    (1) The Commission makes a written determination that access is 
consistent with the interests of national security;
    (2) The Commission takes appropriate steps to protect classified 
information from unauthorized disclosure or compromise, and ensures that 
the information is safeguarded in a manner consistent with Executive 
Order 12356;
    (3) The Commission limits the access granted to former Presidential 
appointees to items that the person originated, reviewed, signed or 
received while serving as a Presidential appointee; and
    (4) In addition, the Director, Office of Executive Administration 
obtains:
    (i) Written agreements from the requesters to safeguard the 
information to which they are given access, as permitted by Executive 
Order 12356 and this part; and
    (ii) Written consent from the requester for the Director, Office of 
Executive Administration to review all of their notes and manuscripts 
for the purpose of assuring that no classified information is contained 
in them.
    (e) If the access requested by historical researchers and former 
Presidential appointees requires the rendering of services for which 
fair and equitable fees may be charged pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 9701, the 
requesters shall be so notified and the fees may be imposed.
    (f) Except as provided by directives issued by the President through 
the National Security Council, classified information originating in one 
agency may not be disseminated outside any other agency to which it has 
been made available without the consent of the originating agency.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59883, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.11   Top Secret, Secret, and Confidential Control Officer.

    (a) The Director, Office of Executive Administration, Panama Canal 
Commission, is the Agency's designated Top Secret Control Officer and is 
responsible for the receipt, current accountability, and transmission of 
all Top Secret information. The Deputy Director, Office of Executive 
Administration is the Alternate Top Secret Control Officer. A physical 
inventory of all Top Secret material shall be made at least annually.
    (b) The Director and the Deputy Director, Office of Executive 
Administration are also the Agency's designated Control Officer and 
Alternate Control

[[Page 41]]

Officer, respectively, for all classified information up to and 
including Secret.
    (c) The Director, Office of Executive Administration shall act on 
all suggestions and complaints received by the Commission with respect 
to the administration of Executive Order 12356 and this part, and may 
also recommend to the Deputy Administrator appropriate administrative 
actions or sanctions to correct abuse or violation of any provision of 
that Order or directives under it. The Director of the Information 
Security Oversight Office shall be promptly informed by the agency when 
such violations occur.
    (d) To the extent required by applicable laws and agency 
regulations, the Deputy Administrator shall report to the Attorney 
General evidence reflected in classified information of possible 
violations of Federal criminal law by an agency employee and of possible 
violations by any other person of those Federal criminal laws specified 
in guidelines adopted by the Attorney General.
    (e) When the Commission is the agency of primary interest, following 
an inadvertent or unauthorized publication or disclosure of information 
identical or similar to information that has been classified in 
accordance with the Executive Order 12356 or predecessor orders, the 
Director, Office of Executive Administration shall determine the degree 
of damage to the national security, the need for continued 
classification, and, in coordination with the agency in which the 
disclosure occurred, what action must be taken to prevent similar 
occurrences, see Sec. 60.17.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59883, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.12   Mandatory review for declassification.

    (a) Any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, federal 
agency, or the government of a U.S. state or municipality may request 
that classified information be reviewed for declassification by the 
originating agency and released. Such requests must be submitted in 
writing to the Chief, Administrative Services Division, Panama Canal 
Commission, Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or Panama Canal Commission, 
Balboa Heights, Republic of Panama). In accordance with section 9701 of 
title 31, United States Code, fees may be applied to any requests for 
declassification and release. A request need not identify the 
information requested by date or title, but must describe the document 
or material containing the information with sufficient specificity to 
enable the agency to locate it with a reasonable amount of effort. 
Whenever a request is deficient in its description of the information 
sought, the Chief, Administrative Services Division shall notify the 
requester that, unless additional identifying information is provided or 
the scope of the request is narrowed, the Commission will take no 
further action on the request.
    (b) When the Commission receives any request for documents in its 
custody that were classified by another agency, it shall refer copies of 
the request and the requested documents to the originating agency for 
processing, and may, after consultation with the originating agency, 
inform the requester of the referral. In cases in which the originating 
agency determines in writing that a response is required, it is the 
responsibility of the referring agency to respond to the requester.
    (c) When another agency refers a request to the Commission for 
review because the Commission originally classified the information 
requested, the Commission shall treat the request as though it were 
submitted directly to it under paragraph (a) of this section. The 
Commission shall send its decision directly to the requester and shall, 
if so requested, notify the referring agency of its decision on the 
request and on the appeal, if any.
    (d) Requests for classification review made under paragraph (a) of 
this section shall be promptly acknowledged by the Chief, Administrative 
Services Division and then forwarded to the official who originally 
classified the document, or that official's successor, or when 
appropriate to an official designated by an official listed in 
Sec. 60.4(a), who, in coordination with the Chief, Administrative 
Services Division, shall

[[Page 42]]

decide whether the requested information may be declassified, see 
Sec. 60.7 and Sec. 60.9.
    (1) Unless withholding is otherwise warranted under applicable law, 
any information which may be declassified shall normally be forwarded to 
the requester within sixty (60) days after receipt of a proper request. 
If additional time is needed to locate or review the requested 
information, the Chief, Administrative Services Division will notify the 
requester accordingly. Except in unusual circumstances, a decision will 
be made within one year of receipt of the request.
    (2) When information cannot be declassified in its entirety, a 
reasonable effort will be made, consistent with other applicable law, to 
release those portions of the requested information that constitute a 
coherent segment.
    (3) Upon the denial or a partial denial of a request, the Chief, 
Administrative Services Division shall reply to the requester and 
provide a brief statement of the reasons for the denial, a notice of the 
right to appeal the decision to the Director, Office of Executive 
Administration and a notice that the appeal must be in writing and must 
be received by the Commission within sixty (60) days of receipt of the 
decision letter by the requester. Appeals should be addressed to: 
Director, Office of Executive Administration, Panama Canal Commission, 
Unit 2300, APO AA 34011-2300 (or Panama Canal Commission, Balboa 
Heights, Republic of Panama).
    (e) Within thirty (30) days after its receipt of a proper appeal 
against an initial decision not to declassify information, the Director, 
Office of Executive Administration shall make and dispatch the decision 
whether the information should be declassified. If the Director, Office 
of Executive Administration is the original classification authority of 
the information under appeal, the Deputy Administrator shall determine 
whether the information may be declassified. The Director, Office of 
Executive Administration shall, after the decision, promptly make 
available to the requester any information that is declassified and 
which is otherwise releasable. If continued classification of the 
requested information is necessary, the requester shall be notified of 
that decision and the reasons therefor. If requested, the appeal 
determination shall also be communicated to any referring agency.
    (f) The classification reviews made in response to requests and 
appeals under this section are in addition to the systematic review of 
classified information prescribed by Executive Order 12356 and 32 CFR 
part 2001.
    (g) Requests for access to classified material submitted under the 
Freedom of Information Act or the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552 and 
552a) shall be processed in accordance with parts 9 and 10 of 35 CFR, 
and shall be subject to the same review criteria for declassification as 
requests submitted under paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section. In 
response to a request for information under the Freedom of Information 
Act, the Privacy Act of 1974, or the mandatory review provisions of this 
Order, the Commission shall refuse to confirm or deny the existence or 
non-existence of requested information whenever the fact of its 
existence or non-existence is itself classifiable under Executive Order 
12356 or 32 CFR part 2001.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59883, Nov. 26, 1991; 59 
FR 26123, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 60.13  Custody and storage.

    (a) Classified information shall be protected in accordance with 
applicable National Security Council directives or directives 
promulgated by the Information Security Oversight Office and approved by 
the National Security Council.
    (b) Each bureau director and chief of an independent unit (or 
classified security control officer as designated by the Director, 
Office of Executive Administration) shall be responsible for assuring 
that all classified information within that official's organization is 
used, processed, stored, and transmitted only under conditions which 
will provide adequate protection and prevent access by, or dissemination 
to, unauthorized persons. Containers, vaults, alarm systems, and 
associated security devices procured after the effective date of this 
part for the storage and protection of classified information

[[Page 43]]

shall be in conformance with the standards and specifications published 
by the General Services Administration and, to the maximum extent 
practicable, be of the type designated on its Federal Supply Schedule.
    (c)(1) Top secret information shall be stored in a GSA-approved 
security container with an approved built-in, three-position, dial-type 
combination lock; in a vault protected by an alarm system and response 
force; or in other storage facility that meets the standards for top 
secret established under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (2) Secret and confidential information shall be stored in a manner 
and under the conditions prescribed for top secret information, or in a 
container, vault, or alarmed area that meets the standards for secret or 
confidential information established pursuant to the provisions of 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, and/or paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section.
    (3) Secret and confidential information may also be stored in a 
safe-type filing cabinet having a built-in, three-position, dial-type, 
changeable combination lock, or a steel filing cabinet equipped with a 
steel lock bar, provided it is secured by a three-position, changeable 
combination padlock approved by GSA for the purpose. The Director, 
Office of Executive Administration shall prescribe any necessary 
supplementary controls for storage of secret information in cabinets 
equipped with a steel lock bar.
    (d) Each bureau director and chief of an independent unit (or 
classified security control officer) is responsible for assuring that 
all personnel within that official's organization, having access to 
classified information, have a security clearance issued by the 
Director, Office of Executive Administration, see Sec. 60.14 and 
Sec. 60.16.
    (e)(1) Combinations of all repositories containing classified 
information shall be changed at least annually and forwarded in double-
sealed envelopes to the Office of Executive Administration. The double-
sealed envelopes shall be classified no lower than the highest category 
of information contained in the repositories. Combinations to dial-type 
locks shall be changed only by persons having appropriate security 
clearance, and shall be changed whenever such equipment is placed in 
use, whenever a person knowing the combination no longer requires access 
to the combination, whenever the equipment is taken out of service, and 
at least once every year. Knowledge of combinations protecting 
classified information shall be limited to the minimum number of persons 
necessary for operating purposes. Records of combinations shall be 
classified no lower than the highest level of classified information to 
be stored in the security equipment concerned. Bureau directors and 
heads of independent units (or classified security control officers) 
shall ensure that combinations of dial-type locks shall be changed 
whenever there is reason to suspect possible compromise of the current 
combination.
    (2) When security equipment having a built-in combination lock is 
taken out of service, the lock shall be reset to the standard 
combination 50-25-50. Combination padlocks shall be reset to the 
standard combination 10-20-30.
    (3) The Commission shall establish administrative procedures for the 
control and accountability of keys and locks whenever key-operated, 
high-security padlocks are utilized. The level of protection provided 
such keys shall be equivalent to that afforded the classified 
information being protected. Under no circumstances may keys be removed 
from the premises. They shall be stored in a secure container.
    (f) Custodians of classified matter are responsible for registering 
with the Office of Executive Administration the names of all persons 
having knowledge of combinations to repositories containing classified 
information.
    (1) Persons entrusted with classified information shall be 
responsible for providing protection and accountability for such 
information at all times and for locking classified information in 
approved security equipment whenever it is not in use or under the 
direct supervision of authorized persons. Custodians shall follow 
procedures which will ensure that unauthorized persons do not gain 
access to classified information.
    (2) Individuals charged with the custody of classified information 
shall

[[Page 44]]

conduct the necessary inspections within their areas to ensure adherence 
to procedural safeguards prescribed to protect classified information. 
The Director, Office of Executive Administration shall ensure that 
periodic inspections are made to determine whether procedural safeguards 
prescribed by agency regulations are in effect at all times.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59883, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.14  Security investigations; training and orientation of employees.

    (a) Requests for security clearances, including changes in the level 
of clearances, will be forwarded to the Office of Personnel 
Administration for background investigations and security checks. The 
Deputy Personnel Director shall ensure that all necessary investigations 
are completed, and will provide a recommendation on the issuance of a 
security clearance to the Office of Executive Administration. The 
Director, Office of Executive Administration, in consideration of all 
available information, will determine if a security clearance may be 
issued, or if the level may be changed, and establish the expiration 
date of the clearance.
    (b) The Director, Office of Executive Administration is also 
responsible for establishing and maintaining a training and orientation 
program for employees concerned with classified information or material.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59884, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.15  Debriefing upon termination of employment.

    (a) Bureau directors and heads of independent units (or classified 
security control officers as designated by the Director, Office of 
Executive Administration) shall be responsible for notifying the Office 
of Executive Administration whenever it is necessary that an employee be 
briefed or debriefed. Such notification should be in writing and be at 
least sixty (60) days, or as long as possible, in advance.
    (b) Bureau directors and heads of independent units (or classified 
security control officers) shall ensure that debriefings are 
accomplished for any employee whose employment is terminated, or 
scheduled to be terminated, or when a temporary separation from 
employment (not to include leave) for sixty (60) days or more has 
occurred or is scheduled, whenever the employee has had access to 
classified information within the last twelve calendar months of his 
employment.

[56 FR 59884, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.16   Responsibility of individual employees.

    (a) The responsibility for the safeguarding of classified 
information shall rest on each individual employee having possession or 
knowledge of it, regardless of how such information or knowledge was 
obtained. In addition, each individual employee is directly responsible 
for acquiring familiarity with and complying with these and subsequently 
published security regulations.
    (b) Any officer or employee, at any level of employment, determined 
to have been responsible for any release or disclosure of national 
security information or material in a manner not authorized by Executive 
Order 12356 or under this part, is subject to prompt and stringent 
administrative action, and, where a violation of criminal statute may be 
involved, is subject to prosecution under applicable law.


<R05>
Sec. 60.17  Loss or compromise; destruction of nonrecord classified information.

    (a) Any person who has knowledge of the loss or possible compromise 
of classified information in the custody of the Commission shall 
immediately report the circumstances to the Office of Executive 
Administration. The Director, Office of Executive Administration shall 
initiate an inquiry to:
    (1) determine cause,
    (2) place responsibility, and
    (3) take corrective measures and appropriate administrative, 
disciplinary, or legal action. If it is determined that classified 
information has been compromised, the agency that originated the 
information shall be notified of the loss or possible compromise so that 
a damage assessment may be conducted and appropriate measures taken to 
negate or minimize any adverse effect of the compromise.

[[Page 45]]

    (b) The Deputy Administrator or the Director, Office of Executive 
Administration shall initiate a damage assessment whenever there has 
been a compromise of classified information originated by the Commission 
that, in his judgment, can reasonably be expected to cause damage to the 
national security. Damage assessments shall be in writing and shall 
conform to the guidelines established by the Information Security 
Oversight Office, as provided in 32 CFR 2001.47(b).
    (c) Nonrecord classified information that has served its intended 
purpose shall be destroyed in accordance with procedures and methods 
approved by the Deputy Administrator or the Director, Office of 
Executive Administration. The method of destruction selected must 
preclude recognition or reconstruction of the classified information or 
material.
    (d) The Office of Executive Administration is the only office within 
the Commission authorized to destroy classified documents which have 
been recorded as received and assigned a control number.

[53 FR 7894, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 59884, Nov. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 60.18  Procedures for receiving and transmitting classified documents.

    (a) The procedures for handling classified documents received by any 
person or unit of the Panama Canal Commission shall be as follows:
    (1) All classified documents received by any person or unit of the 
Commission shall be immediately delivered to the Office of Executive 
Administration. Personnel of the Office of Executive Administration 
shall receipt for and record all classified documents received from 
outside agencies (except that those officials listed in Sec. 60.4(a) of 
this part may receipt for classified documents from outside agencies, 
and then forward them to the Office of Executive Administration, in 
person or by an authorized representative).
    (2) The receipted documents shall be permanently recorded by the 
Office of Executive Administration, at which time accountability for 
these documents shall be assumed by that office.
    (3) When classified documents addressed to an individual in the 
Panama Canal Commission are received by the Office of Executive 
Administration, the addressee shall be notified by telephone that such 
classified matter is awaiting him; or the classified documents may be 
transmitted as provided in paragraph (c) and (d) of this section. When 
the addressee picks up the classified documents, all items shall be 
recorded on an individual classified documents register furnished by the 
Office of Executive Administration; one copy is to be permanently 
retained in the library, and one is to be furnished to the addressee, or 
his authorized representative, who shall sign for the documents opposite 
each item on the register. This method of transfer may be utilized in 
lieu of a receipt.
    (b) When any unit of the Panama Canal Commission prepares a document 
which is to be classified Secret or Confidential for transmission to 
other offices of the Commission, the procedure shall be as follows:
    (1) Prepare sufficient copies of the document for whatever 
distribution is required, and one additional copy for file in the Office 
of Executive Administration.
    (2) Forward draft copies, handwritten copies, and carbons to the 
Office of Executive Administration for retention or destruction under 
established procedures.
    (i) In addition, all portions of electric typewriter ribbons used in 
the preparation of classified material must be destroyed in the same 
manner. Reusable cloth typewriter ribbons must be protected if used for 
preparation of classified material on the first pass through typewriter.
    (ii) Classified material may not be entered into electronic 
equipment with memory capability, such as word processors, computers, 
personal computers, memory typewriters and other similar equipment, 
unless specific, written permission is obtained in advance, for each 
specific piece of equipment or system, from the Office of Executive 
Administration.
    (3) Bring all copies of the document to the Office of Executive 
Administration. Copies shall be securely fastened underneath a cover 
sheet of the classification recommended by the originator.

[[Page 46]]

    (4) At the direction of the Director, Office of Executive 
Administration, the proper classification, short title, and serial 
number shall be assigned to each document, and an accountability stamp 
shall be placed on each copy.
    (5) All classified documents shall be appropriately and 
conspicuously marked to put all persons on clear notice of their 
classified content. In addition, all classified documents shall be 
marked to indicate the downgrading-declassification schedule to be 
followed in accordance with Sec. 60.9.
    (6) The documents shall be recorded in the permanent documents log. 
The accountability for the documents passes from the originator to the 
Office of Executive Administration at this point.
    (7) Distribution of the remaining copies shall be made according to 
the procedures covered in paragraphs (a)(3), (c) and (d) of this 
section. The number of copies of documents containing classified 
information shall be kept to a minimum to decrease the risk of 
compromise and reduce storage costs.
    (c) When any unit of the Panama Canal Commission transmits documents 
or information classified Top Secret to other offices of the Commission, 
or any classified documents or information to any agencies or units 
other than the Commission, the procedure for handling such information 
shall be as follows:
    (1) The documents or information shall be enclosed in opaque inner 
and outer covers before transmitting. The inner cover shall be a sealed 
wrapper or envelope plainly marked with the assigned classification and 
addresses of both sender and addressee. The outer cover shall be sealed 
and addressed with no identification of the classification of its 
contents.
    (2) A receipt shall be attached to or enclosed in the inner cover. 
The receipt shall identify the sender, addressee, and the document, but 
shall contain no classified information. It shall be immediately signed 
by the recipient and returned to the sender.
    (d) When the Commission transmits classified documents or 
information to any agency other than the Commission, or documents or 
information classified Top Secret to other offices of the Commission, 
one or more of the following methods shall be used:
    (1) By specifically designated personnel having the appropriate 
security clearance;
    (2) By State Department diplomatic pouch;
    (3) By messenger-courier system specifically created for that 
purpose;
    (4) Over authorized secure communication circuits.
    (e) Secret and confidential documents or information may also be 
transmitted by the following methods:
    (1) As provided in paragraph (c) of this section, if transmittal is 
to be within the Commission;
    (2) By U.S. registered mail through Army, Navy, or Air Force Postal 
Service facilities provided that the information does not at any time 
pass out of U.S. citizen control and does not pass through a foreign 
postal system; or
    (3) Under escort of appropriately cleared personnel aboard U.S. 
Government and U.S. Government-contract vehicles or aircraft, ships of 
the United States Navy, civil-service-manned U.S. Naval ships, and ships 
of U.S. Registry. Operators of vehicles, captains or masters of vessels, 
and pilots of aircraft who are U.S. citizens and who are appropriately 
cleared may be designated as escorts.


<R05>
Sec. 60.19   Reproduction of classified documents.

    (a) Top Secret documents may not be reproduced without the consent 
of the originating agency unless otherwise marked by the originating 
office. The reproduction of Secret and Confidential documents may be 
restricted by the originating agency. Reproduced copies of classified 
documents are subject to the same accountability and controls as the 
original documents.
    (b) The Office of Executive Administration is the only office within 
the Panama Canal Commission authorized to reproduce documents which have 
been classified. Other offices within the Panama Canal Commission which 
require the reproduction of classified documents shall take them to the 
Office of Executive Administration,

[[Page 47]]

where the documents will be reproduced, properly marked, controlled and 
then returned to the user.


<R03>
PART 61--HEALTH, SANITATION, AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASE SURVEILLANCE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                         Subparts A-D [Reserved]

          Subpart E--Maritime Communicable Disease Surveillance

                   Definitions and General Provisions

Sec.
61.121  Purpose.
61.122  Definitions.
61.123  Periods of isolation and surveillance.
61.124  Periods of immunity.
61.125  Sanitary measures previously applied.
61.126  Certificate of measures applied.

                           Measures in Transit

61.151  Vessels; general provisions.
61.152  Vessels; sanitary inspection and corrective measures.
61.153  Vessels; entries in the official record.
61.154  Vessels; radio report of disease aboard.
61.155  Vessels; yellow fever.
61.156  Vessels; disinsecting.

     Vessels Subject to Communicable Disease Surveillance Inspection

61.171  General provisions.
61.172  Exempt vessels subject to sanitary regulations.
61.173  Report of disease or rodent mortality on vessel during stay in 
          port.

          General Requirements Upon Arrival at the Panama Canal

61.191  Applicability.
61.192  Vessels; awaiting inspection.
61.193  Maritime communicable disease surveillance declaration.
61.194  Persons; restrictions on boarding and leaving vessels, or having 
          contact with persons aboard.
61.195  Communicable disease surveillance inspsection and controls.
61.196  Persons; examination.
61.197  Vessels; persons and things; communicable diseases other than 
          quarantinable diseases.
61.198  Persons; isolation.
61.199  Furnishing of fresh crew.
61.200  Disinfection of cargo.
61.201  Exemption for mails.

        Particular Requirements Upon Arrival at the Panama Canal

61.221  Applicability.
61.222  Cholera; vessels and things.
61.223  Cholera; vessels; persons.
61.224  Plague; vessels.
61.225  Plague; vessels; persons; things.
61.226  Yellow fever; vessels; classification.
61.227  Yellow fever; vessels; persons.

             Sanitary Inspection: Rodent and Vermin Control

61.241  General provisions.
61.242  Disinsecting and disinfection; vessels and persons.
61.243  Deratting Certificates; Deratting Exemption Certificates.
61.244  Vessels in traffic between the United States and Panama.

                            Pratique: Vessels

61.261  General requirements.
61.262  Free pratique.
61.263  Provisional pratique.
61.264  Radio pratique.

                      Importation of Dogs and Cats

61.281  Quarantine of dogs and cats.

                      Subpart F--Pest Exterminators

61.311  License required to engage in business of pest extermination.
61.312  Licensed foreman required to be in charge.
61.313  Possession and display of licenses.
61.314  Renewal of licenses; suspension and revocation.
61.315  Approval of types, concentrations, and manner of use of 
          insecticides and rodenticides required.
61.316  Sale of insecticides and rodenticides.
61.317  Inapplicability to Government agencies and their officers and 
          employees.
61.318  Inapplicability to military reservations.

                        Subparts G-H--[Reserved]

                    Subpart I--Authority of Governor

61.381  Authority of Governor.

    Authority: Issued under authority vested in the President by section 
1701, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 492; EO 12173, 44 FR 69271.

    Source: 31 FR 12236, Sept. 16, 1966, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                        Subparts A-D  [Reserved]


<R04>
          Subpart E--Maritime Communicable Disease Surveillance

    Authority: Issued under authority vested in the President by 22 
U.S.C. 3811; EO 12215, 45 FR 36043.


[[Page 48]]


    Source: 51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes appear at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 
1997.

                   Definitions and General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 61.121  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subpart is to insure the 
health and safety of employees of the Panama Canal Commission, to 
prescribe procedures for coordination with the Government of Panama 
concerning communicable disease surveillance, and to comply with the 
recommendations of the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning such 
surveillance.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.122  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Aedes aegypti Index means the ratio, expressed as a percentage, 
between the number of houses in a limited well-defined area on the 
premises of which actual breeding-places of Aedes aegypti are found, and 
the total number of houses examined in that area.
    Boarding official (admeasurer) means an official or employee of the 
Panama Canal Commission specially trained and assigned to communicable 
disease surveillance duty by authority of the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division.
    Certificate of vaccination means a certificate of vaccination or 
revaccination against cholera, or yellow fever conforming with the rules 
and models prescribed by the International Health Regulations.
    Chief, Occupational Health Division means the officer of the Panama 
Canal Commission responsible for the application of these regulations.
    Communicable disease means an illness due to an infectious agent or 
its toxic products which is transmitted directly or indirectly to a well 
person from an affected person, animal, or arthropod (including insecta 
and arachnida) or through the agency of an intermediate host, vector or 
the inanimate environment.
    Communicable disease surveillance means the surveillance or 
quarantine of a person, vessel, or other conveyance, animal or thing, in 
such place and for such period of time as may be specified in the 
regulations in this subpart.
    Contamination means the presence of undesirable substance or 
material which may contain pathogenic micro-organisms.
    Day means a period of 24 hours.
    Deratting certificate means a certificate issued with respect to a 
vessel by the competent health authority of a port, in the form 
prescribed by the International Health Regulations, recording the 
inspection and deratting of the vessel.
    Deratting exemption certificate means a certificate issued with 
respect to a vessel by the competent health authority of a port, in the 
form prescribed by the International Health Regulations, recording the 
inspection and exemption from deratting of the vessel which has a 
negligible number of rodents on board.
    Disinfection means the act of rendering anything free from the 
causal agents of disease.
    Disinfestation means the act of destroying the vectors of a 
communicable disease.
    Disinsecting means the act of destroying insects or other anthropod 
vectors of communicable disease.
    Foreign port means any seaport other than a port of the United 
States or of the Republic of Panama.
    Fumigation means the process by which the destruction of vermin and 
rodents is accomplished by the employment of gaseous agents.
    Immunity means the condition of being protected against a particular 
disease, either as a result of artificial immunization or through a 
previous attack of the disease in question.
    Incubation period means the period between the implanting of disease 
organisms in a susceptible person and the appearance of clinical 
manifestations of the disease.
    Infected area means an area (as defined in the International Health 
Regulations): (1) Where there is a nonimported case of cholera, or (2) 
where there is a nonimported case of plague, or there is plague 
infection among rodents; or (3) where there is a nonimported case of 
yellow fever, or there

[[Page 49]]

is activity of yellow fever virus in vertebrates other than man.
    Infected person means any person who is suffering from a 
quarantinable disease or who is considered by the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division to be infected with such a disease.
    Infected vessel means a vessel determined to be infected with an 
internationally quarantinable disease, as recognized by the World Health 
Organization (WHO).
    International Health Regulations means the regulations adopted by 
the 22nd World Health Assembly in 1969, as amended by subsequent 
Assemblies for the International Surveillance of Communicable Diseases, 
(3rd Edition, Annotated, 1983).
    Isolation means (1) when applied to a person or group of persons, 
the separation of that person or group of persons from other persons in 
such a manner as to prevent the spread of infection; and (2) when 
applied to animals, the separation of an animal or group of animals from 
other animals or vectors of disease in such a manner as to prevent the 
spread of infection.
    Port of Panama means any seaport in the Republic of Panama.
    Port of the United States means any seaport in the United States, in 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and in territories or possessions of 
the United States.
    Pratique means authorization granted by the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division in writing or via radio releasing or provisionally 
releasing a vessel from quarantine, without relieving the vessel from 
completing the necessary documentation.
    Quarantinable disease means a specific communicable disease such as 
cholera, plague, or yellow fever for which WHO requires specific 
quarantine measures.
    Rodents means gnawing mammals capable of transmitting or harboring 
quarantinable diseases.
    Suspect means a person who is considered by the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division as having been exposed to infection by a quarantinable 
or other dangerous infectious disease and to be capable of spreading 
that disease.
    Suspected vessel, means a vessel that is suspected to be infected 
with an internationally quarantinable disease as recognized by WHO.
    Valid means (1) with respect to a Deratting Certificate or Deratting 
Exemption Certificate issued for a vessel, a certificate issued by the 
competent health authority for a port not more than 6 months before 
presentation of the certificate to the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division, or if the vessel is proceeding to a port designated or 
approved for the issuance of such certificates, not more than 7 months 
before such presentation; and (2) with respect to a Certificate of 
Vaccination, a certificate presented within the applicable period of 
immunity prescribed in Sec. 61.124.
    Vector means an animal (including insects), plant, or thing which 
conveys or is capable of conveying pathogenic organisms from a person or 
animal to another person or animal.
    WHO means the World Health Organization, an international 
organization which acts as the directing and coordinating authority on 
international health work and is charged with eradicating or controlling 
epidemic, endemic and other diseases.
    Yellow fever receptive area means an area in which the virus of 
yellow fever does not exist but where the presence of Aedes aegypti or 
any other domiciliary or peri-domiciliary vector of yellow fever would 
permit its development if introduced.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.123  Periods of isolation and surveillance.

    Except as otherwise provided with respect to infected persons, 
isolation or surveillance shall not exceed the following appropriate 
incubation period for internationally quarantinable diseases:
    (a) Plague: 6 days.
    (b) Cholera; 5 days.
    (c) Yellow fever: 6 days.


<R05>
Sec. 61.124  Periods of immunity.

    The following shall be the recognized period of immunity after 
successful immunication:

[[Page 50]]

    (a) Cholera: 6 months, beginning 6 days after the first injection of 
the vaccine or on the date of a revaccination during such six-month 
period.
    (b) Yellow fever: 10 years beginning 10 days after date of original 
vaccination or from date of a revaccination within such period of 10 
years.


<R05>
Sec. 61.125  Sanitary measures previously applied.

    (a) Required sanitary measures (other than a medical examination) 
taken by a vessel with respect to a quarantinable disease need not be 
repeated upon the vessel's arrival in Panama Canal waters, unless--
    (1) After the departure of a vessel from the port where the measures 
were applied there is or has been on board an infected person or suspect 
or there has occurred any other incident of epidemiological significance 
either in the port or on board the vessel which, in the judgment of the 
Chief, Occupational Health Division, requires further application of any 
such measure; or
    (2) The Chief, Occupational Health Division has ascertained, on the 
basis of definite evidence, that the individual measure so applied was 
not substantially effective.
    (b) Measures taken with regard to unsanitary conditions on vessels 
entering a port of Panama by means of Panama Canal waters will be 
coordinated with the Port Quarantine Office of the Government of Panama.


<R05>
Sec. 61.126  Certificate of measures applied.

    The Chief, Occupational Health Division shall, upon request, issue 
free of charge to a carrier a certificate specifying the sanitary 
measures applied to a vessel, the parts thereof treated, the methods 
employed, and the reasons why the measures were applied.

                           Measures in Transit


<R05>
Sec. 61.151  Vessels; general provisions.

    The measures described in Secs. 61.152 through 61.156 must be taken 
in transit with respect to vessels destined to enter Panama Canal 
waters.


<R05>
Sec. 61.152  Vessels; sanitary inspection and corrective measures.

    The master or his/her designated officer shall make a daily sanitary 
inspection of all compartments or the vessel normally accessible to 
passenger or crew. Immediate corrective measures shall be taken if 
evidence of vermin, rodents or unsanitary conditions is found.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.153  Vessels; entries in the official record.

    A record of the conditions found in a sanitary inspection under 
Sec. 61.152 and the corrective measures taken shall be entered in an 
official record.


<R05>
Sec. 61.154  Vessels; radio report of disease aboard.

    (a) The master of a vessel destined to enter Panama Canal waters 
shall report promptly by radio to the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division of the Panama Canal Commission prior to entering the Panama 
Canal, and wherever practicable not less than four hours before the 
expected arrival of the ship, the occurrence or suspected occurrence of 
any serious human or animal disease manifested by fever, diarrhea, skin 
rashes and other suspicious symptoms such as may indicate any of the 
following: Anthrax, cholera or suspected cholera, dengue, diphtheria, 
encephalitis, gonorrhea, hemolytic streptococcal infections, infectious 
hepatitis, leprosy, malaria, measles, meningococcal meningitis, plague, 
poliomyelitis, shigella dysentery, syphilis, tuberculosis, typhoid 
fever, typhus, suspected viral hemorragic fever, yellow fever, or any 
other diseases which may be added to the list of internationally 
communicable diseases as recognized by WHO in its International Health 
Regulations or by the Ministry of Health of the Government of Panama. A 
disease may also be deleted from this list with the concurrence of the 
Ministry of Health of the Government of Panama, if it has been removed 
from the WHO regulations.
    (b) The Chief, Occupational Health Division will notify the Port 
Quarantine Office of the Government of

[[Page 51]]

Panama as soon as information is received that one of the preceding 
diseases is present or suspected of being present on a ship entering the 
Panama Canal.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.155  Vessels; yellow fever.

    (a) The following vessels shall be disinsected prior to their 
arrival in Panama Canal waters, and the master of the vessel shall 
certify to this effect on the maritime quarantine declaration presented 
to the Chief, Occupational Health Division upon arrival:
    (1) An infected or suspected vessel as defined in Sec. 61.226; or
    (2) A vessel from an infected area; or,
    (3) A vessel that has within 15 days left a port where the Aedes 
aegypti Index is reported as 1.0 or higher.
    (b) The insecticide used and method or disinsecting shall be those 
prescribed by the Chief, Occupational Health Division.
    (c) If the disinsecting required under paragraph (a) of this section 
is not carried out or if the Chief, Occupational Health Division finds 
live mosquitoes on board or otherwise determines that the vessel's own 
disinsecting was inadequate, the vessel shall be detained in quarantine 
at a mooring not less than 400 meters from shore until disinsected by 
communicable disease surveillance personnel, and persons other than such 
personnel shall not be allowed on board until disinsecting is completed.
    (d) The Quarantine Office of the Government of Panama, upon request, 
will be provided complete information from the ship's required entry 
documents for specified vessel(s) which have either transited the Panama 
Canal or docked at a port of Panama.
    (e) The disinfecting required under paragraph (a) of this section 
shall not be required when the index of Aedes aegypti in Panama exceeds 
the 1.0 index level established by the World Health Organization (WHO).

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 12751, Mar. 18, 1997; 
62 FR 33478, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.156  Vessels; disinsecting.

    Vessels required to be disinsected under Sec. 61.155 shall be 
disinsected as follows:
    (a) The insecticide used shall be an aerosol of a type approved by 
the Chief, Occupational Health Division;
    (b) The insecticide shall be dispensed in the amount to be 
determined by the Chief, Occupational Health Division and released or 
sprayed throughout all accessible compartments;
    (c) The ventilating system shall be stopped and all openings to the 
exterior kept closed while the insecticide is being released or sprayed 
for a period of at least 15 minutes thereafter.

     Vessels Subject to Communicable Disease Surveillance Inspection


<R05>
Sec. 61.171  General provisions.

    (a) A vessel arriving in Panama Canal waters shall undergo 
communicable disease surveillance inspection prior to entry unless:
    (1) In the current voyage the vessel has not touched at any port 
other than a port determined by WHO, the quarantine officer of the 
Government of Panama or the Centers for Disease Control of the United 
States Public Health Service to be in an area that is exempt from 
communicable disease surveilliance; or
    (2) In the current voyage the vessel has received pratique at a port 
of Panama or a port of the United States, and since receiving such 
pratique has met the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section; 
or
    (3) Pratique has been granted by a Chief, Occupational Health 
Division prior to the arrival of the vessel at the Panama Canal.
    (b) A vessel otherwise exempt from inspection under the provision of 
paragraph (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section shall undergo communicable 
disease inspection prior to entering the Panama Canal if the vessel--
    (1) Has on board, or during the current voyage has had on board, a 
person infected or suspected of being infected with any serious human or 
animal disease manifested by fever, diarrhea, skin rashers or other 
suspicious symptoms;

[[Page 52]]

    (2) Arrives directly from a port where at the time of departure 
there was present or suspected of being present cholera, plaque, or 
yellow fever.
    (3) Being exempt from inspection under the provisions of paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section, or arrival at the Panama Canal has on board a 
person who has been in a port or area which is not exempt from 
communicable disease surveillance within 14 days prior to such arrival; 
or,
    (4) Being exempt from inspection under the provisions of paragraph 
(a) (1) or (3) of this section, on arrival at the Panama Canal has on 
board an animal or article that does not comply with the admission 
requirements contained in this part or prescribed by the Government of 
Panama.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of 
this section, a vessel having received pratique at a port of Panama or a 
port of the United States--
    (1) Shall comply with any conditions and carry out any additional 
measures specified in the pratique; and
    (2) May be required to undergo communicable disease surveillance 
inspection if the Chief, Occupational Health Division has reason to 
believe that the entry or departure of the vessel would be likely to 
cause the introduction of communicable disease.


<R05>
Sec. 61.172  Exempt vessels subject to sanitary regulations.

    A vessel which has been exempted from communicable disease 
surveillance inspection under Sec. 61.171 shall nevertheless be subject 
to the provisions of Secs. 61.241 through 61.244.


<R05>
Sec. 61.173  Report of disease or rodent mortality on vessel during stay in port.

    The master of a vessel which has entered the Panama Canal to dock in 
a port of Panama shall promptly report to the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division before re-entering the Panama Canal the occurrence of the 
following on the vessel during its stay in port:
    (a) A known or suspected case of communicable disease included in 
the list or description in Sec. 61.154.
    (b) Unusual mortality or evidence of disease among rodents.

          General Requirements Upon Arrival at the Panama Canal


<R05>
Sec. 61.191  Applicability.

    The measures prescribed in Secs. 61.192 through 61.201 shall be 
taken with respect to vessels which are subject to communicable disease 
surveillance inspection pursuant to Secs. 61.171 and with respect to 
persons and things arriving on such vessels.


<R05>
Sec. 61.192  Vessels; awaiting inspection.

    (a) A vessel which must undergo communicable disease surveillance 
inspection prior to entry shall fly a yellow flag and, except as 
provided in paragraph (b) of this section, shall anchor in the 
prescribed anchorage and await inspection.
    (b) If the vessel is to dock in a port of Panama, the Chief, 
Occupational Health Division, after reaching agreement with the port 
quarantine officer of the Government of Panama, may authorize the vessel 
to proceed to a point within the port to await further inspection.
    (c) There will be no movement of any person or thing onto or from 
the vessel without the permission of the port quarantine officer of the 
Government of Panama pending communicable disease surveillance 
inspection by appropriate personnel.


<R05>
Sec. 61.193  Maritime communicable disease surveillance declaration.

    (a) Upon arrival of a vessel, her master shall complete and sign a 
maritime communicable disease surveillance declaration on the Panama 
Canal Commission Communicable Disease Surveillance Declaration form. 
This form is also referred to as the Ship Information and Quarantine 
Declaration (SIQD). The SIQD shall also be signed by the ship's surgeon 
if one is carried. The signed form shall be delivered to the 
Commission's boarding officer (admeasurer) when he boards the vessel. 
The original shall be retained in the Office of Admeasurement. Copies 
will be sent to the port quarantine officer of the Government of Panama 
and the Panamanian Ministry of Health. A copy shall be given to the 
master of the vessel as well.

[[Page 53]]

    (b) The master of a vessel and the ship's surgeon, if one is 
carried, shall furnish all information as to health conditions on board 
during the voyage which may be required by the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division, and shall comply with the regulations in this subpart 
and with any directions or requirements of the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division, pursuant to the regulations in this subpart.
    (c) See Ship Information and Quarantine Declaration, Sec. 101.10.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.194  Persons; restrictions on boarding and leaving vessels, or having contact with persons aboard.

    Except with the permission of the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division or the port quarantine officer, no person other than the pilot 
may board a vessel subject to communicable disease surveillance 
inspection until after it has been inspected by the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division or port quarantine officer and granted pratique. A 
person boarding the vessel shall be subject to the same restrictions as 
those imposed on the persons on the vessel. A person may not leave or be 
permitted to leave a vessel subject to communicable disease surveillance 
inspection until after it has been inspected by the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division or port quarantine officer and granted pratique, except 
with the permission of the Chief, Occupational Health Division or port 
quarantine officer.


<R05>
Sec. 61.195  Communicable disease surveillance inspection and controls.

    (a) Communicable disease surveillance inspection of vessels may 
include, but is not limited to, the following:
    (1) Inspection of the vessel, its cargo, manifests, and other papers 
to ascertain the sanitary history and condition of the vessel; and
    (2) Examination of the persons aboard the vessel, their personal 
effects and records to determine the presence, or risk or introduction, 
of quarantinable and other communicable diseases.
    (b) The Chief, Occupational Health Division may require a vessel to 
remain under communicable disease surveillance controls until the 
completion of the measures authorized in this subpart which in his/her 
judgment are necessary to prevent the introduction or spread of a 
quarantinable or other communicable disease.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.196  Persons; examination.

    If a vessel that is subject to communicable disease surveillance 
inspection carries a ship surgeon, the examination of persons on board 
may be limited to those designated by the port quarantine officer of the 
Government of Panama.


<R05>
Sec. 61.197  Vessels; persons and things; communicable diseases other than quarantinable diseases.

    Whenever the Chief, Occupational Health Division has reason to 
believe that an arriving vessel has a person aboard who is suffering or 
has been exposed to any of the communicable diseases listed in 
Sec. 61.154 of this chapter or has an article or thing aboard that is 
contaminated with any of the same communicable diseases, he will report 
these findings to the Quarantine Office of the Government of Panama and 
take whatever measures are indicated to prevent the spread of the 
communicable disease to the Republic of Panama and to the Panama Canal 
Commission personnel boarding the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 61.198  Persons; isolation.

    Persons held under isolation or surveillance pursuant to these 
provisions shall not have contact with other persons except by 
permission of the Chief, Occupational Health Division.


<R05>
Sec. 61.199  Furnishing of fresh crew.

    After a vessel has been cleared by the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division, it may be furnished with a fresh crew. Crew members boarding 
the vessel must clear the Quarantine, Immigration and Customs offices of 
the Government of Panama.

[[Page 54]]


<R05>
Sec. 61.200  Disinfection of cargo.

    When the freight manifest of a vessel lists articles which may 
require disinfection under the provisions of this subpart, the Chief, 
Occupational Health Division shall:
    (a) Request veterinary assistance to inspect and disinfect them on 
board if the vessel is for transit only.
    (b) Notify the port quarantine officer of the Government of Panama 
if the vessel will enter a port of Panama so that the articles can be 
disinfected or kept separate from other freight in the port pending 
appropriate disposition.


<R05>
Sec. 61.201  Exemption for mails.

    Except to the extent that mail contains any of the foods or 
beverages specified in Sec. 61.222(d) which the boarding officer 
(admeasurer) has reason to believe comes from a cholera-infected area, 
or any dog or cat subject to communicable disease surveillance 
restrictions under Secs. 61.281, this subpart shall not render liable to 
detention, disinfection, or destruction any mail conveyed under the 
authority of the postal administration of the United States or of any 
other Government.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]

        Particular Requirements Upon Arrival at the Panama Canal


<R05>
Sec. 61.221  Applicability.

    In addition to the requirements of Secs. 61.192 through 61.201, the 
particular requirements prescribed in Secs. 61.222 through 61.229 for 
persons, vessels, animals, and cargo shall be observed with respect to 
vessels which are subject to communicable disease surveillance 
inspection under Secs. 61.171. The particular requirements of 
Sec. 61.226 shall be observed irrespective of whether the vessels are 
subject to communicable disease surveillance inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 61.222  Cholera; vessels and things.

    (a) For the purpose of applying sanitary and quarantine measures 
against the spread of cholera:
    (1) An infected vessel means a vessel which has on board on arrival 
a case of cholera-like diarrhea or on which a case of cholera has 
occurred within 5 days prior to arrival.
    (2) A suspected vessel means a vessel which has had on board during 
the voyage a severy case of cholera-like diarrhea more than 5 days prior 
to arrive.
    (b) An infected or suspected vessel shall be detained in quarantine 
as may be necessary for the effective accomplishment of the applicable 
sanitary measures prescribed in this subpart.
    (c) Personal effects and baggage of an infected person or suspect 
and and part of the infected or suspected vessel considered to be 
contaminated shall be disinfected. Bedding or linen, human ejecta, bilge 
water, waste matter or water, and matter considered to be contaminated 
may not be unloaded or discharged until it has been disinfected by the 
quarantine officer of the Government of Panama.
    (d) On arrival of an infected or suspected vessel, or a vessel 
arriving from an infected area, the boarding officer (admeasurer) may 
prohibit entrance into Panama Canal waters of such vessel until 
arrangements have been made with the quarantine officer of the 
Government of Panama at the ports of Panama for evaluation of all fish, 
shellfish, fruit or vegetables to be consumed uncooked unless such food 
or beverages are in sealed containers. The quarantine officer of the 
port of Panama will also evaluate any such food or beverages that form 
part of the ship's stores.
    (e) If the boarding officer (admeasurer) considers the water supply 
of a cholera infected or suspected vessel to be contaminated, he shall 
require the disinfection and removal of any water carried on board and 
if necessary the disinfection of the water system and of the water 
containers. The ship will be instructed not to dispose of any 
potentially contaminated water of feces into Canal waters.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.223  Cholera; vessels; persons.

    (a) Persons ill from cholera shall be isolated and immediate 
arrangements shall be made with the Quarantine Office of the Government 
of Panama for treatment of the person.

[[Page 55]]

    (b) On arrival of an infected vessel the Chief, Occupational Health 
Division shall contact the port quarantine officer of the Government of 
Panama to arrange placement under isolation of all persons disembarking.
    (c) On arrival of a suspected vessel the boarding officer 
(admeasurer) shall contact the port qurantine officer of the Government 
of Panama to arrange placement under surveillance or isolation of any 
person disembarking.
    (d) The quarantine officers of the Government of Panama shall be 
contacted regarding isolation or surveillance of any person wishing to 
disembark from a vessel which within five days prior to arrival has 
departed from a cholera-infected area or arrives on a vessel which has 
departed from such an area.
    (e) A person who has departed from an infected area within 5 days 
prior to arrival and who has symptoms indicative of cholera may be 
required to submit to a stool examination.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.224  Plague; vessels.

    (a) For the purpose of applying sanitary and quarantine measures 
against the spread of plague:
    (1) An infected vessel means a vessel which has on board on arrival 
a case of human plague, or a plague infected rodent. A vessel shall also 
be regarded as infected if a case of plague develops on board in a 
person more than 6 days after his embarkation.
    (2) A suspected vessel means (i) a vessel which, not having a case 
of human plague on board on arrival, has had on board such a case 
developed by the person within 6 days of his embarkation, or (ii) a 
vessel on which there is evidence of abnormal mortality of rodents on 
board, the cause of which is not known on arrival.
    (b) An infected or suspected vessel shall be detained in quarantine 
as may be necessary for the effective accomplishment of the applicable 
sanitary measures prescribed in this subpart.
    (c) On arrival of a vessel which has rodent plague on board the 
boarding officer (admeasurer) shall contact the port quarantine officer 
of the Government of Panama to arrange deratting of the vessel. A vessel 
which has entered a Panamanian port in or adjacent to Panama Canal 
waters will not be allowed to re-enter Panama Canal waters until the 
following provisions have been met during such deratting:
    (1) The deratting shall be carried out as soon as the holds have 
been emptied.
    (2) One or more preliminary derattings of a vessel with the cargo in 
situ, or during its unloading, may be carried out to prevent the escape 
of infected rodents.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.225  Plague; vessels; persons; things.

    (a) Persons ill from plague shall be isolated until arrangements are 
made with the quarantine office of the Government of Panama for 
quarantine and treatment of the person.
    (b) On arrival of an infected or suspected vessel the boarding 
officer (admeasurer) may:
    (1) Require any suspect on board to be disinsected and may place him 
under surveillance, the period of surveillance being reckoned from the 
data of arrival of the vessel;
    (2) Require the disinsecting and, if necessary, disinfection of the 
baggage of any infected person or suspect and of any other article such 
as used bedding or linen; and any part of the vessel which the boarding 
officer (admeasurer) considers to be contaminated.
    (c) On the arrival of a healthy vessel which has come from a plague-
infected area the boarding officer (admeasurer) may--
    (1) Arrange placement under surveillance by the quarantine officer 
of the Government of Panama of any suspect who disembarks.
    (2) Require the deratting of the vessel at the anchorage in 
exceptional circumstances. In such case, the master shall be informed in 
writing of the reasons for the action.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]

[[Page 56]]


<R05>
Sec. 61.226  Yellow fever; vessels; classification.

    For the purpose of applying sanitary and quarantine measures against 
the spread of yellow fever:
    (a) An infected vessel means a vessel which has on board on arrival 
or which during its voyage had on board a case of yellow fever.
    (b) A suspected vessel means a vessel which has left a yellow fever-
infected area within 6 days prior to arrival or which arriving within 30 
days after leaving such area has Aedes aegypti mosquitoes on board.


<R05>
Sec. 61.227  Yellow fever; vessels; persons.

    (a) On arrival of an infected vessel the boarding officer 
(admeasurer) shall contact the quarantine officer of the Government of 
Panama to coordinate removal and isolation of all persons ill with 
yellow fever until they are no longer infectious.
    (b) The boarding officer (admeasurer) will inform the quarantine 
office of the Government of Panama of the arrival of any person from an 
infected area or planning to disembark from an infected or suspected 
vessel who does not produce a valid certificate of vaccination against 
yellow fever.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]

             Sanitary Inspection: Rodent And Vermin Control


<R05>
Sec. 61.241  General provisions.

    (a) Vessels entering Panama Canal waters are subject to sanitary 
inspection in accordance with Sec. 61.241 through 61.244 to ascertain 
whether there exists rodent, vermin, or insect infestation, contaminated 
food or water, or other unsanitary conditions requiring measures for the 
prevention of the introduction, transmission, or spread of communicable 
disease.
    (b) The Chief, Occupational Health Division of the Panama Canal 
Commission may require such measures with respect to such vessels as are 
deemed necessary to:
    (1) Carry out the Commission's responsibilities as set forth in the 
Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 in regards to preserving the health of the 
employees of the Commission and the sanitation of Panama Canal areas and 
waters;
    (2) Comply with the recommendations of the World Health 
Organization;
    (3) Effect those measures deemed necessary by the Government of 
Panama;
    (4) Prevent the entrance into Panama or the international spread of 
other communicable diseases designated as a serious threat.


<R05>
Sec. 61.242   Disinsecting and disinfection; vessels and persons.

    Except as otherwise provided in this subpart--
    (a) Vessels may be disinfected on arrival if the Chief, Occupational 
Health Division considers disinfestation necessary to prevent the spread 
of infection or for the destruction of insects and vermin capable of 
transmitting communicable disease.
    (b) The person, effects and baggage of any vermin-infested person 
arriving aboard a vessel shall be disinsected and, if necessary, in the 
judgment of the boarding officer (admeasurer), disinfected.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.243  Deratting Certificates; Deratting Exemption Certificates.

    (a) If a valid Deratting Certificate or Deratting Exemption 
Certificate is not produced with respect to any arriving vessel--
    (1) If the vessel will only transit the Panama Canal and the 
boarding officer (admeasurer) is satisfied that the vessel is free of 
rodents or is kept in such a condition that the number of rodents on 
board is negligible, the boarding officer (admeasurer) may clear it for 
transit. If it is determined that a deratting certificate shall not be 
issued with respect to the vessel, the boarding officer (admeasurer) 
shall notify the Commission's Marine Traffic Control Center and the Port 
Quarantine Office of the Government of Panama.
    (2) If the vessel will stop in the ports of Balboa or Cristobal, the 
boarding officer (admeasurer) will report his findings and 
recommendations to the Port Quarantine Office of the Government of 
Panama.

[[Page 57]]

    (b) [Reserved]

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.244  Vessels in traffic between the United States and Panama.

    Notwithstanding any other provision of this subpart, vessels engaged 
in trade between ports of the United States or Panama on entering Panama 
Canal waters shall be subject to sanitary inspection and measures as 
described in Secs. 61.241 through 61.243, when arriving from a port 
infected or suspected of being infected with a quarantinable disease or 
when illness on board indicates unsatisfactory sanitary conditions.

                            Pratique: Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 61.261  General requirements.

    Vessels subject to communicable disease surveillance inspections 
under the provisions of Sec. 61.171 may not enter Panama Canal waters 
unless a certificate of free pratique or provisional pratique has been 
granted to the master. When it is not feasible to comply with the 
requirements for free or provisional pratique, the vessel is at liberty 
to return to sea:


<R05>
Sec. 61.262  Free pratique.

    The granting of free pratique signifies that the vessel and its 
master may enter Panama Canal waters.


<R05>
Sec. 61.263  Provisional pratique.

    (a) Provisional pratique signifies the vessel may proceed, but 
additional measures regarding the sanitary condition of the vessel, as 
specified, must be taken in connection with the entering or proceeding 
through the Canal. Free pratique shall be issued after the additional 
measurers have been completed.
    (b) The boarding officer (admeasurer) may notify the next port of 
such additional measures as may be indicated for a particular vessel to 
proceed there. The boarding officer (admeasurer) may contract the 
quarantine stations at the next port of call regarding additional 
measures indicated.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 61.264  Radio pratique.

    The boarding officer (admeasurer) may grant pratique to a vessels 
upon the basis of information regarding the vessel, its cargo and 
persons aboard, received prior to arrival of the vessel, when in his 
judgment, and in accordance with general standands set by the Chief, 
Occupational Health Division of the Commission and the Ministry of 
Health of the Government of Panama, the entry of the vessel will not 
result in the introduction, transmission or spread of communicable 
diseases.

[51 FR 21361, June 12, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 33748, June 23, 1997]

                      Importation of Dogs and Cats


<R05>
Sec. 61.281  Quarantine of dogs and cats.

    The owner or person in charge of any dog or cat entering the Panama 
Canal area from outside the Republic of Panama shall make arrangements 
with the appropriate veterinary authorities for entry of the animal.


<R04>
                      Subpart F--Pest Exterminators


<R05>
Sec. 61.311   License required to engage in business of pest extermination.

    (a) A firm, establishment, company, corporation, or individual doing 
business in his own name may not engage in the business of extermination 
of pests such as rats, roaches, ticks, termites, ants, or other harmful 
insects or rodents, unless licensed to do so by the Health Director of 
the Canal Zone Government.
    (b) The Health Director may not license an applicant as a pest 
exterminator unless it is established to the satisfaction of the Health 
Director:
    (1) That a sufficient number of its personnel are licensed under 
Sec. 61.312 to ensure its capacity to conduct its business in conformity 
with the regulations in this subpart; and
    (2) That it is otherwise properly qualified and competent to conduct 
such business.

    Cross Reference: See also 2 C.Z.C. 872, 76A Stat. 33, for certain 
statutory requisites applicable to corporations doing business in the 
Canal Zone.

[[Page 58]]


<R05>
Sec. 61.312   Licensed foreman required to be in charge.

    (a) Each crew or gang of pest exterminators performing pest 
eradication shall be under the direct and immediate supervision of a 
foreman or gang leader licensed as a pest exterminator under this 
section.
    (b) In order to be licensed as a pest exterminator the applicant 
must establish to the satisfaction of the Chief, Division of Sanitation 
of the Health Bureau of the Canal Zone Government, or such person as the 
Health Director designates to issue such licenses, that he is familiar 
with the accepted methods of dispensing insecticides and rodenticides, 
with their toxicity and other significant qualities, and with safety 
precautions to be observed in their use.


<R05>
Sec. 61.313   Possession and display of licenses.

    The foreman or leader of each crew or gang of pest exterminators 
performing pest eradication shall have in his possession a legible copy 
of the license issued to him under Sec. 61.312 and a legible copy of the 
license issued to his employer under Sec. 61.311 and shall display such 
licenses on demand of personnel of the Health Bureau or of the Canal 
Zone Police.


<R05>
Sec. 61.314   Renewal of licenses; suspension and revocation.

    (a) Licenses issued under Secs. 61.311 and 61.312 shall be renewed 
annually. The licensing authority may require the same kind of showing 
of qualification of an applicant for renewal of a license as is required 
of an applicant for an original license. Licenses may be suspended at 
any time by the issuing authority, without prior notice to the licensee, 
for failure to comply with these regulations or with the terms of the 
license or for other good and sufficient cause.
    (b) A suspended licensee shall be entitled to a hearing if he 
requests it within 10 days after receiving notice of the suspension. The 
hearing, if requested, shall be held by the licensing authority or his 
designee within 10 days of the request therefor or within such later 
period as may be acceptable to the suspended licensee and the licensing 
authority. Upon completion of the hearing, or if no hearing is 
requested, the licensing authority shall:
    (1) Removal of the suspension;
    (2) Extend the suspension for a fixed period; or
    (3) Revoke the license.
    (c) A former licensee whose license has been revoked is not eligible 
to apply for a new license until expiration of a period of 1 year 
following the revocation.


<R05>
Sec. 61.315   Approval of types, concentrations, and manner of use of insecticides and rodenticides required.

    Licensees under Secs. 61.311 and 61.312 may use only such 
insecticides or rodenticides and only such concentrations thereof and 
may employ only such techniques as the Chief of the Sanitation Division 
approves, in writing, for each licensee under Sec. 61.311.


<R05>
Sec. 61.316   Sale of insecticides and rodenticides.

    The sale of insecticides and rodenticides is prohibited. This 
section does not prohibit pest exterminators who are issued licenses 
under Secs. 61.311 and 61.312 from dispensing approved insecticides and 
rodenticides in the performance of pest eradication and including the 
cost thereof in the charges for the service.


<R05>
Sec. 61.317   Inapplicability to Government agencies and their officers and employees.

    The provisions of this subpart do not apply to agencies or 
instrumentalities of the United States or to their officers or employees 
who use, handle, dispense, or sell insecticides or rodenticides in the 
performance of their official duties.


<R05>
Sec. 61.318   Inapplicability to military reservations.

    The provisions of this subpart do not apply within military, naval, 
or air force reservations.


<R04>
                        Subparts G-H--[Reserved]


<R04>
                    Subpart I--Authority of Governor


<R05>
Sec. 61.381   Authority of Governor.

    The Governor:

[[Page 59]]

    (a) May issue health and sanitation regulations respecting (1) 
barbers, beauticians and manicurists; (2) examination of food handlers 
and the inspection of food-handling establishments; (3) foods and 
beverages; and (4) pest extermination; and
    (b) Shall administer the provisions of this part.


<R03>
PART 67--CANAL ZONE POSTAL MONEY ORDERS AND SAVINGS CERTIFICATES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
67.1  Authority.
67.2  Scope.

                Subpart B--Canal Zone Money Order System

67.11  Scope of the subpart.
67.12  Applicability of Federal postal laws and regulations.
67.13  U.S. Postal Service restrictions.
67.14  Payment.
67.15  General procedures for payment of outstanding Canal Zone money 
          orders.
67.16  Period of validity.
67.17  Who may receive information.
67.18  Inquiries regarding payment.
67.19  Duplicate money orders; application for payment of mutilated or 
          lost money orders.
67.20  Acceptance of application for refund payment.
67.21  Money orders recovered after duplicate issued.

               Subpart C--Canal Zone Postal Savings System

67.31  Purpose and designation of depository.
67.32  Scope of this subpart.
67.33  Retroactive application.
67.34  Applicability of Federal postal laws and regulations.
67.35  Care and protection of records.
67.36  Interest.
67.37  Payment of postal savings certificates.
67.38  General procedures for payment of postal savings certificates.
67.39  Privacy of accounts.
67.40  Claims.
67.41  Disposal of paid postal savings certificates.
67.42  Replacement of certificates.
67.43  Payment of duplicate certificate.
67.44  Disposition of recovered certificate.

    Authority: Sec. 1331, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 481; EO 12173, 44 FR 
69271.

    Source 44 FR 75324, Dec. 19, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 67.1  Authority.

    The provisions of Chapter 73 of the Panama Canal Code relating to 
postal savings deposits, postal savings certificates, postal money 
orders and the accounting for funds shall continue to apply for the 
purpose of meeting the obligations of the United States concerning 
outstanding postal savings and money orders and disposition of funds.


<R05>
Sec. 67.2  Scope.

    The regulations in this part govern the procedures to be followed in 
redeeming outstanding Canal Zone postal savings deposits, postal savings 
certificates and postal money orders.


<R04>
                Subpart B--Canal Zone Money Order System


<R05>
Sec. 67.11  Scope of the subpart.

    This subpart covers procedures to be followed in the conduct of 
payment of outstanding Canal Zone money orders, and accounting for such 
transactions.


<R05>
Sec. 67.12  Applicability of Federal postal laws and regulations.

    The provisions of the postal laws of the United States, and of 39 
CFR, relating to the payment of outstanding Canal Zone money orders, are 
applicable to the Panama Canal Commission, insofar as they are not in 
conflict with the provisions of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 67.13  U.S. Postal Service restrictions.

    Any restrictions imposed by the United States Postal Service on 
payment of United States postal money orders shall apply to outstanding 
Canal Zone money orders.


<R05>
Sec. 67.14  Payment.

    (a) Place of payment. Money orders may be paid at the Office of the 
Treasurer, Panama Canal Commission, which is authorized to pay 
outstanding Canal Zone money orders.
    (b) Canal Zone Money Orders. A money order may be paid at full face

[[Page 60]]

value when presented by the payee, endorsee, or purchaser, within the 
period of validity.

    Cross Reference: Procedure for payment, see Sec. 67.15. Period of 
validity, see Sec. 67.16.


<R05>
Sec. 67.15  General procedures for payment of outstanding Canal Zone money orders.

    (a) Terms of payment. A money order shall be paid at its face value 
if presented by the payee, remitter or endorsee.
    (b) Examination of order. When a Canal Zone money order is presented 
for payment, the Cashier, Office of the Treasurer, shall examine it to 
see that:
    (1) It is not a form reported stolen.
    (2) It is not a counterfeit.
    (3) It is properly stamped and drawn by the issuing office.
    (4) It does not bear any alterations or erasures.
    (c) Machine-issued orders. The money orders issued by the print-
punch machine are payable in the amount printed on and punched in the 
order by the machine. The money orders issued by machine are payable in 
the amount imprinted by machine, but for no more than the amount stamped 
between the words ``Not Valid For More Than'' and the word ``Pay''.
    (d) Verification. Verification of an order presented for payment 
should be made by Chief, Agents Accounts Branch of the Panama Canal 
Commission, prior to payment by the cashier.
    (e) Identification--(1) General requirement. If the payee presenting 
the money order is not personally known to the cashier, he must prove 
his identity.
    (2) Identification of payee. Social security cards are not 
acceptable. Drivers permits, military identification cards, or other 
credential showing signature of bearer and having serial numbers or 
other indicia which can be traced to the holder are helpful in 
identification. The owner must sign the money order in the presence of 
the cashier. The cashier shall compare signature with identification, if 
possible, shall enter on the back of the order the license or serial 
number and full description of the identification; and shall also 
initial the back of the order and an impression of the agent's stamp 
will be affixed on the back of the order immediately on payment. This 
will aid in apprehending persons attempting forgery or other wrong 
payment.
    (3) Cashing endorsed money orders. This procedure must be followed 
carefully in the case of endorsed money orders, as they might bear a 
forged endorsement and be in the hands of the wrong person.
    (4) Payment to wrong person. If the cashier has taken proper care 
under the circumstances, the Treasurer of the Panama Canal Commission 
will recommend that he be relieved of financial responsibility for wrong 
payment.
    (5) Duties of employees. If a cashier is unable to satisfy himself 
that an applicant for payment is the owner of the order, he should bring 
the case to the attention of his supervisor or the Treasurer.
    (6) Attempts to defraud. Any attempt to defraud should be referred 
to the Treasurer by the cashier.
    (7) Requirements for signatures; etc.--
    (i) Signature by mark. If signature of payee or endorsee is by mark, 
it shall be witnessed by a person who can write, and the witness shall 
be someone other than the Treasurer or paying cashier.
    (ii) Signature different from name on order. Any signature of the 
payee consistent with the name given on the order may be accepted by the 
paying cashier as sufficient, if he is satisfied that it is the genuine 
signature of the payee intended.
    (iii) Signature of officer. An order drawn in favor of a public 
official or officer of a corporation, company, or association, as such, 
may be paid to his successor, if presented by the latter, who, in 
receipting for it, shall be required to indicate in writing the capacity 
in which he acts, thus: ``William Jones, Treasurer, successor to George 
Thompson''.
    (iv) When payee is society or corporation. When the payee is a 
society or corporation, the person who has authority to receive payment 
of money due such payee shall receipt the order in his official 
capacity, and if occasion arises, the Treasurer may require satisfactory 
proof of such authority.
    (v) Stamped signature in receipt. All of the requisite signatures to 
a money

[[Page 61]]

order--those of payee, endorsee, or witness to payment--shall be 
written, preferably in ink; but a stamped signature may be used in place 
of the written signature of payee or agent of payee in receipts on money 
order drawn in favor of or made payable to a firm, corporation, 
association, society, or individual, if beneath it is written the 
signature of the person receiving payment or executing the endorsement. 
Under no circumstances may an endorsement be made by means of a 
perforating device.
    (vi) Signature of agent. The paying cashier shall affix or cause to 
be affixed to the signature of the person receiving payment of a money 
order any such word or words as may be necessary to explain the right of 
such person to collect the amount. For instance, where an order drawn in 
favor of a company is paid to its local manager, the word ``Manager'' 
should appear beneath or opposite his signature to the endorsement.
    (vii) Use of titles. The paying cashier shall not insist on the 
inclusion or the omission of a title or prefix such as ``Dr.,'' 
``Rev.,'' ``Prof.,'' ``Madam,'' or ``Mrs.'' in the signature to an 
order, whether or not the payee is designated by such title or prefix in 
the body of the order.
    (viii) Order presented by payee after being endorsed by others. When 
an order is presented by the payee for payment, it is immaterial what 
endorsements there may be on the order. Payment may be made if the order 
is otherwise regular and there is space for the payee to sign his name 
on the back of the order on or near the line above the word ``Payee'' 
and inconsistent or unnecessary signatures or endorsements may be 
canceled.
    (ix) Substitution by payee or remitter of name written in error. The 
payee or the remitter of an order, but no one else, may substitute any 
other name for one which he has already written by mistake in the body 
of the first endorsement thereon, and payment may be made to the person 
whose name has thus been substituted, if the order is regular in other 
respects.
    (x) More than one payee. Money orders completed by the purchaser to 
show more than one firm or person as payee may be paid to any one of 
them.
    (f) Stolen forms. Money orders issued on stolen forms will not be 
accepted as valid vouchers for disbursements.
    (g) Procedure where duplicate issued. If upon verification, it is 
established that a duplicate has been issued, the cashier to whom the 
order is presented shall write across it with ink the words, ``Canceled-
Duplicate Issued,'' and forward the order to the Chief, Agents Accounts 
Branch for disposition.
    (h) Payment to other than payee. (1) Transfer of money orders-- (i) 
By purchaser or payee. The payee or the purchaser of a money order may 
endorse the order to any other person or firm. A money order may not be 
paid to a second person without written transfer or endorsement to him 
by the payee or purchaser in the prescribed form on the reverse side of 
the order, except as provided by paragraphs (h)(i)(ii) and (iii) of this 
section.
    (ii) On power of attorney. A person with power or attorney may cash 
money orders in behalf of the payee who gave him that authority. The 
power of attorney must be filed at the office of payment.
    (iii) On separate written order of payee. When the payee has filed 
with the Treasurer a separate written order authorizing payment to 
another person, and designating that person by name as the one to 
receive payment of and to receipt for any specified order, or for all 
orders payable by the Treasurer to the payee, that person may cash money 
orders on behalf of the payee.
    (2) Upon assignment. When a person or firm makes an assignment, and 
the assignor intends that money orders payable to him will be paid to 
assignee, he should execute a power of attorney to give such written 
order separate from the instrument of assignment, to be filed in the 
Office of the Treasurer. The person designated to receive payment should 
receipt the money order as such, indicating beneath his signature the 
capacity in which he acts.
    (3) On death of payee. A money order belonging to a deceased 
remitter or payee may be paid to the executor or administrator of the 
estate appointed by the court. A certified copy of the appointment shall 
be filed with the

[[Page 62]]

Treasurer. If the estate is small and administration is not desired, 
payment shall be made in accordance with the Panama Canal Code. Whenever 
a money order belonging to a deceased remitter or payee is presented for 
payment, the Treasurer should be informed and payment therefor withheld 
until instructions for payment are received.

    Cross Reference: Laws on succession, see 7 P.C.C. 501, et seq.

    (4) To concern which has ceased to exist. A money order payable to a 
firm, bank, or company which has ceased to exist shall be paid to the 
legal representative thereof.
    (5) To committee or guardian. When a committee, guardian, or other 
person is appointed by a court to act for a person declared incompetent, 
money orders shall not be paid to the ward. All money orders showing the 
ward as payee or endorsed shall be paid only to the committee, guardian, 
or other duly designated person, who shall exhibit to the postmaster the 
authority thus to act for the ward. Such money orders shall be receipted 
in the name of the ward, followed by the signature and legal designation 
of the committee, guardian, or other authorized agent.
    (6) To minor. A money order payable to a minor may be paid to the 
father or mother thereof as natural guardian, unless legal proceedings 
have been instituted which make questionable the claim of the father or 
mother, in which case the facts should be reported to the Treasurer.
    (i) Discrepancies or alterations. If there is any doubt as to the 
particulars on a Canal Zone money order, verification of the order 
should be made with Chief, Agents Accounts Branch.
    (j) Payment of remitter. A money order presented by the remitter may 
be refunded at the Office of the Treasurer upon proper identification.
    (k) Payment of order withheld--(1) Invalid orders. Provisions 
relating to the payment of invalid Canal Zone money orders are contained 
in Sec. 67.16.
    (2) Nonpayment because of fraud--(i) Proof. If the purchaser has 
proof that the order was purchased because of false representations or 
other fraudulent action of the payee, or that the payee is engaged in 
conducting a scheme or device for obtaining money fraudulently through 
the mails, the purchaser may request the Treasurer to withhold payment.
    (ii) Orders forbidding payment. Payment of a money order should not 
be made under any circumstances to a specific person or firm when an 
order has been issued by the Treasurer forbidding payment of money 
orders to such persons or firms.


<R05>
Sec. 67.16  Period of validity.

    As provided by 2 P.C.C. 1142, 76A Stat. 40, money orders issued by 
the Canal Zone Postal Service may not be paid after 20 years from the 
last day of original issue. Claims for unpaid money orders shall be 
forever barred unless received by the Panama Canal Commission Treasurer 
within such 20-year period. Special authority shall be obtained from the 
Chief, Agents Accounts Branch, to pay or refund a Canal Zone money order 
presented after one year from the last day of the month in which it was 
issued and prior to the expiration of the 20-year period.


<R05>
Sec. 67.17  Who may receive information.

    Information concerning money order transactions may be given only to 
the purchaser, payee, or endorsee, or his agent, or to a representative 
of the Agents Accounts Branch, the Office of the Treasurer, and the 
Postal Assistance Unit of the Panama Canal Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 67.18  Inquiries regarding payment.

    Inquiries concerning the payment of a money order shall be made to 
the Chief, Agents Accounts Branch on PS Form 6401 or by direct 
correspondence.


<R05>
Sec. 67.19  Duplicate money orders; application for payment of mutilated or lost money orders.

    (a) Duplicate money orders shall not be issued after September 28, 
1979.
    (b) A duplicate money order issued prior to September 29, 1979, may 
be paid at the Office of the Treasurer.
    (c) A duplicate money order is payable only to the payee named 
thereon or his endorsee.
    (d) An application for payment of a mutilated or lost money order 
may be

[[Page 63]]

accepted and certified by Chief, Agents Accounts Branch and honored by 
the Treasurer if the mutilated order accompanies the application or the 
original money order has been inadvertently destroyed and the person in 
whose favor the application is made submits evidence, in the form of 
affidavits or otherwise as Chief, Agents Accounts Branch deems 
sufficient to establish a valid claim to the original order.


<R05>
Sec. 67.20  Acceptance of application for refund payment.

    (a) An application for refund payment on a money order may be 
accepted by the Chief, Agents Accounts Branch.
    (b) An application for refund payment of a money order alleged to 
have been lost, stolen or destroyed may be accepted only from the 
purchaser, or the holder of the purchaser's receipt, and payment shall 
be issued if the person in whose favor the application is made submits 
evidence in the form of affidavits or otherwise, as the Chief, Agents 
Accounts Branch deems sufficient to establish a valid claim to the 
original order and the original order has not be been paid.
    (c) The complete name and address of the person or firm to whom the 
money order was sent, as well as the complete name and last known 
address (house number, street, and post office) of the person to whom 
the refund payment is to be paid, shall be determined from the applicant 
by inquiry.


<R05>
Sec. 67.21  Money orders recovered after duplicate issued.

    When a money order alleged to have been lost comes into the 
possession of the remitter, payee, or endorsee thereof after application 
for a refund payment has been made, the paying cashier to whom the order 
is presented shall notify Chief, Agents Accounts Branch by memorandum. 
If a duplicate or refund payment has not been issued in lieu thereof, 
the Chief, Agents Accounts Branch, may authorize the payment or refund 
of such original order. If upon verification, it is evident that a 
duplicate or refund payment has been issued, the cashier to whom the 
order is presented shall write across it the words ``Canceled--
Duplicate/Refund Payment Issued,'' and the order shall be sent to Chief, 
Agents Accounts Branch for disposition.


<R04>
               Subpart C--Canal Zone Postal Savings System


<R05>
Sec. 67.31  Purpose and designation of depository.

    The postal savings system was established to provide facilities for 
the deposit of savings at interest with the security of the United 
States Government for repayment. As a result of the discontinuance of 
the Canal Zone Postal Service, effective October 1, 1979, the Treasurer 
of the Panama Canal Commission has been designated as the sole postal 
savings depository.


<R05>
Sec. 67.32  Scope of this subpart.

    This subpart covers the procedures to be followed in the payment of 
outstanding postal savings certificates and the accounting for such 
transactions.


<R05>
Sec. 67.33  Retroactive application.

    This subpart applies equally to money orders or deposit orders 
issued in lieu of postal savings certificates prior to September 29, 
1979. Such orders may have been endorsed or were known at various times 
as follows:

``Money Order''--``Deposit Money Order'';
``Non-Transferable Deposit Money Order'';
``Non-Transferable--Payable to Depositor Only'';
``Pay Depositor Only at Office of Issue.''


<R05>
Sec. 67.34  Applicability of Federal postal laws and regulations.

    The provisions of the postal laws of the United States, and of 39 
CFR, relating to the payment of postal savings certificates, are 
applicable to the Panama Canal Commission, insofar as they are not in 
conflict with the provisions of this subpart.

    Cross Reference: Postal savings system, see 39 U.S.C. 5201 et seq.; 
postal savings, see 39 CFR Part 173.


<R05>
Sec. 67.35  Care and protection of records.

    All unpaid stubs and any current postal savings statements, records, 
or files relating to unpaid accounts shall be placed and maintained in a 
vault or

[[Page 64]]

safe when not actually required for an official transaction. All such 
records shall be placed in the vault or safe during alerts or disaster 
periods. The Chief, Agents Accounts Branch, shall give this matter his 
personal attention and shall be held accountable for the proper 
protection of the records.


<R05>
Sec. 67.36  Interest.

    (a) Rate. Postal savings certificates shall bear interest at the 
rate of one-half of one percentum for each period of three full months 
from the date of issue.
    (b) Interest period--(1) ``Three full months''. In computing 
interest, the term ``three full months'' shall be considered as follows:
    (i) If a certificate was issued on the last day of the month, 
interest is due and payable on the last day of the month, regardless of 
the number of days in such month, except that:
    (A) If the last day of the month falls on a Sunday or holiday, 
interest is not payable until the first day of the following month.
    (B) If the certificate was issued February 28, interest is due and 
payable May 28, August 28, etc. Interest on certificates issued August 
31, therefore, would be due and payable November 30, February 28, and 
May 31.
    (ii) If a certificate was issued other than on the last day of the 
month, interest is due and payable three months from the actual date of 
issue.
    (A) If issued January 15, interest is due April 15.
    (B) If issued February 1, interest is due May 1, etc.
    (iii) When the computation of interest results in fraction of a 
cent, the fraction shall be dropped.
    (c) When paid. Interest shall be paid only when the certificate is 
paid.
    (d) This section applies to all outstanding deposit money orders and 
postal savings certificates issued prior to September 29, 1979.

(2 P.C.C. sec. 1134, 76A Stat. 39).


<R05>
Sec. 67.37  Payment of postal savings certificates.

    (a) On demand at Office of the Treasurer. Upon certification by a 
designated Agents Accounts Branch representative, postal savings 
certificates shall be authorized for payment only to the depositor by 
either cash through the Office of the Treasurer of the Panama Canal 
Commission or by a Panama Canal Commission check. In the case of a joint 
account, the certificates shall be payable to the signature of either of 
the depositors or the survivor. To terminate a joint account, all orders 
payable to the two persons jointly must be presented and cashed.
    (b) In person. The certifcate shall be paid to the depositor on 
proper identification and certification by the designated Agents 
Accounts Branch representative. Payment may be made by cash only at the 
Office of the Treasurer or by a Panama Canal Commission check.
    (c) By mail--(1) Requisites. Withdrawals may be made by mail, if the 
certificates are properly signed by the depositor and forwarded to the 
Chief, Agents Accounts Branch, and he is satisfied as to the identity of 
the depositor.
    (2) Manner of payment. Payment shall be made by check, which shall 
be sent by registered mail. Before mailing the payment, the registry fee 
and postage, shall be deducted.
    (d) Payment of certificates of deceased depositors--(1) Payment to 
representative. After the death of a depositor, certificates in his or 
her favor shall be paid to the duly authorized executor or administrator 
of the estate or other person only upon the authority of the Chief, 
Agents Accounts Branch. When it is known that a depositor has died, the 
stubs should be ``flagged'' and held to the credit of the deceased 
depositor.
    (2) Survivor of joint depositors. After the death of either of two 
joint depositors, when a ``Joint Depositor's Agreement'' has been 
completed, the certificates remaining unpaid become the sole property of 
the survivor and may be paid to the survivor without the authority of 
the Chief, Agents Accounts Branch.
    (e) Payment of certificates to incompetent depositors. In cases of 
mental disability or other legal incompetence of a depositor, the Chief, 
Agents Accounts Branch should contact the General Counsel of the Panama 
Canal Commission for instructions.
    (f) Identification. The person presenting a postal savings 
certificate must

[[Page 65]]

identify himself before payment is made. Section 67.15(e) covering 
payment of money orders, shall govern in the payment of postal savings 
certificates.


<R05>
Sec. 67.38  General procedures for payment of postal savings certificates.

    (a) Examination of the certificate. Postal savings certificates 
presented for payment must be validated by the designated Agents 
Accounts Branch representative prior to effecting payment. The 
representative shall examine the certificate and compare it with all 
particulars on the post office stub and the list of outstanding 
certificates to ascertain if the certificate is valid for payment and if 
the certificate is in order. A payment authorization will be prepared 
and forwarded to the Office of the Treasurer.
    (b) Signatures. The certificate shall be signed by the depositor on 
the back in the presence of the Panama Canal Commission cashier who 
shall verify all particulars entered thereon. When in doubt, a signature 
should be verified with that which appears on the corresponding 
application, joint account card or the representative of depositor's 
card (Form 2105). The person presenting the certificate must identify 
himself before payment is made. If a certificate is paid to the wrong 
person through lack of precaution, the paying cashier will be held 
accountable for the amount of the certificate.
    (c) Interest Due--(1) Notation of interest. When a certificate is 
paid, the total amount of interest due shall be shown in red ink in the 
``Interest'' block of the certificate and stub of the postal savings 
certificate. When no interest is paid, a straight line in red ink shall 
be drawn across the ``Interest'' blocks. Once the amount of interest is 
written on the certificate, no change or alteration shall be permitted.
    (2) Errors--(i) Underpayment of interest. If an underpayment of 
interest has been made after figures have been entered in the interest 
block on a certificate, paying cashier shall receive a payment voucher 
Panama Canal Commission Form 5128 for cash payment from the depositor 
when the additional amount is paid to him. The payment voucher shall be 
returned to Agents Accounts Branch for their office records. Requests 
for payment by check shall be accomplished on Panama Canal Commission 
Form 3162. The amount of unpaid interest shall not be set aside for the 
depositor pending his response to a notice to call, and credit shall not 
be taken until the short payment has actually been made to the 
depositor.
    (ii) Overpayment of Interest. The Chief, Agents Accounts Branch will 
establish procedures for the recovery of overpayments.
    (d) Date of payment. A clear impression of the Agent's stamp shall 
be placed in proper space on back of the certificate and on the back of 
the corresponding office stub. The date affixed by the cashier shall be 
the actual day of payment.
    (e) Initiating paid certificates. The Chief, Agents Accounts Branch 
shall establish procedures for identifying paid savings certificates, 
specifically as it relates to the original certificates and 
corresponding stub.
    (f) Issuance of duplicate as precluding payment. The original postal 
savings certificate shall NOT be paid under any circumstances if a 
duplicate postal savings certificate was issued prior to September 29, 
1979.
    (g) Filing paid stubs. The stubs of paid certificates shall be filed 
in numerical sequence in a file covering the calendar year in which 
paid.
    (h) Final determination regarding payment. Final determination as to 
whether payment has been properly made on postal savings certificates or 
other evidences of deposit in the postal savings of the former Canal 
Zone Postal Service including duplicates, shall be based upon the 
official records of Agents Accounts Branch.

    Cross Reference: Rate of interest, see Sec. 67.36.


<R05>
Sec. 67.39  Privacy of accounts.

    Agents Accounts Branch employees shall not disclose the name of any 
postal savings depositor nor give information concerning a particular 
account to any person other than the depositor himself, without specific 
authority from the Chief, Agents Accounts Branch.

[[Page 66]]


<R05>
Sec. 67.40  Claims.

    (a)  Dispute as to ownership or claim by another person. When there 
is any dispute as to the ownership, or when a claim by a person other 
than the depositor is made for payment, the designated Agents Accounts 
Branch representative shall withhold payment authorization of 
withdrawals from the account involved pending instructions from the 
Chief, Agents Accounts Branch.
    (b) Limitations on claims. All claims for payment of any postal 
savings certificate or other evidence of deposit in the postal savings 
system of the former Canal Zone Postal Service issued prior to October 
1, 1979, including duplicates, which are shown by the records in the 
possession of the Agents Accounts Branch to have been duly paid, shall 
be barred if not presented to the Panama Canal Commission within six 
years from the date on which such records show that they were paid.


<R05>
Sec. 67.41  Disposal of paid postal savings certificates.

    Postal savings certificates or other evidences of deposit in the 
postal savings system of the former Canal Zone Postal Service, including 
duplicates, may be disposed of after the expiration of six years from 
date payment thereon has been made as shown by the records of the Panama 
Canal Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 67.42  Replacement of certificates.

    Duplicate postal savings certificates shall not be issued after 
September 28, 1979. A postal savings certificate that is lost, stolen, 
destroyed or improperly withheld, shall be paid by cash or check to the 
depositor, in accordance with the procedures established by this 
subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 67.43  Payment of duplicate certificate.

    A duplicate postal savings certificate issued prior to September 29, 
1979 may be paid at the Office of the Treasurer, under the same 
conditions governing the payment of the original postal savings 
certificate.


<R05>
Sec. 67.44  Disposition of recovered certificate.

    If, after a duplicate postal savings certificate was issued, the 
depositor reports that he has found the original certificate, he shall 
be instructed to surrender the original certificate. The certificate 
surrendered shall be endorsed with the word ``Canceled'' across its face 
and retained at Agents Accounts Branch as office records.


<R03>
PART 70--PROCEDURES FOR CHANGING RULES OF MEASUREMENT OR RATES OF TOLLS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
70.1  Scope.
70.2  Definitions.
70.3  Official language.
70.4  Publication of notice.
70.5  Contents of notice.
70.6  Analysis for public use.
70.7  Data filed by interested parties.
70.8  Hearing.
70.9  Hearing panel.
70.10  Notice of appearance; witnesses.
70.11  Conduct of hearing.
70.12  Post-hearing revision.
70.13  Transcript.
70.14  Effective date.

    Authority: Sections 1601-1604 and 1801, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 489-
492, 22 U.S.C. 3791-3794, 3811; sections 3527 and 3528, Pub. L. 104-106; 
EO 12215, 45 FR 36043, 3 CFR, 1981 Comp., p. 257.

    Source: 47 FR 8177, Feb. 25, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 70.1  Scope.

    These regulations establish procedures for prescribing or changing 
the rules of measurement of vessels for the Panama Canal and the rates 
of tolls that shall be levied for the use of the Canal.


<R05>
Sec. 70.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Board means the nine-member Board of the Panama Canal 
Commission, appointed pursuant to section 1102 of the Panama Canal Act 
of 1979, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 456.
    (b) Commission means the Panama Canal Commission.
    (c) Hearing means a public proceeding at which interested persons 
are afforded an opportunity to participate in rulemaking through 
submission of

[[Page 67]]

written data, views or arguments with or without oral presentation.
    (d) Panel means the members of the Board of the Panama Canal 
Commission, who are designated by the Chairman of the Board to conduct a 
hearing in accordance with Sec. 70.9.
    (e) Party includes an individual, partnership, corporation, 
association, or public or private organization other than an agency of 
the United States Government.


<R05>
Sec. 70.3  Official language.

    Hearings, arguments, views, and other data provided for by these 
rules shall be in the English language.


<R05>
Sec. 70.4  Publication of notice.

    The Commission shall publish in the Federal Register notice of any 
proposed change in the rules of measurement or rates of tolls. Such 
notice must be published at least 30 days prior to the date of the 
public hearing referred to in Sec. 70.8.


<R05>
Sec. 70.5  Contents of notice.

    The notice referred to in Sec. 70.4 shall include:
    (a) The substance of the proposed change;
    (b) A statement of the time, place, and nature of the proceedings; 
and
    (c) A statement of the time by which interested parties must submit 
the notices of appearance required by Sec. 70.10.


<R05>
Sec. 70.6  Analysis for public use.

    At the time of publication of the notice referred to in Secs. 70.4 
and 70.5, the Commission shall make available to the public an analysis 
showing:
    (a) The basis and justification for the proposed change, which, in 
the case of a change in the rates or tolls, shall indicate the 
conformity of the existing and proposed rates of tolls with the 
requirements of section 1602 of the Panama Canal Act of 1979; and
    (b) The Commission's full consideration of the following factors:
    (1) The costs of operating and maintaining the Panama Canal;
    (2) The competitive position of the use of the Canal in relation to 
other means of transportation;
    (3) The interests of the United States and the Republic of Panama in 
maintaining their domestic fleets;
    (4) The impact of such a change in rates of tolls on the various 
geographical areas of each of the two countries; and
    (5) The interests of both countries in maximizing their 
international commerce.


<R05>
Sec. 70.7  Data filed by interested parties.

    After notice required by Sec. 70.4, interested parties shall be 
given the opportunity to participate in the change in the rules of 
measurement or rates of tolls through submission of written data, views, 
or arguments, which shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commission 
within the time prescribed in the notice. Copies of such data or other 
materials shall be available for distribution to other interested 
parties on payment of the cost prescribed by the Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 70.8  Hearing.

    Interested parties shall have the opportunity to participate in a 
hearing which shall be held not less than 30 days after the date of 
publication of the notice required by Sec. 70.4. Such hearing shall be 
held at the time and place prescribed in the notice. In fixing the time 
and place for the hearing, due regard shall be had for the convenience 
of the parties and their representatives. Parties appearing at such 
hearing may present data supplementary to any material already submitted 
by them, or any oral argument or statement concerning the rules of 
measurement or tolls, as appropriate. Upon presentation of such 
supplementary data, arguments, or statements, the panel may request 
further information or clarification.


<R05>
Sec. 70.9  Hearing panel.

    One or more members of the Board shall be designated by the Chairman 
of the Board as a panel to conduct the hearing. If two or more members 
are so designated, one shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Board 
to act as Chairman of the Panel.

[[Page 68]]


<R05>
Sec. 70.10  Notice of appearance; witnesses.

    Interested parties may appear at the hearing in person or by or with 
counsel or other qualified representative if notice of that appearance, 
including the names and addresses of the parties appearing, is furnished 
in writing to the Commission's Secretary within the time prescribed by 
the notice of the hearing. Such notice of appearance shall also state 
the names and addresses of any witnesses to appear, the capacity in 
which they will appear, the place at which they desire to be heard if 
hearings are scheduled to be held at more than one place, and the 
approximate time requested for the presentation of each witness.


<R05>
Sec. 70.11  Conduct of hearing.

    The panel shall conduct the hearing in an impartial manner. Subject 
to applicable statutes and rules, the panel may:
    (a) Regulate the course of the hearing;
    (b) Administer or require the administration of oaths or 
affirmations;
    (c) Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the 
issues by consent of the parties;
    (d) Dispose of procedural requests or similar matters;
    (e) Exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious material 
offered by the parties or witnesses; and
    (f) Exclude any party or witness for contumacious or other conduct 
which interferes with the proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 70.12  Post-hearing revision.

    After consideration of the panel's findings and other relevant 
matters, the Commission may revise the proposed rules of measurement or 
rates of tolls, as the case may be. However, in the case of rates of 
tolls, if such revision proposes rates greater than those originally 
proposed, the proceedings set out above (making an analysis available to 
the public, minimum of 30 days notice, submission of data, hearing, 
etc.) shall be repeated. This requirement shall apply to any subsequent 
revision which proposes rates higher than those in the preceding 
proposal.


<R05>
Sec. 70.13  Transcript.

    A transcript of the proceedings at the hearing(s) shall be made 
available to any party on request and payment of the costs prescribed by 
the Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 70.14  Effective date.

    Rules of measurement or rates of tolls prescribed by the Commission, 
pursuant to Pub. L. 96-70 and these regulations, shall take effect on a 
date prescribed by the Commission which is not less than 30 days after 
the Commission publishes such rules or rates in the Federal Register.

[47 FR 8177, Feb. 25, 1982. Redesignated and amended at 61 FR 16719, 
Apr. 17, 1996]

[[Page 69]]


<R03>
                  SUBCHAPTER C--SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION

<R05>


<R03>
PART 101--ARRIVING AND DEPARTING VESSELS: VARIOUS COMMUNICATION, DOCUMENTATION, SANITATION AND ADMEASUREMENT REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
101.1  Signal stations at the Canal entrances.
101.2  Boarding of arriving vessels.
101.3  Definition and functions of the boarding officer.
101.4  Measurement of vessel making maiden transit.
101.8  Vessel anchorage areas.
101.9  Papers required by boarding officer.
101.10  Same; list.
101.13  Entry and departure of vessels.
101.14  Panama Canal waters; definition.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3811, E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043, and 44 U.S.C. 
3501.

    Source: 46 FR 63175, Dec. 30, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 101.1  Signal stations at the Canal entrances.

    The Panama Canal Commission maintains established signal stations at 
both the Atlantic and Pacific entrances of the Canal. A vessel arriving 
at the Canal must communicate with the signal station which is located 
at the entrance of the Canal at which that vessel arrives. Vessels 
required to be equipped with a radiotelephone pursuant to Part 123 of 
this subchapter must, upon arrival, communicate with the appropriate 
signal station on Channel 12, 156.000 MHz. All other vessels may use 
International Code and flashing light. Such stations are also utilized 
to assist in control of traffic within Panama Canal waters.

    Cross Reference: See Part 123 for provisions respecting radio 
communication by vessels prior to arrival and while they are in Panama 
Canal waters.


<R05>
Sec. 101.2  Boarding of arriving vessels.

    (a) Unless otherwise directed, all arriving vessels will anchor in 
designated anchorages to await instructions. No person other than 
boarding officials of the Panama Canal Commission and the Republic of 
Panama may go on board or leave any vessel until such vessel has been 
entered by the Commission and where applicable, by the Republic of 
Panama.
    (b) Arriving vessels that are subject to inspection for compliance 
with Panama Canal shipping and navigation regulations will normally be 
boarded upon arrival inside the breakwater at the Atlantic entrance of 
the Canal or off the seaward end of the dredged, marked channel at the 
Pacific entrance. When such vessels are not boarded immediately upon 
arrival, they shall anchor in a designated anchorage area and await the 
boarding official. Weather and sea conditions permitting, the boarding 
of vessels may take place outside of these areas. Boarding will be 
performed by a Commission boarding official in accordance with the 
procedures established under this part.
    (c) Admeasurement functions shall be performed on arriving vessels 
either while at anchor or during transit.

[46 FR 63175, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 56 FR 55632, Oct. 29, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 101.3  Definition and functions of the boarding officer.

    (a) Boarding officer means any official or employee of the Panama 
Canal Commission who is duly assigned the functions of a boarding 
officer, including admeasurement and sanitation.
    (b) The Commission boarding officer shall perform the functions of 
admeasurer for the purpose of determining Panama Canal tolls and shall 
make inspection for the purpose of insuring compliance with Panama Canal 
shipping, navigation and sanitation regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 101.4   Measurement of vessel making maiden transit.

    A vessel that arrives after 8 p.m. and is to make her maiden transit 
will normally be admeasured on the following day.

[31 FR 12287, Sept. 16, 1966]

[[Page 70]]


<R05>
Sec. 101.8  Vessel anchorage areas.

    The following areas are designated as authorized anchorages within 
Canal waters:
    (a) Atlantic entrance--(1) Merchant-vessel anchorage. An area to the 
west of the Canal channel bounded as follows: Starting at a point ``A'', 
located in position 9 deg.21'25" N., 79 deg.55'31" W., and marked by 
lighted buoy No. 2, thence 900 yards 270 deg. true to a point ``B'' 
located in position 9 deg.21'25" N., 79 deg.55'58" W., thence to lighted 
buoy ``I'', thence to lighted buoy ``H'', thence due north to a point 
``C'' located in position 9 deg.22'07" N., 79 deg.56'41" W., thence 
2,800 yards 59 deg. true to a point ``D'' located in position 
9 deg.22'50" N., 79 deg.55'29" W., and thence to the starting point. The 
line extending due west from the Cristobal Mole through lighted beacon 
No. 1 and lighted buoy No. 2 (9 deg.21'25" North) marks the southern 
limit of the anchorage area. Except as provided by Sec. 105.3, no vessel 
shall pass this line without having been passed by the boarding officer 
and without having a Canal pilot on board.
    (2) Outside explosive anchorage. An area bounded by a line from 
Point A at position 9 deg.23'53" N., 79 deg.56'29" W., thence to Point B 
at position 9 deg.24'40" N., 79 deg.56'29" W., thence to Point C at 
position 9 deg.24'40" N., 79 deg.57'00" W., thence to Point D at 
position 9 deg.23'53" N., 79 deg.57'00" W., thence to Point A.
    (3) Inside explosive anchorage. The area included in a rectangle one 
thousand yards wide immediately south of the West breakwater, the 
rectangle extending 2000 yards along the west breakwater from a point on 
the west breakwater one thousand yards from the west breakwater light.
    (4) Small-craft anchorage. An area to the east of the Canal channel 
bounded as follows: Starting at buoy ``A'', a flashing amber buoy 
located in position 9 deg.20'43" N., 79'55'10" W., thence 1075 yards 
066 deg. true, through fixed amber lighted buoy ``B'' to fixed amber 
lighted buoy ``C'', thence 375 yards 143 deg. true, thence 1760 yards 
233 deg. true to the east prism of the Canal channel, thence due north 
410 yards to flashing special anchorage buoy ``3'', thence 525 yards 
023 deg. true to the starting point at buoy ``A''.
    (b) Gatun Lake anchorage. An area immediately east of the Canal 
channel line, bounded by a line extending from the south end of the east 
wing-wall of Gatun Locks, thence 450 yards 120 deg. true, thence 676 
yards 146 deg. true to flashing special anchorage buoy ``A'', thence 
1,415 yards 078 deg. true to flashing special anchorage buoy ``1'', 
thence 1,199 yards 155 deg. true to flashing special anchorage buoy 
``3'', thence 2,314 yards 225 deg. true through special anchorage buoy 
``5'' to special anchorage buoy ``7'', thence 901 yards 220 deg. true to 
special anchorage buoy ``9'', thence 952 yards 205 deg. true to the 
Canal channel line at flashing buoy ``11'', the channel prism line being 
the westerly boundary line of the anchorage area.
    (c) Pacific entrance--(1) Merchant-vessel anchorage. An area bounded 
as follows: Beginning at a point in position 8 deg.51'50" N., 
79 deg.30'00" W., marked by a lighted, whistle buoy which is painted 
with alternating black and white vertical stripes and which shows short-
long flashing white light every 8 seconds (i.e., light 0.4 second, 
eclipse 0.4 second, light 1.6 seconds, eclipse 5.6 seconds), thence due 
east to longitude 79 deg.28'00" W., thence due north to 8 deg.54'31" N., 
thence due west toward Flamenco Island Light to a point 8 deg.54'31" N., 
79 deg.30'46" W., thence southwestward touching the northwest corner of 
San Jose Rock to position 8 deg.53'27" N., 79 deg.31'23" W., marked by 
canal-entrance lighted buoy No. 2, thence southeastward to the point of 
beginning.
    (2) Explosive anchorage. An area south of Naos Island bounded on the 
east by a line drawn south (true) from canal-entrance lighted buoy No. 
1; on the south by a line drawn east (true) from Tortolita Island, and 
in the north and west by the curve of 30 foot depth.
    (d) If there are any discrepancies between the designated anchorage 
areas as described in this section and the anchorage areas described in 
paragraph 4 of Annex A of the Agreement in Implementation of Article III 
of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and the attachments thereto, the 
description in the treaty documents shall govern.

[50 FR 19678, May 10, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 101.9  Papers required by boarding officer.

    On arrival, there shall be ready for immediate inspection or 
delivery, as the case may be, to the boarding officer

[[Page 71]]

the required number of copies of papers concerning tonnage of vessel, 
cargo, and such other matters upon which information is necessary, as 
are prescribed by Sec. 101.10. The required manifests, lists and 
statements shall be sworn to by the Master or agent of the vessel. 
Vessels will not be permitted to transit until properly cleared by the 
boarding officer. Failure to present the required papers to boarding 
officers could result in loss of the vessel's relative position in the 
movement schedule and delay in granting the necessary permission to 
depart.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[46 FR 63175, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 50 FR 26991, July 1, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 101.10  Same; list.

    (a) Documents for Commission Boarding Officer. All documents listed 
below shall be ready for immediate delivery to the boarding officer when 
he boards the vessel upon each arrival of the vessel at the Canal.

                           Documents Required

    (1) Ship's Information and Quarantine Declaration (Panama Canal Form 
4398)--1 copy.
    (2) Cargo Declaration (Panama Canal Form 4363)--1 copy.<SUP>1</SUP> 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Required only if vessel transits Canal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Crew List (Panama Canal Form 1509)--1 Copy
    (4) Passenger List (Panama Canal Form 20)--1 copy.
    (5) Dangerous Cargo Manifest--1 copy.<SUP>2</SUP> 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ Required only if vessel is carrying packaged, dangerous goods.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (6) Loading Plan--1 copy.<SUP>3</SUP> 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ Required only if vessel is carrying dangerous cargo in bulk.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (7) Panama Canal Tonnage Certificate--1 copy.<SUP>1</SUP> 
    (8) Ship's plans (general arrangement, engine room, capacity, mid-
ship, etc.)--1 copy.<SUP>1
    </SUP>(b) Documents for examination only. The following documents 
shall be available for inspection by the Commission boarding officer:
    (1) Ship's log,
    (2) All ship's documents pertaining to cargo, classification, 
construction, load lines, equipment, safety, sanitation, and tonnage,
    (3) SOLAS certificate, for ships carrying dangerous cargo in bulk,
    (4) An International Oil Pollution certificate, for ships carrying 
dangerous cargo in bulk, and
    (5) Certificates showing compliance with the International 
Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for 
Seafarers, 1978 (STCW), if the nation of registry has implemented the 
convention standards. If the nation of registry has not implemented the 
STCW convention, then certifications issued or accepted by the registry 
nation attesting to the qualifications of officers and crew will be 
accepted by the agency. Certification requirements will apply only to 
officers and crew responsible for the safe handling of the vessel.
    (c) Crew list. For the purposes of additional identification of crew 
members, all copies of the crew list required by this section shall 
include for each seaman the serial number of his certificate of 
identification, continuous discharge book, passport or other 
satisfactory identifying documentation. In addition, the given name and 
middle initial, as well as the family name, shall be shown for all 
seamen.
    (d) Passenger list. The passenger list required by this section 
shall be in accurate and legible form and shall be delivered to the 
boarding officer. The list shall show passengers in alphabetical order.
    (e) Dangerous cargo manifest. The dangerous cargo manifest for 
vessels carrying packaged dangerous goods, as defined in Sec. 113.2(m) 
of this title, shall show the correct technical name, United Nations 
number, International Maritime Organization class and division, storage 
location, and quantity for each packaged dangerous good carried as 
cargo.
    (f) Loading plan. The loading plan for vessels carrying dangerous 
cargo in bulk, as defined in Sec. 113.2(f) of this title, shall show the 
location of cargo tanks or holds and the correct technical name, United 
Nations number, International Maritime Organization class and division, 
and quantity of dangerous

[[Page 72]]

cargo carried in each cargo tank or hold.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[50 FR 19678, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37326, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 101.13  Entry and departure of vessels.

    (a) An arriving vessel shall be entered at either the Pacific or 
Atlantic entrance. A vessel is entered by the Canal Commission 
authorities upon the report of the boarding officer and it is not 
necessary for the Master to come ashore for that purpose. At the 
discretion of the Marine Director, a vessel may be denied entry for 
failure to comply with Panama Canal regulations. In certain cases 
vessels may be provisionally entered. When provisional entry is granted, 
vessels may remain in Canal waters only under the conditions set forth 
in the provisional entry. Permission to enter port waters will be given 
by the Republic of Panama.
    (b) Any vessel that has entered or has provisionally entered the 
Canal shall, prior to its departure therefrom, obtain permission from 
the Marine Director or designee. Permission to depart shall be issued 
only after that official has been satisfied that:
    (1) All documents and statistical data required for entry or 
provisional entry by the Canal authorities respecting the vessel and its 
cargo have been furnished; and
    (2) Tolls and other charges for services or supplies furnished by 
the Panama Canal Commission have been paid or the payment secured.

[46 FR 63175, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 11908, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 101.14  Panama Canal waters; definition.

    As used in this Subchapter, the term ``Panama Canal waters'' or 
``Canal waters'' refers to all waters lying within the Canal operating 
area described in Annex A of the Agreement in Implementation of Article 
III of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 between the United States of 
America and the Republic of Panama and depicted in attachments thereto.


<R03>
PART 103--GENERAL PROVISIONS GOVERNING VESSELS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
103.1  Regulations to be kept aboard.
103.2  Denial of passage to dangerous vessel.
103.3  Discovery of defect in vessel during transit or while under way.
103.4  Load and trim.
103.5  Deck load.
103.6  Size and draft limitations of vessels.
103.7  Authority to deny transit.
103.10  Vessels required to be equipped with certain indicators.
103.11  Vessels without mechanical signal system to engine room subject 
          to delay in transiting.
103.12  Discharge of firearms.
103.13  Firing of salutes.
103.14  Colors and house flags.
103.15  Boarding vessels at anchor or underway.
103.16  Meals to be furnished by vessel in certain cases.
103.17  Boat for handling lines.
103.18  Pilot ladders, hoists and side ports.
103.19  Requirement for pilot shelter platforms.
103.20  Disabling of engines.
103.21  Precautions against emission of sparks, smoke or noxious gases.
103.25  Fishing or placing of nets or other obstructions prohibited.
103.26  Obstructions not to be placed across channels or anchorages.
103.27  Clear view forward from the bridge and steering light 
          requirement for certain vessels.
103.28  Towing of certain vessels required.
103.29  Anchoring in Panama Canal waters.
103.30  Requirements for all dead tows.
103.32  Engine orders to be recorded.
103.33  Navigation in Gaillard Cut.
103.34  Same; Control by Canal Operations Captain.
103.39  Arrow signals; locks.
103.40  Transit schedules; pennants.
103.41  Ships to display schedule number.
103.42  Maneuvering characteristics; data required.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3791, E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043, 3 CFR, 1981 
Comp., p. 257.

    Source: 46 FR 63176, Dec. 30, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 103.1   Regulations to be kept aboard.

    All vessels shall keep aboard not less than one copy of the current 
regulations contained in Subchapters A, B, and C of this chapter. 
Vessels arriving for the first time without such regulations aboard 
shall obtain them through

[[Page 73]]

their ships' agent as soon as practicable after arrival.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 54 FR 29336, July 12, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 103.2   Denial of passage to dangerous vessel.

    The Canal authorities may deny any vessel passage through the Canal 
when the character or condition of the cargo, hull, or machinery is such 
as to endanger the structures pertaining to the Canal, or which might 
render the vessel liable to obstruct the Canal, or whose draft, at any 
part of the vessel, exceeds the maximum allowable draft in the Canal as 
designated from time to time by the Canal authorities.

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 103.3  Discovery of defect in vessel during transit or while under way.

    Upon the discovery during transit of the Canal, or at any time while 
under way, of any defect in a vessel of such serious nature that it 
might interfere with further passage or with her safe navigation, the 
vessel shall stop and, if practicable, be anchored or moored at the 
first available place. A full report shall be made immediately to the 
Canal Operations Captain or his designee by radio or by the best means 
available.

[46 FR 63176, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982, as amended at 55 
FR 11908, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 103.4   Load and trim.

    (a) A vessel shall not be permitted to transit the Canal if she:
    (1) Has a list of more than 10 degrees;
    (2) Is so tender or otherwise so loaded as to dangerously affect her 
stability or maneuverability; or
    (3) Is so trimmed as to dangerously affect her maneuverability.
    (b) A vessel having a list of between 3 degrees and 10 degrees, or 
which is so loaded or so trimmed as to adversely affect her 
manuverability, may be permitted to transit at the discretion of the 
Canal Operations Captain or his designee. If such vessel is allowed to 
transit, however, it may do so only at its own risk and, to the extent 
and in the proportion that such failure to meet the requirements of this 
section proximately causes or contributes to a casualty and resulting 
damages, the Master of such vessel on behalf of said vessel, her owners, 
operators, or any other persons having any interest in her, and for 
himself, will be considered to have released the Panama Canal Commission 
and the United States from, and to have indemnified them against, any 
loss, damage, or liability incurred by the Commission, or the United 
States under or in respect to:
    (1) Sections 1411 through 1416, inclusive, of Pub. L. 96-70, 93 
Stat. 485-87.
    (2) Property of the Panama Canal Commission or the United States; 
and
    (3) Panama Canal Commission employees under the Federal Employees' 
Compensation Act, 5 U.S.C. 8101, et seq., or any other employee 
compensation system.

The Master of the vessel that fails to meet the requirements of this 
section may be required to execute, in the presence of a Commission 
official, a form undertaking to release the Panama Canal Commission and 
the United States from liability in case of an accident and to indemnify 
the Commission and the United States for any damages sustained. The 
failure of the Master of a vessel to sign such a form, however, will not 
relieve the vessel, her owners, or any other person having an interest 
in her from liability incurred as a result of the vessel's failure to 
meet the requirements of this section.
    (c) Nothing shall be done, or permitted to be done, by the Master or 
any member of the crew, which would alter the trim or draft of a vessel 
while it is transiting the Canal, without the prior, express approval of 
the pilot.

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 46 FR 63177, Dec. 30, 1981; 
55 FR 11908, Mar. 30, 1990]

    Cross Reference: Federal Employees' Compensation Act, see 5 U.S.C. 
8102 et seq.


<R05>
Sec. 103.5   Deck load.

    (a) A vessel carrying a deck load shall have it so stowed as to be 
sufficiently clear to provide safe working space around all chocks, 
bitts, and other gear used in transiting and so arranged as to not 
obstruct any direct lead from chocks to bitts.

[[Page 74]]

    (b) Vessels may transit with deck cargo protruding over one side not 
to exceed 15.0 feet if the maximum beam, including protrusions, does not 
exceed 85.0 feet. Pursuant to section 1411 of Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 
485, however, the Commission may not consider any claim for damages on 
account of any injury to such cargo which might be sustained while the 
vessel is passing through the locks of the Canal.


<R05>
Sec. 103.6  Size and draft limitations of vessels.

    (a) Definitions as used in this section:
    (1) TFW means Tropical Fresh Water of Gatun Lake, density .9954 gms/
cc at 85 deg.F. (Transition to fresh water frequently alters the trim of 
large vessels 3'' to 4'' by the head.)
    (2) Published TFW maximum draft means the deepest point of immersion 
in Gatun Lake waters as promulgated by the Marine Director, taking into 
account the water level of Gatun Lake and other limitations deemed 
necessary because of restrictions in the Canal.
    (3) Maximum authorized transit draft means the deepest point of 
immersion in TFW of a particular vessel authorized at anytime, Gatun 
Lake level and Canal restrictions permitting.
    (4) Commercial vessel means a self-propelled vessel, other than a 
naval, military or other public vessel.
    (5) Integrated tug-barge combination means a barge that is 
specifically configured to receive a tugboat and with the tug, becomes, 
in effect, a single self-propelled unit.
    (6) Non-self-propelled vessel means a vessel which either does not 
have an installed means of propulsion, or has an installed means of 
propulsion which is not functioning during transit.
    (7) Barge means a flat-bottomed vessel of full body and heavy 
construction without installed means of propulsion.
    (b) Maximum authorized transit draft of vessels with draft in excess 
of 35 feet, six inches.
    (1) Prior to the initial transit of a vessel whose transit draft 
will exceed 35 feet, six inches, owners, operators, or agents must 
supply in full the information required in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section and request the maximum authorized transit draft for the vessel 
(deepest point of immersion TFW) from the Canal Operations Captain or 
his designee, no later than two weeks prior to loading of the vessel. 
This request will be returned with the approved maximum authorized 
transit draft stamped thereon.
    (2) The information required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
shall be submitted in the following format:

  Information Needed Prior to Initial Transit Through the Panama Canal

                            Bilge Information

    Name of vessel -------------------- Date ------
    Authorized Tropical Fresh Water Load Line ------
    Admeasurer ------------ Certified as Correct ------
                                  [Master-Owners--Agents]
    (1) ``A''--Half breadth of vessel to the outside of shell ----------
--
    (2) ``R''--Radius of turn of bilge (Feet & Inches) ------------
    (3) ``DR''--Dead rise at side of vessel (Inches) ------------

[[Page 75]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.000


    Note: On an off-center lockage with the vessel touching the lock 
wall, the turn of the bilge will clear the lock-wall batters at the most 
critical point as shown in the Table of Limiting Drafts, paragraph 
(d)(3) of this section.
    (c) Draft during initial transit. The initial transit is permitted 
at the maximum authorized transit draft. After the initial transit, 
unless the vessel's agent or owner is notified of any restrictions 
imposed by Canal authorities, this maximum authorized transit draft will 
remain in effect.
    (d) Minimum transit drafts, measured in salt water--(1) All vessels 
transiting the Canal must have sufficient ballast to permit safe 
handling during transit. The following are minimum salt water drafts 
(TSW) for ships anticipating transit:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Length                           Minimum drafts       
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 425'................................  Trimmed so pilot can see the
                                             ranges over the forecastle 
                                             from center of navigation  
                                             bridge.                    
Over 425' but not more than 475.0'........  8' forward, 14' aft, TSW.   
Over 475' but not more than 525.0'........  18' forward, 20' aft, TSW.  
Over 525' but not more than 580.0'........  20' forward, 22' aft, TSW.  
Over 580' but not more than 625.0'........  22' forward, 24' aft, TSW.  
Over 625'.................................  24' forward, 26' aft, TSW.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) The vessel's drag must not adversely affect maneuverability.
    (3) The following table provides the limiting drafts due to bilge 
radius:

                     Table of Limiting Drafts Due To Bilge Radius Contacting Chamber Batters                    
                   [Allows for 6-inch thick rubber fenders on lock walls at batter locations]                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                         Radius of turn of bilge (feet)         
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
                                                                   1'        2'        3'        4'        5'   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0''...........................................................    35'8''    36'6''    37'4''    38'2''    39'0''
1''...........................................................    35'9''    35'7''    37'5''    38'3''    39'1''
2''...........................................................   35'10''    36'8''    37'6''    38'4''    39'2''
3''...........................................................   35'10''    36'8''    37'6''    38'5''    39'3''
4''...........................................................   35'11''    36'9''    37'7''    38'5''    39'3''
5''...........................................................    36'0''   36'10''    37'8''    38'6''    39'4''
6''...........................................................    36'1''   36'11''    37'9''    38'7''    39'5''
7''...........................................................    36'2''    37'0''   37'10''    38'8''    39'6''
8''...........................................................    36'3''    37'1''   37'11''   38'10''          
9''...........................................................    36'3''    37'1''    38'0''   38'10''          
10''..........................................................    36'4''    37'2''    38'0''   38'10''          
11''..........................................................    36'5''    37'3''    38'1''   38'11''          
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example: To find draft of ship having a radius-of-turn-of-bilge of 
4'4'' read across top of table to column headed 4' thence down column 
opposite 4 inches--Read 38'5''.
    Note: Dead Rise not included in above tabulations and must be added 
to above readings.

    (4) A vessel whose ballast draft does not meet the minimum draft 
requirements established by this section may be accepted for transit on 
a regular basis, provided the vessel operator requests permission and 
submits the following information to the Marine Bureau of the Panama 
Canal Commission: (i) Principal dimensions of the vessel;

[[Page 76]]

(ii) deepest attainable minimum draft (fore and aft); (iii) limitations 
on visibility fore and aft from the navigation bridge; (iv) necessary 
excerpts from the vessel's plans, drawings and maneuvering data that 
relate to the vessel's suitability for transit.
    (5) The vessel will be inspected by the Canal authorities upon its 
first visit after such a request is made. If the vessel is acceptable 
for transit at less than the prescribed minimum draft, the operator will 
be notified that transit on a regular basis is authorized provided the 
vessel meets the special minimum draft that is specified in the notice.
    (6) If the vessel is found not to be acceptable for transit on a 
regular basis, a single transit may be authorized, at the discretion of 
the Canal authorities, subject to the imposition of any special 
conditions that may be required for reasons of safety or continuance of 
regular Canal operations.
    (e) Maximum length. (1) The maximum length overall, including 
bulbous bow, for a commercial vessel acceptable for regular transit is 
950.0 feet, except passenger and container ships, which may be 965.0 
feet in overall length. In order to insure a safe passage, vessels 
exceeding 900.0 feet in overall length, which are transiting the Canal 
for the first time or are newly-modified or newly-constructed vessels, 
are subject to denial of passage pursuant to Sec. 103.2 and to the 
requirement of prior Commission review and approval of vessel plans in 
accordance with Canal regulations.
    (2) The maximum length for integrated tug-barge combination 
acceptable for regular transit is 900.0 feet overall, including the tug. 
A tug-barge combination must transit together as one unit, with the tug 
supplying the propelling power.
    (3) The maximum aggregate overall length for non-self-propelled 
vessels acceptable for transit is 850.0 feet, including accompanying 
tugs. Accompanying tugs must lock through with the non-self-propelled 
vessel.
    (f) Maximum beam--(1) The maximum extreme beam for a commercial 
vessel and the integrated tug-barge combination acceptable for regular 
transit is 106.0 feet.
    (2) In the discretion of the Canal Operations Captain or his 
designee, commercial vessels, including integrated tug-barge 
combinations, having an extreme beam of between 106.0 and 107.0 feet may 
be permitted to transit on a one-time basis only if the deepest point of 
immersion does not exceed 37.0 feet TFW.
    (3) The maximum extreme beam for non-self-propelled vessels (other 
than integrated tug-barge combinations) acceptable for transit is 100.0 
feet.
    (g) Previous approvals and one-time transits. Vessels approved for 
regular transit prior to December 20, 1976 whose maximum length or beam 
slightly exceed the limits set forth in paragraphs (e) and (f) may 
continue to transit on a regular basis. After that date, approval will 
not be given for transit of other commercial vessels whose extreme beam 
exceeds 106.0 feet by any amount, except for vessels transiting on a 
one-time delivery basis.
    (h) Release from liability. If a vessel having a beam in excess of 
106.0 feet is permitted to transit on a one-time basis, such vessel may 
do so only at its own risk and, to the extent and in proportion that 
such failure to meet the requirements of this section proximately causes 
or contributes to a casualty and resulting damages, the Master of such 
vessel, on behalf of said vessel, her owners, operators, or any other 
person having an interest in her, and for himself, will be considerd to 
have released the Panama Canal Commission and the United States from, 
and to have indemnified them against, any loss, damage or liability 
incurred by the Panama Canal Commission or the United States under, or 
in respect to:
    (1) Sections 1411 through 1416, inclusive, of Pub. L. 96-70, 93 
Stat. 485-87;
    (2) Property of the Panama Canal Commission or the United States; 
and
    (3) Panama Canal Commission employees under the Federal Employees' 
Compensation Act 5 U.S.C. 8101, et seq., or any other employee 
compensation system.

The Master of the vessel that fails to meet the requirements of this 
section may be required to execute, in the presence of a Commission 
official, a form undertaking to release the Panama Canal Commission and 
the United

[[Page 77]]

States from liability in case of an accident and to indemnify the 
Commission and the United States for any damages sustained. The failure 
of the Master of a vessel to sign such a form, however, will not relieve 
the vessel, her owners, or any other person having an interest in her 
from liability incurred as a result of the vessel's failure to meet the 
requirements of this section.
    (i) Denial of transit. A vessel shall not be permitted to transit 
the Canal under the following circumstances:
    (1) When the vessel's maximum point of immersion exceeds its maximum 
authorized draft;
    (2) When the vessel's maximum point of immersion exceeds the 
published FW maximum draft then in effect;
    (3) When the length overall, including bulbous bow, exceeds that 
stated in paragraph (e) of this section, unless the vessel was approved 
for regular transit prior to March 16, 1981; or
    (4) When the extreme beam exceeds that stated in paragraph (f) of 
this section by any amount, unless the vessel was approved for regular 
transit prior to March 10, 1981.
    (j) General. (1) Vessels of 100.0 feet beam and over whose list, 
trim or handling characteristics are such as to endanger themselves, 
Panama Canal appurtenances or a third party, may have such further 
limitations placed on them as Canal authorities deem necessary to insure 
reasonable safety.
    (2) The draft of non-self-propelled barges of 550.0 feet or more in 
length may be limited when, in the opinion of Canal authorities, such a 
limit is necessary to insure reasonable safety.
    (3) Non-self-propelled vessels, other than integrated tug-barge 
combinations, will be accepted only on an individual basis; advance 
permission for initial transit as a non-self-propelled vessel is 
required. Displacement of these vessels is limited to 35,000 tons and 
the draft requirements of paragraph (d) of this section are applicable. 
Riding crews must be provided in sufficient numbers, as required by the 
Canal Operations Captain, to safely handle towboat lines and boarding 
ladders, and to assist in mooring.
    (4) The numerous constraints affecting the transit schedules of 
vessels and tows make it important that information provided in advance 
of the initial transit of a vessel include a capacity plan, general 
arrangement plans, engine room plans, and whenever possible, a 
photostatic copy of national register, load line certificate and Panama 
Canal tonnage certificate. This advance information will minimize the 
time spent aboard the vessel by Panama Canal officials before 
commencement of the initial transit.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[46 FR 63176, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982, as amended at 50 
FR 26991, July 1, 1985; 53 FR 12517, Apr. 15, 1988; 55 FR 11908, Mar. 
30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 103.7  Authority to deny transit.

    A vessel's transit may be denied until, in the opinion of the Canal 
authorities, its tenderness, trim, list, draft, cargo, hull, machinery, 
and equipment have been put into such condition as will make the vessel 
safe for her passage through the Canal. No claim shall be allowed or 
considered because of any such delay.

[54 FR 43962, Oct. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 103.10   Vessels required to be equipped with certain indicators.

    (a) All vessels in excess of 150 feet in length shall be equipped 
with properly operating rudder-angle and engine-revolution indicators in 
the wheelhouse so located and illuminated as to be readily visible to a 
pilot.
    (b) All vessels with beams in excess of 80 feet shall be equipped 
with properly operating rudder-angle and engine-revolution indicators in 
the wheelhouse and on each bridge wing so located and illuminated as to 
be readily visible to a pilot.
    (c) All vessels in excess of 150 feet in length which are equipped 
with variable pitch propellers shall have properly operating pitch 
indicators in the wheelhouse so located and illuminated as to be readily 
visible to a pilot.
    (d) All vessels with beams in excess of 80 feet which are equipped 
with variable pitch propellers shall have properly operating pitch 
indicators in the wheelhouse and on each bridge wing so located and 
illuminated as to be readily visible to a pilot.

[[Page 78]]

    (e) Any vessel which fails to meet the requirements of this section 
may be denied transit. If the Canal authorities decide that a vessel can 
be handled without undue danger to equipment or to personnel, 
notwithstanding her failure to comply with other requirements of this 
section, and permit her to transit, such vessel may do so only at its 
own risk and, to the extent and in the proportion that such failure to 
meet the requirements of this section proximately causes or contributes 
to a casualty and resulting damages, the Master of such vessel, on 
behalf of said vessel, her owners, operators or any other persons having 
any interest in her, and for himself, will be considered to have 
released the Panama Canal Commission and the United States from, and to 
have indemnified them against, any loss, damage or liability incurred by 
Panama Canal Commission or the United States under, or in respect to:
    (1) Sections 1411 through 1416, inclusive, of Pub. L. 96-70, 93 
Stat. 485-87;
    (2) Property of the Panama Canal Commission or the United States; 
and
    (3) Panama Canal Commission employees under the Federal Employees' 
Compensation Act, 5 U.S.C. 8101, et seq., or any other employee 
compensation system.

The Master of the vessel that fails to meet the requirements of this 
section may be required to execute, in the presence of a Commission 
official, a form undertaking to release the Panama Canal Commission and 
the United States from liability in case of an accident and to indemnify 
the Commission and the United States for damages sustained. The failure 
of the Master of a vessel to sign such a form, however, will not relieve 
the vessel, her owners, or any other person having an interest in her 
from liability incurred as a result of vessel's failure to meet the 
requirements of this section.

[40 FR 8348, Feb. 27, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 21775, May 28, 1976; 46 
FR 63179, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 103.11   Vessels without mechanical signal system to engine room subject to delay in transiting.

    (a) A vessel that is not equipped with a properly operating 
mechanical system of signals between the pilot house and the engine 
room, as recommended under paragraph (b) of this section, is subject to 
delay in transiting to the extent the Canal authorities deem necessary 
or appropriate in order to minimize, in the light of the type and volume 
of Canal traffic and of other factors relating to the safety of Canal 
operations, the increased hazards of navigation resulting from failure 
of the vessel to be so equipped.
    (b) It is recommended that every vessel have a mechanical system of 
signals between the pilot house and the engine room. Any such system 
should return the engine order to the pilot house. If the signal system 
is by bells the vessel should have a tube, of proper size, so arranged 
as to return the sound of the bell signals to the pilot house, and 
should also be provided with a speaking tube or other device for the 
purpose of conversation between the pilot house and engine room. If the 
signal system is by engine room telegraph it should be capable of 
repeating the order back to the pilot house.

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 103.12  Discharge of firearms.

    No firearms of any kind may be discharged from vessels while in 
Canal waters, except that authorized salutes by vessels of war will be 
permitted by prior arrangement with Canal authorities.


<R05>
Sec. 103.13  Firing of salutes.

    Vessels of war may not fire salutes while at a Commission dock, in 
the locks, or in Gaillard Cut.


<R05>
Sec. 103.14  Colors and house flags.

    During daylight, vessels in Canal waters shall display their colors 
and house flags.


<R05>
Sec. 103.15  Boarding vessels at anchor or underway.

    Except for members of the Canal boarding party, pilots, Republic of 
Panama boarding officials, and agents, in the performance of their 
official duties, and such other persons as may be authorized by Canal 
authorities, no person, with or without the consent of the Master, may 
board a vessel at anchor or underway in the Canal waters.

[[Page 79]]


<R05>
Sec. 103.16  Meals to be furnished by vessel in certain cases.

    Vessels shall furnish meals to Panama Canal pilots without charge 
during the ship's regular meal hours and shall furnish a meal to the 
pilot between 2200 hours and 0400 hours if the vessel is transiting the 
Canal during such hours. In addition, vessels shall provide meals 
without charge during the ship's regular meal hours to any other Panama 
Canal Commission personnel, other than linehandlers, whose assignment 
will require them to be aboard the vessel for four or more hours. If a 
vessel is unable to furnish such meals, they may be furnished by the 
Panama Canal Commission at the expense of the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 103.17   Boat for handling lines.

    A vessel shall keep at least one boat ready for lowering, for the 
purpose of handling lines.

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 103.18  Pilot ladders, hoists and side ports.

    (a) A vessel shall, weather permitting, have both an accommodation 
ladder and a pilot ladder rigged and ready for use upon arrival in Canal 
waters.
    (b) The pilot ladder shall be constructed and rigged in accordance 
with Regulation 17, Chapter V, International Convention for Safety of 
Life at Sea, 1974, TIAS 9700, except that:
    (c) When the distance from the water line to the point of access of 
the vessel exceeds nine meters or 30 feet, a combination pilot ladder 
and short brow accommodation ladder must be provided for boarding 
purposes.
    (d) A mechanical pilot hoist may be used for boarding officials and 
pilots only at their discretion, and provided that the design and 
construction of the hoist and ancillary equipment are in accordance with 
Regulation 17, Chapter V, International Convention for Safety of Life at 
Sea, 1974.
    (e) When a mechanical pilot hoist is used, a ring buoy fitted with a 
lifeline and self-igniting light shall be available and ready for 
immediate use. The pilot ladder required by Sec. 103.18(a) shall be in 
close proximity to the pilot hoist, ready for immediate use but lashed 
up so as not to interfere with the pilot hoist.
    (f) When the side ports are used for boarding, the minimum vertical 
distance between the waterline and the bottom of the side port at any 
draft shall be six feet.


<R05>
Sec. 103.19  Requirement for pilot shelter platforms.

    (a) Any vessel that, in accordance with Panama Canal operation 
standards, is required to have three or more pilots aboard, shall 
provide suitable pilot shelter platforms for the assisting pilots. The 
purpose for the pilot platforms is to provide shelters from sun and rain 
for pilots working near the bow or the stern of a vessel and to provide 
adequate visibility around the locks in order to reduce the danger of 
damage. In general, this bow/stern pilot shelter platforms are required 
on ships of 190.5 meters (625 feet) or more in length and a beam of 30.5 
meters (100 feet) or greater. They may also be required on certain 
smaller ships that the Marine Director or his designated representative 
determine require three or more pilots. Those vessels requiring shelters 
shall provide them for use no later than six months from the effective 
date of the final rule.
    (b) The following is a sketch of a simplified pilot platform which 
is acceptable to the Panama Canal Commission:

[[Page 80]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.001


    (c) Each platform is to be erected over the furthest forward point 
of the extreme beam at the waterline and not more than six inches from 
the vertical plane of shell plating. For vessels of unorthodox design 
requiring aft platforms, they shall be erected at a position which is 
approximately over the aftermost point of extreme beam at the waterline 
and not more than six inches inboard from the vertical plane of shell 
plating.
    (d) In addition to the pilot shelter platforms required by paragraph 
(a) of this section for assisting pilots, all vessels whose extreme beam 
is 24.4 meters (80 feet) or more, are required to provide bridge wing 
shelters for the protection of control pilots. The following is a sketch 
of a bridge wing shelter that is acceptable to the Panama Canal 
Commission. Alternate arrangements, including portable shelters, which 
provide equivalent or better protection and visibility may be 
acceptable.

[[Page 81]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.002



[[Page 82]]

    (e) The purpose of the bridge wing shelter is to provide protection 
for pilots from sun and rain, while allowing maximum visibility around 
the locks. On vessels that have a raised conning station at the edge of 
the bridge wing more than 30 centimeters (1 foot) above the deck level, 
the height of the awning should be raised accordingly. Awnings are to 
extend at least 1.52 meters (5 feet) inboard from the outboard edge of 
the bridge wing. Similarly, their fore-and-aft dimension is to be at 
least 1.52 meters (5 feet), extending aft from the forward part of the 
bridge wing. If ship control equipment (engine, rudder or thruster 
controls, etc.) are located on the bridge wings, these shelters must 
also extend at least one foot beyond such equipment but must not extend 
beyond the outboard edge of the bridge wing.
    (f) The awnings indicated in the sketches in paragraphs (b) and (d) 
of this section are to be made of suitable material to provide shelter 
from sun and rain. The decks of the pilot shelter platforms are to be 
made of wood or other material with a non-skid surface.

[46 FR 63176, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 54 FR 43962, Oct. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 103.20  Disabling of engines.

    Except when specifically authorized by the Canal authorities, no 
vessel at any dock or mooring within Canal waters shall have its engines 
disabled or otherwise rendered inoperative.


<R05>
Sec. 103.21  Precautions against emission of sparks, smoke or noxious gases.

    Vessels in Canal waters shall take all necessary precautions to 
avoid the issuance of sparks, excessive smoke, or noxious gases.


<R05>
Sec. 103.25  Fishing or placing of nets or other obstructions prohibited.

    No fishing nets or other obstructions shall be placed in any of the 
navigable waters of the Panama Canal. Fishing boats shall not anchor for 
the purpose of fishing nor haul nets or trawls in the anchorages or 
navigable channels of the Canal. Fishing from small craft in the 
anchorages or navigable channels of the Canal is prohibited.


<R05>
Sec. 103.26  Obstructions not to be placed across channels or anchorages.

    No line, pipe, or other obstruction shall be passed across any 
channel or anchorage so as to obstruct the passage of vessels.


<R05>
Sec. 103.27  Clear view forward from the bridge and steering light requirement for certain vessels.

    (a) A vessel may not be navigated in Canal waters unless there is a 
clear, unobstructed view from the bridge.
    (b) All vessels over 100 meters (328 feet) in length shall have 
installed, at or near the stem, a steering range equipped with a fixed 
blue light which shall be clearly visible from the bridge along the 
centerline. If said range and light so placed would be partially or 
completely obstructed, then two such ranges and lights must be installed 
at an equal distance from the centerline and shall be clearly visible 
from the bridge along lines parallel to the keel.
    (c) Naval or military vessels exempted from the requirements of Part 
111 of this chapter shall also be exempt from the requirements of 
paragraphs (b), (d), and (e) of this section.
    (d) The light required by this section shall be capable of being 
illuminated and extinguished by a suitable control switch located either 
on the navigation bridge or on the forecastle deck, or both.
    (e) The use of this steering light shall be at the discretion of the 
Panama Canal pilot who has control of the navigation and movement of the 
vessel.
    (f) This section will be effective January 1, 1971.

[35 FR 12274, July 31, 1970, as amended at 46 FR 63181, Dec. 30, 1981; 
48 FR 6709, Feb. 15, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 103.28  Towing of certain vessels required.

    A vessel arriving at an entrance to the Canal and having a mean 
draft in excess of that allowed under the Load Line Regulations for the 
tropical zone, applicable for the voyage on which the vessel is engaged, 
as determined by the American Bureau of Shipping, Lloyd's Register or 
other acceptable certifying agency, is required to take the services of 
a Panama Canal tug or tugs from the Pacific entrance Channel Buoys 1

[[Page 83]]

and 2 to Gamboa Reach, from the north end of Gatun Locks to Buoy 3 in 
the Atlantic harbor, and vice versa. However, in the instances where the 
overdraft is negligible, the assignment of a tug or tugs may be waived 
at the discretion of the Canal Operations Captain or his designee. Any 
vessel without mechanical motive power, or the machinery of which is or 
becomes disabled, or which steers badly, or which is liable to become 
unmanageable for any reason, shall be towed through the Canal. The Canal 
authorities may require any vessel to take a tug or tugs through 
Gaillard Cut, in the approaches to the locks, or in any other part of 
the Canal, when in their judgment such action is necessary to insure 
reasonable safety to the vessel or to the Canal and its appurtenances. 
The tug service in any of these cases shall be chargeable to the vessel. 
The Master of a vessel which steers badly, or which is liable to become 
unmanageable for any reason, shall report such fact and request the 
services of a tug.

[46 FR 63176, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 11908, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 103.29  Anchoring in Panama Canal waters.

    No vessel shall anchor within the navigable waters of the Canal in 
other than a designated anchorage, except in an emergency, and no craft 
shall tie up to any aid-to-navigation in Canal waters.


<R05>
Sec. 103.30  Requirements for all dead tows.

    (a) Preparation for transit--(1) Upon arrival, the tug will break up 
the tow and secure the bridle so that no part of it extends below the 
surface of the water.
    (2) Tows shall have the capability of anchoring.
    (3) Tows will be inspected before being scheduled for transit.
    (4) Agents, operators and owners will be responsible for making any 
required alterations or additions to equipment or stowage.
    (5) Boarding facilities will comply with Regulation 17, Chapter V, 
International Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, TIAS 9700. 
There must be a clear passage, free of obstructions, from the boarding 
facility to all working areas, otherwise, catwalks with handrails and 
steps must be provided.
    (6) The working area near chocks and bitts on all dead tows must be 
clear of obstructions and fitted with safety rails or lines at the 
vessel's sides.
    (b) Transit requirements--(1) Tows must provide a pilot shelter with 
a clear view forward, on the center line, approximately midway between 
the bow and stern. This shelter may be permanent or portable, but must 
protect the pilot from the elements. All tows with a beam in excess of 
79.9 feet shall provide, in addition to the center line shelter, pilot 
shelters at the extreme beams from which the pilots may readily view the 
vessel's sides.
    (2) Dead tows must be equipped with the chocks and bitts as set 
forth in Sec. 109.6 of this chapter.
    (3) Tows must provide mooring and heaving lines and have mooring 
arrangements, and bitts or cleats for securing tugs that do not 
interfere with those chocks and bitts required for locomotive wires.
    (4) All barges will be fitted so that a pusher tug can be secured 
with its stem held firmly to the center line of the barge. Pushing tugs 
are to be equipped with wire cable snubbers and springs.
    (5) All barges will be required to have portable toilets on board 
prior to departure for transit.


<R05>
Sec. 103.32  Engine orders to be recorded.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, every 
power-driven vessel over 250 feet in length, while navigating in Panama 
Canal waters under the control of a Panama Canal pilot, shall maintain a 
bridge bell book and an engine room bell book. The bridge bell book 
shall consist of a contemporaneous record of each engine order and the 
time it is transmitted from the bridge to the engine room. The engine 
room bell book shall consist of a contemporaneous record of each engine 
order and the time it is received in the engine room.
    (b) No vessel is required to maintain any bell books if equipped 
with a serviceable automatic device which produces a permanent, legible 
record of every engine order transmitted from

[[Page 84]]

the bridge and the time of every transmission, plus the response and 
time of the response of the engine room to the engine order.
    (c) The bell books and automatic recording referred to in paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of this section, the record of an automatic course recording 
device, if one is available, and any log books must be surrendered, upon 
request, to the pilot or to the Board of Local Inspectors or other Canal 
authorities for the purpose of inspection and reproduction.
(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)
[41 FR 21776, May 28, 1976, as amended at 46 FR 63181, Dec. 30, 1981; 50 
FR 26991, July 1, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 103.33   Navigation in Gaillard Cut.

    No vessel other than a vessel transiting the Canal shall navigate in 
Gaillard Cut except with the express prior approval of the Canal 
authorities.
[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 103.34  Same; control by Canal Operations Captain.

    The movement of vessels in Gaillard Cut shall be regulated by the 
Canal Operations Captain through Marine Traffic Control, or by such 
other persons and through such other stations or facilities as the Canal 
authorities may designate.
[46 FR 63176, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 11908, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 103.39   Arrow signals; locks.

    Choice between east and west chambers shall be made by the Locks 
Superintendent. Pilots shall stand toward the chamber indicated and 
shall comply with the arrow signal unless unsafe to do so.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.003

           Not ready; lockage cannot take place for some time
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.004

 Not ready; stand off well clear of lock, prepared to approach on signal
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.005

Locks making preparation, probably be ready in 10 minutes or less; you 
may approach with caution, prepared to tie up or enter on right-hand 
side on signal
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.006

Locks making preparation, probably be ready in 10 minutes or less; you 
may approach with caution, prepared to tie up or enter on left-hand side 
on signal
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.007

           Moor to approach wall near chain on right-hand side
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.008

           Moor to approach wall near chain on left-hand side
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.009

                          Enter right-hand side
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02NO91.010

                          Enter left-hand side

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966]

[[Page 85]]


<R05>
Sec. 103.40   Transit schedules; pennants.

    (a) When a pilot is assigned to a ship for northbound or southbound 
canal transit he shall be given a schedule number and the expected time 
of arrival at south end of Miraflores Locks or at north end of Gatun 
Locks.
    (b) Northbound ships shall fly ``H'' under International numeral 
pennant corresponding to schedule assigned.
    Southbound ships shall fly ``H'' over International numeral pennant 
corresponding to schedule assigned.

In addition: Preference ships shall fly ``Z'' (blue light at night); 
hazardous cargo will fly ``B'' (red light at night).
    (c) Ships maneuvering in Canal waters with pilot on board shall fly 
``H''.

[31 FR 12289, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 103.41  Ships to display schedule number.

    Each ship shall display throughout her transit, the flag or flags 
designating the schedule number on which it is running.


<R05>
Sec. 103.42   Maneuvering characteristics; data required.

    (a) Each vessel of 1,600 gross tons or over shall have the following 
maneuvering information prominently displayed in the wheelhouse on a 
fact sheet:
    (1) For full and half speed, a turning circle diagram to port and 
starboard that shows the time and the distance of advance and transfer 
required to alter the course 90 degrees with maximum rudder angle and 
constant power settings.
    (2) The time and distance required to stop the vessel from full and 
half speed while maintaining approximately the initial heading with 
minimum application of rudder.
    (3) For each vessel with a fixed propeller, a table of shaft 
revolutions per minute for a representative range of speeds.
    (4) For each vessel with a controllable pitch propeller, a table of 
control settings for a representative range of speeds.
    (5) For each vessel that is fitted with an auxiliary device to 
assist in maneuvering, such as a bow thruster, a table of vessel speeds 
at which the auxiliary device is effective in maneuvering the vessel.
    (b) For tankships, the maneuvering information referred to in 
paragraph (a) of this section shall be provided for the normal load and 
normal ballast condition. For all other vessels, it shall be provided 
for the normal load and normal light condition with normal trim for a 
particular condition of loading. All the maneuvering information for all 
vessels which must be provided is to be based on the following:
    (1) Calm weather--wind 10 knots or less, calm sea;
    (2) No current;
    (3) Deep water conditions--water depth twice the vessel's draft or 
greater; and
    (4) Clean hull.
    (c) The information on the fact sheet shall be:
    (1) Verified six months after the vessel is placed into service; or
    (2) Modified six months after the vessel is placed into service and 
verified within three months thereafter.
    (d) The information that appears on the fact sheet may be obtained 
from:
    (1) Trial trip observations;
    (2) Model tests;
    (3) Analytical calculations;
    (4) Simulations;
    (5) Information established from another vessel of similar hull 
form, power, rudder and propeller; or
    (6) Any combination of the above.

The accuracy of the information in the fact sheet required is that 
attainable by ordinary shipboard navigation equipment.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[41 FR 21776, May 28, 1976. Redesignated at 46 FR 63182, Dec. 30, 1981, 
and amended at 50 FR 26991, July 1, 1985]


<R03>
PART 104--VESSEL TRANSIT RESERVATION SYSTEM--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
104.1   Applicability and scope.
104.2   Definitions.
104.3   Booking periods; allocation of booking slots.

[[Page 86]]

104.4   Booked transits.
104.5   Passenger vessel preference.
104.6   Booking fees.
104.7   Penalties.
104.8   Re-scheduling.
104.9   Cancellations.
104.10  Regular transits.
104.11  Temporary suspension of system.
104.12  Further implementation.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3811.

    Source: 62 FR 18276, Apr. 15, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 104.1  Applicability and scope.

    Subject to the limitations imposed by Article III of the 1901 Treaty 
to Facilitate the Construction of a Ship Canal, entered into by the 
United States and Great Britain, and by Articles II and VI of the 1977 
Treaty concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama 
Canal, between the United States and the Republic of Panama, Canal 
authorities have implemented a vessel transit reservation system that 
allows vessels desiring transit of the Panama Canal to reserve transit 
slots by complying with the provisions of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 104.2  Definitions.

    (a) Booked for transit means that a vessel, in advance of arriving 
at the Canal, has been assigned a specific date by Canal authorities on 
which it will be moved through the Canal and that the vessel has 
otherwise complied with the provisions of this part.
    (b) Regular transit means movement through the Canal of a vessel 
that has not been booked for transit.
    (c) Required arrival time means the date and the hour of the day 
established by Canal authorities as the deadline by which a vessel 
booked for transit must arrive at a terminus of the Canal in order to 
transit on its reserved transit date.


<R05>
Sec. 104.3  Booking periods; allocation of booking slots.

    (a) Vessel agents only may request reserved transit slots for 
vessels during the following booking periods:
    (1) First period--365 to 22 days prior to the requested transit 
date.
    (2) Second period--21 days to 4 days prior to the requested transit 
date.
    (3) Third period--3 to 2 days prior to the requested transit date.
    (b) A total of 21 reserved transit slots will be made available for 
all three booking periods, allocation of which among the booking periods 
is to be determined by Canal authorities. Canal authorities, from time 
to time, may adjust the total number of available reserved transit slots 
to ensure continued safe and efficient operation of the Canal.


<R05>
Sec. 104.4  Booked transits.

    (a) The specific order vessels transit the Canal, whether booked or 
regular transits, shall be determined by Canal authorities. Except as 
provided in this part, a vessel booked for transit may not transit prior 
to its reserved transit date, unless Canal authorities determine that 
assigning the vessel an earlier transit slot would not impair safe and 
efficient operation of the Canal.
    (b) Notwithstanding any subsequent assignment of an earlier transit 
slot, a vessel booked for transit will be charged the prescribed booking 
fee.
    (c) Substitution of reserved transit slots between or among vessels 
booked for transit will be permitted only on conditions specified by 
Canal authorities.


<R05>
Sec. 104.5  Passenger vessel preference.

    To the extent consistent with efficient operation of the Canal, and 
subject to being booked for transit, commercial passenger vessels 
running on fixed published schedules will be given preference over other 
vessels in transiting, as determined by Canal authorities.


<R05>
Sec. 104.6  Booking fees.

    (a) The booking fee for reserving a transit slot for a vessel 
measured in accordance with Sec. 135.13(a) of this chapter, shall be 
$0.26 per PC/UMS Net Ton.
    (b) The booking fee for reserving a transit slot for a vessel 
subject to transitional relief measures and measured in accordance with 
Sec. 135.13(b) of this chapter, shall be $0.23 per Panama Canal Gross 
Ton, as specified on the last tonnage certificate issued to the vessel 
by Canal authorities between March 23, 1976 and September 30, 1994, 
inclusive.
    (c) Notwithstanding any contrary provision, whenever the total 
number

[[Page 87]]

of vessels awaiting transit at both terminuses of the Canal is projected 
by Canal authorities to be, within 48-hours, 90 or more vessels, any 
vessel booked for transit that transits the Canal while this condition 
is in effect shall automatically be assessed a booking fee of $0.69 per 
PC/UMS Net Ton.
    (d) Notwithstanding any contrary provision, the minimum booking fee 
for any vessel booked for transit shall be $1500.


<R05>
Sec. 104.7  Penalties.

    (a) The reserved transit slot of a vessel booked for transit will be 
cancelled by Canal authorities and a penalty fee assessed in a sum that 
is the greater of the prescribed booking fee or $1,500, in the following 
situations:
    (1) When a vessel that is subject to transit restrictions (e.g., 
clear cut, clear-cut daylight) has been booked for transit and does not 
arrive at a terminus of the Canal by 0200 hours of the day of the 
scheduled transit;
    (2) When a vessel that is not subject to transit restrictions has 
been booked for transit and does not arrive at a terminus of the Canal 
by 1400 hours of the day of the scheduled transit; or
    (3) When a vessel booked for transit arrives on time but cannot or, 
at the vessel operator's election, does not transit as scheduled, 
despite the readiness of Canal authorities to proceed.
    (b) Canal authorities may waive assessment of a penalty fee if the 
vessel agent presents acceptable proof that late arrival of the vessel 
was due to a medical or humanitarian emergency arising during the 
voyage, or a naturally occurring, extraordinary phenomenon or event of 
major proportions that could not have been reasonably predicted in 
advance.
    (c) Failure of the vessel agent to provide complete and accurate 
information required by Canal authorities when requesting transit 
bookings may result in rejection of the booking request or cancellation 
of the vessel's reserved transit slot.
    (d) When a vessel's reserved transit slot is cancelled, and unless 
otherwise directed by the vessel agent, upon arrival, Canal authorities 
will re-schedule the vessel for regular transit.


<R05>
Sec. 104.8  Re-scheduling.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided, a vessel agent, without penalty, 
may request cancellation of a vessel's reserved transit slot and 
rescheduling of the vessel for regular transit or, alternatively, may 
request assignment of an alternate reserved transit slot, in the 
following situations:
    (1) If for whatever reason Canal authorities cancel or significantly 
delay the transit of a vessel booked for transit that is otherwise ready 
to proceed as scheduled;
    (2) If for whatever reason Canal authorities delay the transit of a 
vessel booked for transit to such a degree that the delay is likely to 
cause the vessel to be unable to meet its required arrival time for a 
later, second reserved transit, booked before the delay of the first 
reserved transit occurred; or
    (3) If a vessel is booked for transit on the assumption that the 
vessel will pay the booking fee prescribed by Sec. 104.6(a) or (b) but, 
subsequently, a change in traffic conditions occurs triggering the 
higher booking fee prescribed by Sec. 104.6(c).
    (b) A vessel booked for transit will be deemed to have transited the 
Canal on its reserved transit date if the vessel arrives at the first 
set of locks at either terminus of the Canal prior to 2400 hours that 
day and its in-transit time (ITT) is 18 hours or less. ITT begins when 
the vessel enters the first set of locks at either Canal terminus and 
ends when the vessel departs the last set of locks at the opposite 
terminus. No booking fee will be charged if ITT, through no fault of the 
vessel, exceeds 18 hours.


<R05>
Sec. 104.9  Cancellations.

    (a) A vessel agent may cancel the transit reservation of a vessel by 
giving notice prescribed by Canal authorities. In such event, and except 
as otherwise provided, a cancellation fee will be charged. The amount of 
the fee will depend on the amount of notice (days or hours) received by 
Canal authorities in advance of the vessel's required arrival time, 
according to the following schedule:

[[Page 88]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Cancellation fee  (the   
          Advance notice  periods                    greater of)        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
31 days or more...........................  None                        
30 to 11 days.............................  20% of booking fee or $500  
10 to 7 days..............................  40% of booking fee or $750  
6 to 2 days...............................  60% of booking fee or $1,000
1 day to 8 hours..........................  80% of booking fee or $1,200
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Receipt of notice of cancellation of a transit reservation by 
Canal authorities after the vessel's required arrival time will result 
in levy of a cancellation fee equal to the entire prescribed booking 
fee.


<R05>
Sec. 104.10  Regular transits.

    Vessels not booked for transit will be scheduled for movement 
through the Canal on the date and in the order determined by Canal 
authorities. In establishing the daily schedule of vessels to be moved 
through the Canal, the order in which vessels arrive is only one of 
several considerations. In general, regular transits will equal or 
exceed in number, one-half the total number of daily vessel transits.


<R05>
Sec. 104.11  Temporary suspension of system.

    (a) Canal authorities may temporarily suspend, in whole or in part, 
for whatever period of time deemed necessary, the vessel transit 
reservation system established by this part, whenever Canal authorities 
determine that such action is necessary to ensure continued safe and 
efficient operation of the Canal.
    (b) No penalty or fee shall be levied against any vessel booked for 
transit whose reserved transit slot is cancelled by reason of a 
temporary suspension of the system pursuant to this section.


<R05>
Sec. 104.12  Further implementation.

    (a) In order to ensure safe and efficient operation of the system, 
Canal authorities may establish additional policies and procedures, 
define additional terms and issue clarifications and interpretations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this part, which will be published 
and distributed periodically to Canal customers through notices to 
shipping or other appropriate means.
    (b) In the event any provision of this part conflicts with any 
implementation provision issued pursuant to this section, the provisions 
of this part shall govern.


<R03>
PART 105--PILOTAGE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
105.1  Pilots required.
105.2  Exemptions from compulsory pilotage.
105.3  Vessels in distress.
105.4  Pilotage charges.
105.5  Pilotage beyond Atlantic breakwater.
105.6  Status and function of pilot.
105.7  Status and function of transit advisor.

    Authority: Issued under authority of the President by 22 U.S.C. 
3811, E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 46 FR 63182, Dec. 30, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 105.1  Pilots required.

    (a) Except as provided by Secs. 105.2, 105.3, and 105.7 or by 
paragraph (c) of this section, no vessel shall pass through, enter or 
leave the Canal, or maneuver in the Canal or waters adjacent thereto, 
including the ports of Cristobal and Balboa, without having a Panama 
Canal pilot on board.
    (b) Normally a vessel will, unless advised to the contrary by the 
Canal Operations Captain or his designee, be boarded by the Panama Canal 
pilot inside the breakwater at a point north of the Mole Beacon at the 
Atlantic entrance and in the Merchant Vessel Anchorage to seaward of 
Buoys 1 and 2 at the Pacific entrance.
    (c) In conformity with past practice, vessels anchored in Anchorage 
Area C and Anchorage Area F, as shown in the Pilot Handbook, Limon Bay 
Chart, may proceed to sea without a Panama Canal Pilot on board. All 
such vessels, prior to getting under way, must obtain permission to 
depart from the Cristobal Signal Station.
    (d) Whenever the Administrator finds there is a critical shortage of 
certified Panama Canal pilots available for movement of vessels in Canal 
waters, he may suspend the rule on compulsory pilotage set out in 
paragraph (a) of this section. The Administrator shall impose such 
conditions upon the suspension of the rule, with respect to any given 
vessel, as are reasonable and appropriate to protect human life and

[[Page 89]]

property and to safeguard the facilities of the Panama Canal.

[46 FR 63182, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982, as amended at 51 
FR 36011, Oct. 8, 1986; 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 105.2  Exemptions from compulsory pilotage.

    The following vessels are exempt from compulsory pilotage, except 
when the Canal Operations Captain or his designee considers a pilot 
necessary; nevertheless a pilot will be furnished any such exempted 
vessel if requested by the commanding officer or Master thereof:
    (a) Local craft such as United States Army and United States Navy 
minesweepers, landing craft, patrol boats and tugs, and Panama Canal 
Commission tugs and equipment, except as limited by paragraph (c) of 
this section.
    (b) Any vessel that makes frequent calls to Canal waters and whose 
current officers and crew are, in the opinion of the Canal Operations 
Captain or his designee, capable, by reason of such frequent calls and 
otherwise, of safely navigating within Canal waters and are so 
certified, except as limited by paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Vessels and craft enumerated in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section may be permitted to transit the Canal without a pilot when, in 
the opinion of the Canal Operations Captain or his designee, the current 
officers and crew have the necessary experience and ability to make safe 
transit and such transit is specifically approved. Whenever any such 
vessel or craft makes transit without a pilot, the Canal Operations 
Captain or his designee shall dispatch it with a larger vessel carrying 
a pilot and it shall lock through with that vessel. The Canal Operations 
Captain or his designee shall control the movements of such vessel or 
craft through Gaillard Cut so as to minimize the danger of its being a 
navigational hazard to larger vessels.
    (d) Any other vessel or craft as and to the extent exempted by the 
Marine Director.

[46 FR 63182, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]

    Cross Reference: Vessels passing through locks without pilot aboard, 
in accordance with this section, to be under direction of Lockmaster, 
see Sec. 109.7(b).


<R05>
Sec. 105.3  Vessels in distress.

    A vessel in danger or distress is not prohibited from entering the 
waters of the Canal any time, but such vessel shall, when practicable, 
give due notice in advance, by radio or otherwise, and obtain a pilot, 
if possible. Such vessel shall, except in an emergency, anchor in the 
designated anchorage area.

    Cross Reference: Merchant-vessel anchorage, see Sec. 101.8.


<R05>
Sec. 105.4  Pilotage charges.

    Pilotage for vessels in transit through the canal is free, but 
whenever any vessel requires a pilot for other than transit, it is 
liable for the applicable pilotage charge.


<R05>
Sec. 105.5   Pilotage beyond Atlantic breakwater.

    Should a vessel desire a pilot to meet it outside the Atlantic 
breakwaters, such vessel shall remain there and make signal to that 
effect.

[31 FR 12292, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 105.6   Status and function of pilot.

    The pilot assigned to a vessel shall have control of the navigation 
and movement of such vessel.

[31 FR 12292, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 105.7  Status and function of transit advisor.

    Vessels less than 20 meters in length, except those described in 
Sec. 105.2 (a) and (b), will be assigned a Panama Canal Commission 
transit advisor in lieu of a Panama Canal pilot. The transit advisor 
will function as an advisor, whose presence is necessary to provide 
comprehensive local knowledge of the Canal operating area and procedures 
for an efficient and safe transit.

[51 FR 36011, Oct. 8, 1986]


<R03>
PART 107--MANNING OF VESSELS: REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING OFFICERS AND CREW--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
107.1  Vessels to be fully manned.
107.2  Crew on watch.

[[Page 90]]

107.3  When Master and officers must be on bridge or at other regular 
          stations.
107.4  When Chief Engineer must be on duty; full head of steam to be 
          maintained.
107.5  When particular deck officers and seamen must be on duty.
107.6  Unauthorized persons not allowed on bridge.

    Authority: Issued under authority of the President by 22 U.S.C. 
3811; E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.


<R05>
Sec. 107.1  Vessels to be fully manned.

    (a) A vessel navigating the waters of the Canal shall be 
sufficiently manned in officers and crew to permit safe handling of the 
vessel.
    (b) If the nation of registry of a vessel has implemented the 
International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and 
Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978 (STCW), which is hereby incorporated by 
reference, the officers and crew shall meet the standards set forth 
therein. This Convention is contained in the International Maritime 
Organization publication number 938 78.15.E ``International Conference 
on Training and Certification of Seafarers, 1978.'' In the event that 
the nation of registry has not adopted the STCW, the certification 
required for officers and crew as required by the country of vessel 
registry shall be met.
    (c) The Canal authorities may deny transit of the Canal to any 
vessel which, in their opinion, is insufficiently manned as to officers 
and crew.

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.2  Crew on watch.

    (a) When under way in Canal waters, a vessel shall keep a full watch 
on deck and in the engine room. When approaching a lock, moored 
temporarily to a lock wall or when in a lock chamber, a vessel shall, 
when so requested by the pilot, have sufficient seamen forward and aft 
to handle lines expeditiously.
    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, when 
anchored, moored, or lying at a Panama Canal Commission pier a vessel 
shall at all times have on board at least one qualified deck officer, 
one qualified engineer officer familiar with the machinery and layout of 
the vessel, and sufficient crew to provide for the safety of the vessel.
    (c) The manning levels of Commission vessels shall be determined by 
the Marine Director or his designee.

[46 FR 63182, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 107.3   When Master and officers must be on bridge or at other regular stations.

    (a) When a vessel is entering or leaving a lock, docking or 
undocking, getting under way, anchoring, mooring or shifting berth, or 
is underway in Gaillard Cut, the Master shall be on the bridge and shall 
keep the Pilot informed concerning any individual peculiarities in the 
handling of the vessel so that the Pilot may be better able to control 
the navigation and movement of the vessel. All other officers shall be 
at their regular stations throughout the times and maneuvers described 
herein.
    (b) At all other times when a vessel is moving in Canal waters, the 
Master of the vessel, or his qualified representative, shall be present 
on the bridge and shall keep the pilot informed concerning the 
individual peculiarities in the handling of the vessel so that the pilot 
may be better able to control the navigation and movement of the vessel. 
All other officers shall be at their regular stations throughout the 
maneuvers described herein.
    (c) The Master, or his qualified representative, shall ensure at all 
times that the pilot's orders are promptly and properly carried out by 
the vessel's personnel.

[31 FR 12293, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 46 FR 63182, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 107.4   When Chief Engineer must be on duty; full head of steam to be maintained.

    (a) In addition to the regular engineer officer of the watch, the 
Chief Engineer of a vessel shall remain on duty in the engine room 
during the approach to, and while passing through, the locks and until 
the lockage is completed and the vessel is clear of the lock walls. The 
Chief Engineer shall also be on duty in the engine room while the vessel 
is passing through Gaillard Cut, docking or undocking,

[[Page 91]]

getting underway, anchoring, mooring, or shifting berth.
    (b) A full head of steam or full diesel power, as the case may be, 
shall be maintained at all times mentioned in paragraph (a) of this 
section. 

[31 FR 12293, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 107.5   When particular deck officers and seamen must be on duty.

    (a) When a vessel is getting underway, anchoring, mooring, or is 
underway in Gaillard Cut, a ship's officer shall stand by on the 
forecastle.
    (b) When a vessel is entering, in, or leaving a lock, docking or 
undocking, or shifting berth, a ship's officer shall stand by on the 
forecastle and a ship's officer shall also stand by on the stern.
    (c) Every vessel with a Panama Canal pilot aboard shall, in addition 
to meeting the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, 
have a seaman stationed on the forecastle who is capable of and ready to 
operate the ground tackle.

[31 FR 12293, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 41 FR 21777, May 28, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 107.6   Unauthorized persons not allowed on bridge.

    While a vessel is underway, no person shall be allowed on the bridge 
or in the pilot house except the pilot and other representative of the 
Panama Canal, and the Master and such officers and other members of the 
crew of the vessel as may be necessary for its navigation and control, 
management, operation and safety. 
[31 FR 12293, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R03>
PART 109--ENTERING AND PREPARING TO ENTER THE LOCKS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
109.1  Keeping persons clear of gear used in lockages.
109.2  Embarking or disembarking at locks.
109.3  Same; permits.
109.4  Locomotives; Canal deckhands.
109.5  Ship's gear to be ready during transit; test.
109.6  Construction, number, and location of chocks and bitts.
109.7  Passing through locks; use of towing locomotives and ship's 
          engines.

    Authority: Issued under authority vested in the President by sec. 
1801, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 492; EO 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 31 FR 12294, Sept. 16, 1966, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 109.1   Keeping persons clear of gear used in lockages.

    The master and officers of a vessel shall require all passengers and 
all other persons not engaged in working the vessel to keep well clear 
of lines, bitts, chocks, winches and other gear being used in connection 
with the lockage.


<R05>
Sec. 109.2   Embarking or disembarking at locks.

    Except when specially authorized by the Canal authorities, no person 
shall embark upon or disembark from a vessel while it is in a lock. The 
Canal authorities shall not be responsible for any injuries to persons 
or property or for damage to vessels which may result from the granting 
of such special permission.


<R05>
Sec. 109.3  Same; permits.

    Permits for embarking or disembarking at the locks may be issued in 
the discretion of the Marine Director or designee.

[55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 109.4   Locomotives; Canal deckhands.

    The Canal authorities are authorized to prescribe:
    (a) The number of towing locomotives and wires required in the locks 
by a transiting vessel, depending upon her length, beam, displacement, 
and special conditions; and
    (b) The number of Canal deckhands to be placed on board a transiting 
vessel to assist her crew in handling towing wires in the locks.


<R05>
Sec. 109.5   Ship's gear to be ready during transit; test.

    Before beginning transit of the Canal, a vessel shall have hawsers, 
lines and fenders ready for passing through the locks, for warping, 
towing, or mooring as the case may be; and shall have both anchors ready 
for letting go. The Master shall assure himself, by actual test, of the 
readiness of his vessel's main engines, steering

[[Page 92]]

gear, engine room telegraphs, whistle, rudder-angle and engine-
revolution indicators, and anchors. During the transit, at all times 
while a vessel is underway or moored against the lock walls, her deck 
winches, capstans, and other power equipment for handling lines, as well 
as her mooring bitts, chocks, cleats, hawse pipes, etc., shall be ready 
for handling the vessel, to the exclusion of all other work.


<R05>
Sec. 109.6  Construction, number, and location of chocks and bitts.

    (a) The Canal Operations Captain or designee is responsible for 
determining if vessels arriving for transit are properly equipped. That 
official is also responsible for the approval of new construction 
requirements concerning chocks and bitts which are utilized for 
locomotives and tugs, relay operations, tie-up operations, boarding 
facilities, and wheelhouse design features, including visibility 
factors.
    (b) All chocks for towing wires shall be of heavy closed 
construction and shall have a convex bearing surface with a radius of 
not less than seven inches (178 millimeters). The convex surface shall 
extend so that a wire from the bitt, or from the towing locomotive 
through the chock, shall be tangent to the seven-inch (178 millimeter) 
radius at any angle up to 90 degrees with respect to a straight line 
through the chock.
    (c) No part of the vessel which may be contacted by the towing 
wires, at any angle, shall have less than a seven-inch radius.
    (d) Chocks designated as single chocks shall have a throat opening 
of not less than 100 square inches (645 square centimeters) in area--
preferred dimensions are 12 x 9 inches (305 x 229 millimeters)--and 
shall be capable of withstanding a strain of 100,000 pounds (43,331 
kilograms) on a towing wire from any direction.
    (e) Chocks designated as double chocks shall have a throat opening 
of not less than 140 square inches (903 square centimeters) in area--
preferred dimensions are 14 x 10 inches (356 x 254 millimeters)--and 
shall be capable of withstanding a strain of 140,000 pounds (64,000 
kilograms) on the towing wires from any direction.
    (f) Use of roller chocks is permissible provided they are not less 
than 14.94 meters (49 feet) above the waterline at the vessel's maximum 
Panama Canal draft and provided they are in good condition, meet all of 
the requirements for solid chocks as specified in paragraphs (a), (b), 
(c), and (d) of this section, as the case may be, and are so fitted that 
transition from the rollers to the chock body will prevent damage to 
towing wires.
    (g) Each single chock shall have an accompanying bitt capable of 
withstanding a strain of 100,000 pounds (45,331 kilograms).
    (h) Each double chock located at the stem and at the stern, in 
accordance with paragraph (h) of this section, shall have two pairs of 
heavy bitts with each bitt of each pair capable of withstanding a strain 
of 100,000 pounds (45,331 kilograms). Other double chocks shall have a 
pair of heavy bitts with each bitt capable of withstanding a strain of 
100,000 pounds (45,331 kilograms).
    (i) All vessels, except a vessel not requiring locomotives, shall be 
fitted with a double chock set athwartships right in the stem and 
another double chock set athwartships right in the stern, except that on 
vessels of less than 75 feet beam, two single chocks may be substituted 
for each double chock required by this subsection; on vessels of over 75 
feet beam, two double chocks may be substituted for each double chock 
required by this section. If such substitution is made, the chocks shall 
be placed port and starboard not more than eight feet abaft the stem or 
10 feet forward of the stern, provided that these chocks are not more 
than 10 feet from the center line of the vessel.
    (j) Vessels under 60.06 meters (200 feet) in length and not 
exceeding 9.14 meters (30 feet) in beam shall have a double chock or two 
single chocks at the stem and stern. If the vessel is equipped with the 
two single chocks, they shall be placed, port and starboard, not more 
than eight feet abaft the stem or 10 feet forward of the stern, and not 
more than 10 feet off the center line.
    (k) Vessels 60.96 to 121.92 meters (200 to 400 feet) in length and 
not exceeding 22.86 meters (75 feet) in beam shall have

[[Page 93]]

a double chock at the stem and at the stern or two single chocks at the 
bow and stern, port and starboard, not more than eight feet abaft the 
stem or 10 feet forward of the stern and not more than 10 feet off the 
center line and shall have two additional single chocks, port and 
starboard, nine to 16 meters (30 to 50 feet) abaft the stem and nine to 
16 meters (30 to 50 feet) forward of the stern.
    (l) Vessels 121.92 to 173.74 meters (400 to 570 feet) long and not 
more than 22.86 meters (75 feet) in beam shall have a double chock at 
the stem and stern or two single chocks at the bow and stern, port and 
starboard, and in addition shall have a chock, port and starboard, 12 to 
16 meters (40 to 50 feet) abaft the stem, a single chock port and 
starboard, 24 to 28 meters (80 to 90 feet) abaft the stem, and a single 
chock, port and starboard, 12 to 16 meters (40 to 50 feet) forward of 
the stern.
    (m) Vessels over 173.74 meters (570 feet) long or 22.86 meters (75 
feet) in beam or over shall have a double chock at the stem and stern; a 
double chock, port and starboard, 12 to 16 meters (40 to 50 feet) abaft 
the stem; a single chock, port and starboard, 24 to 28 meters (80 to 90 
feet) abaft the stem; a double chock, port and starboard, 12 to 16 
meters (40 to 50 feet) forward of the stern and a single chock, port and 
starboard, 24 to 28 meters (80 to 90 feet) forward of the stern.
    (n) Vessels with large flared bows or unusually high freeboard such 
as container vessels or vehicle carriers will be required to provide 
single closed chocks located further aft than those required in 
paragraph (l) of this section for correct positioning of assisting tugs 
or may be required to fit recessed tug bollards into the hull so the 
tugs can work without coming in contact with the bow flare or having 
extra long lines and/or inefficient leads.
    (o) A vessel not requiring locomotives shall have a chock 
arrangement similar to that described in paragraph (i) of this section, 
except that the chocks need only be single chocks or, if approved by the 
Canal authorities, of lesser strength.
    (p) Any vessel which fails to meet the requirements of this section 
may be denied transit. If the Marine Director or his representative 
decides that such a vessel can be handled without undue danger to 
equipment or to personnel, notwithstanding her failure to comply with 
the requirements of this section, and allows it to transit, such vessel 
may do so only at its own risk and, to the extent and in proportion that 
such failure to meet the requirements of this section proximately causes 
or contributes to the casualty and resulting damages, the Master of such 
vessel, on behalf of said vessel, her owners, operators, or any other 
persons having any interest in her, and for himself, will be considered 
to have released the Panama Canal Commission and the United States from, 
and to have indemnified them against, any loss, damage, or liability 
incurred by the Commission or the United States under, or in respect to:
    (1) Section 1411 through 1416, inclusive, of Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 
485-87;
    (2) Property of Panama Canal Commission or the United States; and
    (3) Panama Canal Commission employees under the Federal Employees' 
Compensation Act, 5 U.S.C. 8101, et seq., or any other employee 
compensation system.

The Master of the vessel that fails to meet the requirements of this 
section may be required to execute, in the presence of a Commission 
official, a form undertaking to release the Panama Canal Commission and 
the United States from liability in case of an accident and to indemnify 
the Commission and the United States for damages sustained. The failure 
of the Master of a vessel to sign such a form, however, will not relieve 
the vessel, her owners, or any other person having an interest in her 
from liability incurred as a result of the vessel's failure to meet the 
requirements of this section.

[46 FR 63183, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982, as amended at 55 
FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]

    Cross Reference: Federal Employees' Compensation Act, see 5 U.S.C. 
8102 et seq.


<R05>
Sec. 109.7   Passing through locks; use of towing locomotives and ship's engines.

    (a) A vessel passing through the locks shall normally be assisted by 
electric towing locomotives using steel

[[Page 94]]

towing wires. A vessel may be permitted to pass through the locks under 
her own power in the following circumstances:
    (1) A small vessel up to 125 feet in length and a towboat up to 150 
feet in length may be handled with their own manila, hemp or synthetic 
lines along the wall if their structure and fendering will permit their 
landing against the wall.
    (2) A small vessel not over 100 feet in length, having good 
maneuvering characteristics, may be handled with her own manila, hemp or 
synthetic fiber lines the center of the chamber.
    (b) A vessel passing through the locks without a Pilot aboard, in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 105.2 of this chapter shall be 
under the direction of the Lockmaster, who may authorize the use of the 
vessel's engines in the locks.
    (c) When a vessel has a Pilot aboard, the use of her engines shall 
be under the direction of the Pilot. After towing wires from the towing 
locomotives have been placed aboard a vessel, her engines may be used to 
the extent considered necessary or desirable by the Pilot.

[31 FR 12294, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 40 FR 8348, Feb. 27, 1975]


<R03>
PART 111--RULES FOR THE PREVENTION OF COLLISIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
111.1  Application (Rule 1).
111.2  Responsibility (Rule 2).
111.3  General definitions (Rule 3).

                  Subpart B--Steering and Sailing Rules

            Conduct of Vessels in Any Condition of Visibility

111.4  Application (Rule 4).
111.5  Lookout (Rule 5).
111.6  Safe speed (Rule 6).
111.7  Risk of collision (Rule 7).
111.8  Action to avoid collision (Rule 8).
111.9  Narrow channels (Rule 9).
111.10  [Reserved] (Rule 10).

               Conduct of Vessels in Sight of One Another

111.11  Application (Rule 11).
111.12  Sailing vessels (Rule 12).
111.13  Overtaking (Rule 13).
111.14  Head-on situation (Rule 14).
111.15  Crossing situation (Rule 15).
111.16  Action by give-way vessel (Rule 16).
111.17  Action by stand-on vessel (Rule 17).
111.18  Responsibilities between vessels (Rule 18).

               Conduct of Vessels In Restricted Visibility

111.19  Conduct of vessels in restricted visibility (Rule 19).

                      Subpart C--Lights and Shapes

111.20  Application (Rule 20).
111.21  Definitions (Rule 21).
111.22  Visibility of lights (Rule 22).
111.23  Power-driven vessels under way (Rule 23).
111.24  Towing and pushing (Rule 24).
111.25  Sailing vessels under way and vessels under oars (Rule 25).
111.26  Fishing vessels (Rule 26).
111.27  Vessels not under command or restricted in their ability to 
          maneuver (Rule 27).
111.28  [Reserved] (Rule 28).
111.29  Pilot vessels (Rule 29).
111.30  Anchored vessels and vessels aground (Rule 30).
111.31  Seaplanes (Rule 31).

                   Subpart D--Sound and Light Signals

111.32  Definitions (Rule 32).
111.33  Equipment for sound signals (Rule 33).
111.34  Maneuvering and warning signals (Rule 34).
111.35  Sound signals in restricted visibility (Rule 35).
111.36  Signals to attract attention (Rule 36).
111.37  Distress signals (Rule 37).

                        Subpart E--Miscellaneous

111.38  Diving operations (Rule 38).
111.39  Water skiing prohibited (Rule 39).
111.40  Operation of small craft and recreational vessels in Canal 
          waters (Rule 40).
111.41  Lights; marking of pipelines laid in navigable waters (Rule 41).

    Authority: Issued under authority of the President by 22 U.S.C. 
3811; E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 111.1  Application (Rule 1).

    The provisions of this part incorporate most of the Rules of the 
International Regulations for Preventing

[[Page 95]]

Collisions at Sea, 1972 (72 COLREGS) and the maneuvering and warning 
whistle signals of the Inland Navigational Rules Act of 1980, 
supplemented by rules of particular application in the Panama Canal and 
shall be applicable to vessels and seaplanes upon the navigable waters 
of the Canal operating areas, as the same are described in Annex A of 
the Agreement in Implementation of Article III of the Panama Canal 
Treaty of 1977, and as they are depicted on Attachment 1 to that Annex, 
between a line connecting the East Breakwater Light and West Breakwater 
Light at the Altantic Entrance to the Canal in Limon Bay and a line 
passing through Channel Buoys 1 and 2 extended to the Canal boundary 
lines at the Pacific Entrance in Panama Bay, and in the Ports of Balboa 
and Cristobal. Where any naval or military vessel of special 
construction as certified by the Secretary of the Navy or the Secretary 
of Transportation in the case of Coast Guard vessels operating under the 
Transportation Department, or by a corresponding official of a state, 
other than the United States, shall by virtue of statute, convention or 
treaty, be exempted from compliance with the International Rules (72 
COLREGS), such vessel shall similarly be exempted from compliance with 
any corresponding requirement under the provisions of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 111.2  Responsibility (Rule 2).

    (a) Nothing in this part shall exonerate any vessel, or the owner, 
master or crew thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to comply 
with these Rules or of the neglect of any precaution which may be 
required by the ordinary practice of seamen, or by the special 
circumstances of the case.
    (b) In construing and complying with this part due regard shall be 
had to all dangers of navigation and collision and to any special 
circumstance, including the limitations of the vessels involved, which 
may make a departure from this part necessary to avoid immediate danger.


<R05>
Sec. 111.3  General definitions (Rule 3).

    For the purpose of this part, except where the context otherwise 
requires:
    (a) The word vessel includes every description of water craft, 
including nondisplacement craft and seaplanes, used or capable of being 
used as a means of transportation on water.
    (b) The term power-driven vessel means any vessel propelled by 
machinery.
    (c) The term sailing vessel means any vessel under sail provided 
that propelling machinery, if fitted, is not being used.
    (d) The term vessel engaged in fishing means any vessel fishing with 
nets, lines, trawls or other fishing apparatus which restrict 
maneuverability, but does not include a vessel fishing with trolling 
lines or other fishing apparatus which do not restrict maneuverability.
    (e) The word seaplane includes any aircraft designed to maneuver on 
the water.
    (f) The term vessel not under command means a vessel which through 
some exceptional circumstance is unable to maneuver as required by this 
part and is therefore unable to keep out of the way of another vessel.
    (g) The term vessel restricted in her ability to maneuver means a 
vessel which from the nature of her work is restricted in her ability to 
maneuver as required by this part and is therefore unable to keep out of 
the way of another vessel. The term vessels restricted in their ability 
to manuever shall include but not be limited to:
    (1) A vessel engaged in laying, servicing or picking up a navigation 
mark, submarine cable or pipeline;
    (2) A vessel engaged in dredging, surveying or underwater 
operations;
    (3) A vessel engaged in a towing operation such as severely 
restricts the towing vessel and her tow in their ability to deviate from 
their course.
    (h) The word under way means that a vessel is not at anchor, or made 
fast to the shore, or aground.
    (i) The words length and breadth of a vessel means her length 
overall and greatest breadth.
    (j) Vessels shall be deemed to be in sight of one another only when 
one can be observed visually from the other.

[[Page 96]]

    (k) The term restricted visibility means any condition in which 
visibility is restricted by fog, mist, heavy rainstorms or any other 
similar causes.
    (l) A motorboat means a power-driven vessel no more than 20 meters 
in length as measured from end to end over the deck.


<R04>
                  Subpart B--Steering and Sailing Rules

            Conduct of Vessels in Any Condition of Visibility


<R05>
Sec. 111.4  Application (Rule 4).

    Sections 111.5 through 111.10 apply in any condition of visibility.


<R05>
Sec. 111.5  Lookout (Rule 5).

    Every vessel shall at all times while under way in the Canal and 
adjacent waters maintain a proper lookout by sight and hearing as well 
as by all available means appropriate in the prevailing circumstances 
and conditions so as to make a full appraisal of the situation and of 
the risk of collision. The person acting as lookout shall have no other 
assigned duties and shall report promptly all relevant and material 
information to the person in charge of the navigation of the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 111.6  Safe speed (Rule 6).

    Every vessel shall at all times proceed at a safe speed so that she 
can take proper and effective action to avoid collision and be stopped 
within a distance appropriate to the prevailing circumstances and 
conditions. In determining a safe speed the following factors shall be 
among those taken into account:
    (a) By all vessels:
    (1) The state of visibility;
    (2) The traffic density including concentrations of small craft or 
any other vessels;
    (3) The maneuverability of the vessel with special reference to 
stopping distance and turning ability in the prevailing conditions;
    (4) At night the presence of background light such as from shore 
lights or from back scatter of her own lights;
    (5) The state of wind, sea and current, and the proximity of 
navigational hazards;
    (6) The draft in relation to the available depth of water.
    (b) Additionally, by vessels with operational radar:
    (1) The characteristics, efficiency and limitations of the radar 
equipment;
    (2) Any constraints imposed by the radar range scale in use;
    (3) The effect on radar detection of the sea state, weather and 
other sources of interference;
    (4) The possibility that small vessels and other floating objects 
may not be detected by radar at an adequate range;
    (5) The number, location and movement of vessels detected by radar;
    (6) The more exact assessment of the visibility that may be possible 
when radar is used to determine the range of vessel or other objects in 
the vicinity.
    (c) A vessel shall not exceed the speeds designated below, except in 
an emergency:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Knots 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Atlantic entrance to Gatun Locks..............................        12
Gatun Lake in a 1,000-ft. channel.............................        18
Gatun Lake in a 800-ft. channel...............................        15
Gatun Lake in a 650-ft. channel...............................        12
When rounding Buoy No. 17 in Gatun Reach northbound...........        10
Gaillard Cut, in the straight reaches.........................         8
Gamboa: When passing reserve fleet basin, concrete dock, or             
 floating crane berth; and when entering Gaillard Cut.........         6
When using a tug astern.......................................         6
Miraflores Locks to Buoy No. 14...............................         6
Buoy No. 14 to Pacific entrance...............................        12
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) A vessel in Panama Canal waters at locations other than those 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section, including Gatun Anchorage, 
Bohio Bend, Mamei Curve, Miraflores Lake, and in or near the locks, 
shall not exceed a speed that is safe under the existing circumstances 
and conditions, except in an emergency.
    (e) Whenever a vessel is maneuvering in an area where paragraph (c) 
of this section limits the speed to 6 knots, and the vessel's speed at 
dead slow ahead exceeds 6 knots, she is permitted to proceed at the 
slowest speed possible required to safely maintain manueverability.
    (f) The Canal Operations Captain may authorize departures from the 
maximum speeds established by paragraph (c) of this section in the case 
of

[[Page 97]]

particular vessels whose handling characteristics are such as to 
indicate that a higher speed or speeds can be prudently allowed.
    (g) Paragraph (c) of this section does not apply to motorboats or to 
vessels of the Panama Canal Commission. Nevertheless, motorboats and 
vessels of the Panama Canal Commission when underway shall proceed at a 
speed which is reasonable under the circumstances and conditions and 
which does not create a hazard to life or property.

[48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983, as amended at 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 111.7  Risk of collision (Rule 7).

    (a) Every vessel shall use all available means appropriate to the 
prevailing circumstances and conditions to determine if risk of 
collision exists. If there is any doubt, such risk shall be deemed to 
exist.
    (b) Proper use shall be made of radar equipment if fitted and 
operational.
    (c) Assumptions shall not be made on the basis of scanty 
information, especially scanty radar information.
    (d) In determining if risk of collision exists the following 
considerations shall be among those taken into account:
    (1) Such risk shall be deemed to exist if the compass bearing of an 
approaching vessel does not appreciably change;
    (2) Such risk may sometimes exist even when an appreciable bearing 
change is evident, particularly when approaching a very large vessel or 
a tow or when approaching a vessel at close range.


<R05>
Sec. 111.8  Action to avoid collision (Rule 8).

    (a) Any action taken to avoid collision shall, if the circumstances 
of the case admit, be positive, made in ample time and with due regard 
to the observance of good seamanship.
    (b) Any alteration of course or speed to avoid collision shall, if 
the circumstances of the case admit, be large enough to be readily 
apparent to another vessel observing visually or by radar; a succession 
of small alterations of course or speed should be avoided.
    (c) If there is sufficient sea room, alteration of course alone may 
be the most effective action to avoid a close-quarters situation 
provided that it is made in good time, is substantial and does not 
result in another close-quarters situation.
    (d) Action taken to avoid collision with another vessel shall be 
such as to result in passing at a safe distance. The effectiveness of 
the action shall be carefully checked until the other vessel is finally 
past and clear.
    (e) If necessary to avoid collision or allow more time to assess the 
situation, a vessel shall slacken her speed or take all way off by 
stopping or reversing her means of propulsion.
    (f) When two vessels are proceeding in such directions as to involve 
risk of collision, a power-driven vessel or sailing vessel or motorboat 
that is entering or preparing to enter the main channel of the Canal 
from either side shall not cross the bow of a vessel proceeding in 
either direction along the Canal axis and shall keep clear until the 
vessel proceeding along the Canal axis has passed.


<R05>
Sec. 111.9  Narrow channels (Rule 9).

    (a) A vessel proceeding along the course of a narrow channel or 
fairway shall keep as near to the outer limit of the channel or fairway 
which lies on her starboard side as is safe and practicable.
    (b) A vessel of less than 20 meters in length or a sailing vessel 
shall not impede the passage of a vessel which can safely navigate only 
within a narrow channel or fairway.
    (c) A vessel engaged in fishing shall not impede the passage of any 
other vessel navigating within a narrow channel or fairway.
    (d) A vessel shall not cross a narrow channel or fairway if such 
crossing impedes the passage of a vessel which can safely navigate only 
within such channel or fairway. The latter vessel shall use the danger 
signal prescribed in Sec. 111.34(d) (Rule 34(d)) if in doubt as to the 
intention of the crossing vessel.
    (e)(1) In a narrow channel or fairway when overtaking, the vessel 
intending to overtake shall indicate her intention by sounding the 
appropriate signal prescribed in Sec. 111.34(c) (Rule 34(c)). The 
overtaken vessel, if in agreement, shall sound the same signal. If in 
doubt she

[[Page 98]]

shall sound the danger signal prescribed in Sec. 111.34(d) (Rule 34(d)).
    (2) This section does not relieve the overtaking vessel of her 
obligation under Sec. 111.13 (Rule 13).
    (f) A vessel nearing a bend or an area of a narrow channel or 
fairway where other vessels may be obscured by an intervening 
obstruction shall navigate with particular alertness and caution.
    (g) Any vessel shall, if the circumstances of the case admit, avoid 
anchoring in a narrow channel.
    (h) When two power-driven vessels are meeting end on, or nearly end 
on, in the Canal in the vicinity of an obstruction, e.g., a dredge, 
drill barge, slide, etc., the vessel whose side of the Canal is clear 
shall have the right-of-way and the other vessel shall hold back and 
keep out of the way until the privileged vessel is clear.
Sec. 111.10  [Reserved] (Rule 10).

               Conduct of Vessels in Sight of One Another


<R05>
Sec. 111.11  Application (Rule 11).

    Sections 111.12 through 111.18 apply to vessels in sight of one 
another.


<R05>
Sec. 111.12  Sailing vessels (Rule 12).

    (a) When two sailing vessels are approaching one another, so as to 
involve risk of collision, one of them shall keep out of the way of the 
other as follows:
    (1) When each has the wind on a different side, the vessel which has 
the wind on the port side shall keep out of the way of the other;
    (2) When both have the wind on the same side, the vessel which is to 
windward shall keep out of the way of the vessel which is to leeward;
    (3) If a vessel with the wind on the port side sees a vessel to 
windward and cannot determine with certainty whether the other vessel 
has the wind on the port or on the starboard side, she shall keep out of 
the way of the other.
    (b) For the purpose of this section the windward side shall be 
deemed to be the side opposite to that on which the mainsail is carried 
or, in the case of a square-rigged vessel, the side opposite to that on 
which the largest fore-and-aft sail is carried.


<R05>
Sec. 111.13  Overtaking (Rule 13).

    (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Secs. 111.4 through 
111.18, any vessel overtaking any other shall keep out of the way of the 
overtaken vessel, except that within the Canal channel all pleasure 
vessels and craft, even though they are an overtaken vessel, shall keep 
out of the way of transiting vessels and Panama Canal Commission 
floating equipment.
    (b) A vessel shall be deemed to be overtaking when coming up with 
another vessel from a direction more than 22.5 degrees abaft her beam, 
that is, in such a position with reference to the vessel she is 
overtaking, that at night she would be able to see only the sternlight 
of that vessel but neither of her sidelights.
    (c) When a vessel is in any doubt as to whether she is overtaking 
another, she shall assume that this is the case and act accordingly.
    (d) Any subsequent alteration of the bearing between the two vessels 
shall not make the overtaking vessel a crossing vessel within the 
meaning of this part or relieve her of the duty of keeping clear of the 
overtaken vessel until she is finally past and clear.
    (e) Except as specially authorized by the Canal Operations Captain 
or his designee, an overtaking power-driven vessel shall not overtake 
and pass another power-driven vessel in Gaillard Cut, Mamei Curve or 
Bohio Bend between buoys 38 and 40: Provided, however, That this 
paragraph shall not apply where either the overtaking or the overtaken 
vessel is less than 150 feet in length or is a Panama Canal Commission 
power-driven vessel or a U.S. Army or U.S. Navy local tug, with or 
without a tow.

[48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983, as amended at 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 111.14  Head-on situation (Rule 14).

    (a) When two power-driven vessels are meeting on reciprocal or 
nearly reciprocal courses so as to involve risk of collision each shall 
alter her course to starboard so that each shall pass on the port side 
of the other.
    (b) Such a situation shall be deemed to exist when a vessel sees the 
other ahead or nearly ahead and by night she

[[Page 99]]

could see the masthead lights of the other in a line or nearly in a line 
or both sidelights and by day she observes the corresponding aspect of 
the other vessel.
    (c) When a vessel is in any doubt as to whether such a situation 
exists she shall assume that it does exist and act accordingly.
    (d) In the Canal channel every power-driven vessel encountering 
another vessel while proceeding along the line of the channel, shall 
keep to that side of the fairway or mid-channel which lies on its 
starboard side. When two such vessels so proceeding are bound in 
opposite directions, they shall, when it is safe and practicable, be 
governed by paragraph (a) of this section even when, by reason of an 
intervening bend in the channel, their headings are not substantially 
opposite when they first sight each other; and neither of them shall 
alter course to port across the course of the other. Tugs and motorboats 
shall, whenever practicable, keep well over to that side of the Canal 
which is to their starboard when large vessels are passing.


<R05>
Sec. 111.15  Crossing situation (Rule 15).

    When two power-driven vessels are crossing so as to involve risk of 
collision, the vessel which has the other on her own starboard side 
shall keep out of the way and shall, if the circumstances of the case 
admit, avoid crossing ahead of the other vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 111.16  Action by give-way vessel (Rule 16).

    Every vessel which is directed to keep out of the way of another 
vessel shall, so far as possible, take early and substantial action to 
keep well clear.


<R05>
Sec. 111.17  Action by stand-on vessel (Rule 17).

    (a)(1) Where one of two vessels is to keep out of the way the other 
shall keep her course and speed.
    (2) The latter vessel may however take action to avoid collision by 
her maneuver alone, as soon as it becomes apparent to her that the 
vessel required to keep out of the way is not taking appropriate action 
in compliance with this part.
    (b) When, from any cause, the vessel required to keep her course and 
speed finds herself so close that collision cannot be avoided by the 
action of the give-way vessel alone, she shall take such action as will 
best aid to avoid collision.
    (c) A power-driven vessel which takes action in a crossing situation 
in accordance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section to avoid collision 
with another power-driven vessel shall, if the circumstances of the case 
admit, not alter course to port for a vessel on her own port side.
    (d) This section does not relieve the give-way vessel of her 
obligation to keep out of the way.


<R05>
Sec. 111.18  Responsibilities between vessels (Rule 18).

    Except where Secs. 111.9 and 111.13 (Rules 9 and 13) otherwise 
require:
    (a) A power-driven vessel underway shall keep out of the way of:
    (1) A vessel not under command;
    (2) A vessel restricted in her ability to maneuver.
    (b) A sailing vessel underway shall keep out of the way of:
    (1) A vessel not under command;
    (2) A vessel restricted in her ability to maneuver;
    (3) A power driven vessel, except a motorboat.
    (c) A seaplane on the water shall, in general, keep well clear of 
all vessels and avoid impeding their navigation. In circumstances, 
however, where risk of collision exists, she shall comply with the 
Secs. 111.4 through 111.18 of this subpart.
    (d) Panama Canal floating equipment at work in a stationary position 
shall have a privileged right to such position, and no passing vessel 
shall foul such equipment or its moorings, or pass at such speed as to 
create a dangerous wash or wake. Floating equipment of the Canal from 
which divers are working, and floating equipment so moored, and vessels 
under repair and in such condition, that a high wash might cause 
swampage or be hazardous to the workmen, shall be passed by all vessels 
at a speed sufficiently slow as not to create a dangerous wash or wake.

[[Page 100]]

               Conduct of Vessels in Restricted Visibility


<R05>
Sec. 111.19  Conduct of vessels in restricted visibility (Rule 19).

    (a) This section applies to vessels not in sight of one another when 
navigating in or near an area of restricted visibility.
    (b) Every vessel shall proceed at a safe speed adapted to the 
prevailing circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility. A 
power-driven vessel shall have her engines ready for immediate maneuver.
    (c) Every vessel shall have due regard to the prevailing 
circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility when complying 
with the Secs. 111.4 through 111.9 (Rules 4 through 9) of this subpart.
    (d) A vessel which detects by radar alone the presence of another 
vessel shall determine if a close-quarters situation is developing or 
risk of collision exists. If so, she shall take avoiding action in ample 
time, provided that when such action consists of an alteration of 
course, so far as possible the following shall be avoided:
    (1) An alteration of course to port for a vessel forward of the 
beam, other than for a vessel being overtaken; and
    (2) An alteration of course towards a vessel abeam or abaft the 
beam.
    (e) Except where it has been determined that a risk of collision 
does not exist, every vessel which hears apparently forward of her beam 
the fog signal of another vessel, or which cannot avoid a close quarters 
situation with another vessel forward of her beam, shall reduce her 
speed to the minimum at which she can be kept on her course. She shall 
if necessary take all her way off and in any event navigate with extreme 
caution until danger of collision is over.
    (f) Except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section, vessels 
moored or at anchor shall not get underway when, because of atmospheric 
conditions, visibility is less than 1,000 feet and vessels underway in 
such conditions shall anchor or moor as soon as practicable and report 
immediately to the Canal Operations Captain, or his designee by radio or 
other available means.
    (g) Vessels specially equipped to navigate under conditions 
restricting visibility and which have a pilot aboard, and vessels which 
have a pilot aboard and which are assisted by Panama Canal Commission 
vessels which are specially equipped to navigate under such conditions, 
may, at the discretion of the Canal Operations Captain or his designee, 
be navigated when visibility is less than 1,000 feet.

[48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983, as amended at 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R04>
                      Subpart C--Lights and Shapes


<R05>
Sec. 111.20  Application (Rule 20).

    (a) Sections 111.20 through 111.31 (Rules 20-31) in this subpart 
shall be complied with in all weathers.
    (b) The regulations concerning lights shall be complied with from 
sunset to sunrise, and during such times no other lights shall be 
exhibited, except such lights as cannot be mistaken for the lights 
specified in this part or do not impair their visibility or distinctive 
character, or interfere with the keeping of a proper lookout.
    (c) The lights prescribed by this part shall, if carried, also be 
exhibited from sunrise to sunset in restricted visibility and may be 
exhibited in all other circumstances when it is deemed necessary.
    (d) The regulations concerning shapes shall be complied with by day.
    (e) The lights and shapes specified in this part shall comply with 
the provisions of Annex I to the 72 COLREGS.


<R05>
Sec. 111.21  Definitions (Rule 21).

    (a) Masthead light means a white light placed over the fore and aft 
centerline of the vessel showing an unbroken light over an arc of the 
horizon of 225 degrees and so fixed as to show the light from right 
ahead to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on either side of the vessel.
    (b) Sidelights means a green light on the starboard side and a red 
light on the port side each showing an unbroken light over an arc of the 
horizon of 112.5 degrees and so fixed as to show the light from right 
ahead to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on its respective side. In a vessel 
of less than 20 meters

[[Page 101]]

in length the sidelights may be combined in one lantern carried on the 
fore and aft centerline of the vessel.
    (c) Sternlight means a white light placed as nearly as practicable 
at the stern showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 135 
degrees and so fixed as to show the light 67.5 degrees from right aft on 
each side of the vessel.
    (d) Towing light means a yellow light having the same 
characteristics as the sternlight defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (e) All-round light means a light showing an unbroken light over an 
arc of the horizon of 360 degrees.
    (f) Flashing light means a light flashing at regular intervals at a 
frequency of 120 flashes or more per minute.


<R05>
Sec. 111.22  Visibility of lights (Rule 22).

    The lights prescribed in this part shall have an intensity as 
specified in section 8 of Annex I to 72 COLREGS so as to be visible at 
the following minimum ranges:
    (a) In vessels of 50 meters or more in length:
    (1) A masthead light, 6 miles;
    (2) A sidelight, 3 miles;
    (3) A sternlight, 3 miles;
    (4) A towing light, 3 miles;
    (5) A white, red, green or yelow all-round light, 3 miles.
    (b) In vessels of 12 meters or more in length but less than 50 
meters in length:
    (1) A masthead light, 5 miles; except that where the length of the 
vessel is less than 20 meters, 3 miles;
    (2) A sidelight, 2 miles.
    (3) A sternlight, 2 miles;
    (4) A towing light, 2 miles;
    (5) A white, red, green or yellow all-round light, 2 miles.
    (c) In vessels of less than 12 meters in length:
    (1) A masthead light, 2 miles;
    (2) A sidelight, 1 mile;
    (3) A sternlight, 2 miles;
    (4) A towing light, 2 miles;
    (5) A white, red, green or yellow all-round light, 2 miles.
    (d) In inconspicuous, party submerged vessels or objects being 
towed:
    (1) A white all-round light, 3 miles.


<R05>
Sec. 111.23  Power-driven vessels under way (Rule 23).

    (a) A power-driven vessel under way shall exhibit:
    (1) A masthead light forward;
    (2) A second masthead light abaft of and higher than the foward one; 
except that a vessel of less than 50 meters in length shall not be 
obliged to exhibit such light but may do so;
    (3) Sidelights; and
    (4) A sternlight.
    (b) An air-cushion vessel when operating in the non-displacement 
mode shall, in addition to the lights prescibed in paragraph (a) of this 
section, exhibit an all-round flashing yellow light.
    (c)(1) A power-driven vessel of less than 12 meters in length may in 
lieu of the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section exhibit 
an all-round white light and sidelights;
    (2) A power-driven vessel of less than 7 meters in length and whose 
maximum speed does not exceed 7 knots may, in lieu of the lights 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section, exhibit an all-round white 
light, and shall, if practicable, also exhibit sidelights;
    (3) The masthead light or all-round white light on a power-driven 
vessel of less than 12 meters in length may be displaced from the fore 
and aft centerline of the vessel if centerline fitting is not 
practicable, provided that the sidelights are combined in one lantern 
which shall be carried on the fore and aft centerline of the vessel or 
located as nearly as practicable in the same fore and aft line as the 
masthead light or the all-round white light.
    (d) A vessel employed in the transportation or transfer of 
flammable, explosive, toxic, or radioactive commodities shall carry, in 
addition to her appropriate mooring, anchor, or navigation lights, where 
it can best be seen, a red light of such a character as to be visible 
all around the horizon at a distance of at least 2 miles. By day she 
shall display, where it can best be seen, a red flag if the cargo 
includes flammable or explosive commodities and the international single 
flag hoist signal ``T'' if the commodity is toxic or radioactive only.

[48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983, as amended at 50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985]

[[Page 102]]


<R05>
Sec. 111.24  Towing and pushing (Rule 24).

    (a) A power-driven vessel when towing shall exhibit:
    (1) Instead of the light prescribed in Sec. 111.23(a)(1) or 
Sec. 111.23(a)(2), two masthead lights in a vertical line. When the 
length of the tow, measuring from the stern of the towing vessel to the 
after end of the tow exceeds 200 meters; three such lights in a vertical 
line;
    (2) Sidelights;
    (3) A sternlight;
    (4) A towing light in a vertical line above the sternlight; and
    (5) When the length of the tow exceeds 200 meters, a diamond shape 
where it can best be seen.
    (b) When a pushing vessel and a vessel being pushed ahead are 
rigidly connected in a composite unit they shall be regarded as a power-
driven vessel and exhibit the lights prescribed in Sec. 111.23 (Rule 
23).
    (c) A power-driven vessel when pushing ahead or towing alongside, 
except in the case of a composite unit, shall exhibit:
    (1) Instead of the light prescribed in Sec. 111.23(a)(1) or 
Sec. 111.23(a)(2) (Rule 23(a)(1) or (a)(2), two masthead lights in a 
vertical line;
    (2) Sidelights; and
    (3) A sternlight.
    (d) A power-driven vessel to which paragraph (a) or (c) of this 
section apply shall also comply with Sec. 111.23(a)(2) (Rule 23(a)(2)).
    (e) A vessel or object being towed, other than those mentioned in 
paragraph (g) of this section, shall exhibit:
    (1) Sidelights;
    (2) A sternlight; and
    (3) When the length of the two exceeds 200 meters, a diamond shape 
where it can best be seen.
    (f) Provided that any number of vessels being towed alongside or 
pushed in a group shall be lighted as one vessel;
    (1) A vessel being pushed ahead, not being part of a composite unit, 
shall exhibit at the forward end, sidelights;
    (2) A vessel being towed alongside shall exhibit a sternlight and at 
the forward end, sidelights.
    (g) An inconspicuous, partly submerged vessel or object, or 
combination of such vessels or objects being towed, shall exhibit:
    (1) If it is less than 25 meters in breadth, one all-round white 
light at or near the forward end and one at or near the after end except 
that dracones need not exhibit a light at or near the forward end;
    (2) If it is 25 meters or more in breadth, two additional all-round 
white lights at or near the extremities of its breadth:
    (3) If it exceeds 100 meters in length, additional all-round white 
lights between the lights prescribed in paragraphs (g)(1) and (2) of 
this section so that the distance between the lights shall not exceed 
100 meters;
    (4) A diamond shape at or near the aftermost extremity of the last 
vessel or object being towed and if the length of the tow exceeds 200 
meters an additional diamond shape where it can best be seen and located 
as far forward as is practicable.
    (h) Where from any sufficient cause it is impracticable for a vessel 
or object being towed to exhibit the lights or shapes prescribed in 
paragraph (e) or (g) of this section, all possible measures shall be 
taken to light the vessel or object towed or at least to indicate the 
presence of the unlighted vessel or object.
    (i) Where from any sufficient cause it is impracticable for a vessel 
not normally engaged in towing operations to display the lights 
prescribed in paragraph (a) or (c) of this section, such vessel shall 
not be required to exhibit those lights when engaged in towing another 
vessel in distress or otherwise in need of assistance. All possible 
measures shall be taken to indicate the nature of the relationship 
between the towing vessel and the vessel being towed as authorized by 
Sec. 111.36 (Rule 36), in particular by illuminating the towline.


<R05>
Sec. 111.25  Sailing vessels under way and vessels under oars (Rule 25).

    (a) A sailing vessel under way shall exhibit:
    (1) Sidelights; and
    (2) A sternlight.
    (b) In a sailing vessel of less than 20 meters in length the lights 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section may be combined in one 
lantern carried at or

[[Page 103]]

near the top of the mast where it can best be seen.
    (c) A sailing vessel under way may, in addition to the lights 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section, exhibit at or near the top 
of the mast, where they can best be seen, two all-round lights in a 
vertical line, the upper being red and the lower green, but these lights 
shall not be exhibited in conjunction with the combined lantern 
permitted by paragraph (b) of this section.
    (d)(1) A sailing vessel of less than 7 meters in length shall, if 
practicable, exhibit the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) or (b) of 
this section, but if she does not, she shall have ready at hand an 
electric torch or lighted lantern showing a white light which shall be 
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
    (2) A vessel under oars may exhibit the lights prescribed in this 
section for sailing vessels, but if she does not, she shall have ready 
at hand an electric torch or lighted lantern showing a white light which 
shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
    (e) A vessel proceeding under sail when also being propelled by 
machinery shall exhibit forward were it can best be seen a conical 
shape, apex downwards.


<R05>
Sec. 111.26  Fishing vessels (Rule 26).

    Vessels engaged in fishing, as defined in Sec. 111.3 (d) (Rule 3 
(d)) of this part, shall stay well clear of the navigable waters of the 
Canal Operating Areas.


<R05>
Sec. 111.27  Vessels not under command or restricted in their ability to maneuver (Rule 27).

    (a) A vessel not under command shall exhibit:
    (1) Two all-round red lights in a vertical line where they can best 
be seen:
    (2) Two balls or similar shapes in a vertical line where they can 
best be seen;
    (3) When making way through the water, in addition to the lights 
prescribed in this paragraph, sidelights and a sternlight.
    (b) A vessel restricted in her ability to maneuver shall exhibit:
    (1) Three all-round lights in a vertical line where they can best be 
seen. The highest and lowest of these lights shall be red and the middle 
light shall be white;
    (2) Three shapes in a vertical line where they can best be seen. The 
highest and lowest of these shapes shall be balls and the middle one a 
diamond;
    (3) When making way through the water, masthead light or lights, 
sidelights and a sternlight, in addition to the lights prescribed in 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section;
    (4) When at anchor, in addition to the lights or shapes prescribed 
in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the lights or shapes 
prescribed in Sec. 111.30 (Rule 30).
    (c) A vessel engaged in a towing operation such as severely 
restricts the towing vessel and her tow in their ability to deviate from 
her course shall, in addition to the lights or shapes prescribed in 
Sec. 111.24 (a) (Rule 24 (a)), exhibit the lights or shape prescribed in 
paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section.
    (d) A vessel engaged in dredging or underwater operations, when 
restricted in her ability to maneuver, shall exhibit the lights and 
shapes prescribed in paragraphs (b)(1), (2) and (3) of this section and 
shall in addition, when an obstruction exists, exhibit:
    (1) Two all-round red lights or two balls in a vertical line to 
indicate the side on which the obstruction exists;
    (2) Two all-round green lights or two diamonds on a vertical line to 
indicate the side in which another vessel may pass;
    (3) When at anchor, the lights or shapes prescribed in this 
paragraph instead of the lights or shape prescribed in Sec. 111.30 (Rule 
30).
    (e) Whenever the size of a vessel engaged in diving operations makes 
it impracticable to exhibit all lights and shapes prescribed by 
paragraph (d) of this section, the lights and shapes prescribed by 
Sec. 111.38 shall be exhibited.
    (f) Vessels of less than 12 meters in length, except those engaged 
in diving operations, shall not be required to exhibit the lights or 
shapes prescribed in this section.
    (g) The signals prescribed in this section are not signals of 
vessels in distress and requiring assistance. Such

[[Page 104]]

signals are contained in Sec. 111.37 (Rule 37).

[48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983, as amended at 49 FR 30466, July 31, 1984]
Sec. 111.28  [Reserved] (Rule 28).


<R05>
Sec. 111.29  Pilot vessels (Rule 29).

    (a) A vessel engaged on pilotage duty shall exhibit:
    (1) At or near the masthead, two all-round lights in a vertical 
line, the upper being white and the lower red;
    (2) When under way, in addition, sidelights and a sternlight;
    (3) When at anchor, in addition to the lights prescribed in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the light, lights or shape prescribed 
in Sec. 111.30 (Rule 30) for vessels at anchor.
    (b) A pilot vessel when not engaged on pilotage duty shall exhibit 
the lights or shapes prescribed for a similar vessel of her length.


<R05>
Sec. 111.30  Anchored vessels and vessels aground (Rule 30).

    (a) A vessel at anchor shall exhibit where it can best be seen:
    (1) In the fore part, an all-round white light or one ball;
    (2) At or near the stern and at a lower level than the light 
prescribed in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, an all-round white 
light.
    (b) A vessel of less than 50 meters in length may exhibit an all-
round white light where it can best be seen instead of the lights 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) A vessel at anchor may, and a vessel of 100 meters and more in 
length shall, also use the available working or equivalent lights to 
illuminate her decks.
    (d) A vessel aground shall exhibit the lights prescribed in 
paragraph (a) or (b) of this section and in addition, where they can 
best be seen:
    (1) Two all-round red lights in a vertical line; and
    (2) Three balls in a vertical line.
    (e) A vessel of less than 7 meters in length, when at anchor, not in 
or near a narrow channel, fairway or anchorage, or where other vessels 
normally navigate, shall not be required to exhibit the lights or shape 
prescribed in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (f) A vessel of less than 20 meters in length, when aground, shall 
not be required to exhibit the lights or shapes prescribed in paragraphs 
(d)(1) and (2) of this section.
    (g) Vessels not more than 20 meters in length, when at anchor in any 
special anchorage designated by the Commission for such vessels, shall 
not be required to carry or exhibit the lights or shape specified in 
paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 111.31  Seaplanes (Rule 31).

    Where it is impracticable for a seaplane to exhibit lights and 
shapes of the characteristics or in the positions prescribed in the 
sections of this Subpart she shall exhibit lights and shapes as closely 
similar in characteristics and position as is possible.


<R04>
                   Subpart D--Sound and Light Signals


<R05>
Sec. 111.32  Definitions (Rule 32).

    (a) The word whistle means any sound signaling appliance capable of 
producing the prescribed blasts and which complies with the 
specifications in Annex III to the 72 COLREGS.
    (b) The term short blast means a blast of about one second's 
duration.
    (c) The term prolonged blast means a blast of from four to six 
seconds' duration.


<R05>
Sec. 111.33  Equipment for sound signals (Rule 33).

    (a) A vessel of 12 meters or more in length shall be provided with a 
whisle and a bell and a vessel of 100 meters or more in length shall, in 
addition, be provided with a gong, the tone and sound of which cannot be 
confused with that of the bell. The whistle, bell and gong shall comply 
with the specifications in Annex III to the 72 COLREGS. The bell or gong 
or both may be replaced by other equipment having the same respective 
sound characteristics, provided that manual sounding of the prescribed 
signals shall always be possible.
    (b) A vessel of less than 12 meters in length shall not be obliged 
to carry the sound signaling appliances prescribed in paragraph (a) of 
this section but if she does not, she shall be provided with

[[Page 105]]

some other means of making an efficient sound signal.


<R05>
Sec. 111.34  Maneuvering and warning signals (Rule 34).

    (a) When power-driven vessels are in sight of one another and 
meeting or crossing at a distance within half a mile of each other, each 
vessel under way, when maneuvering as authorized or required by this 
part:
    (1) Shall indicate that manuever by the following signals on her 
whistle: One short blast to mean ``I intend to leave you on my port 
side''; two short blasts to mean ``I intend to leave you on my starboard 
side''; and three short blasts to mean ``I am operating astern 
propulsion'';
    (2) Upon hearing the one or two blast signal of the other shall, if 
in agreement, sound the same whistle signal and take the steps necessary 
to effect a safe passing. If, however, from any cause, the vessel doubts 
the safety of the proposed maneuver, she shall sound the danger signal 
specified in paragraph (d) of this section and each vessel shall take 
appropriate precautionary action until a safe passing agreement is made.
    (b) A vessel may supplement the whistle signals prescribed in 
paragraph (a) of this section by light signals:
    (1) These signals shall have the following significance: one flash 
to mean ``I intend to leave you on my port side''; two flashes to mean 
``I intend to leave you on my starboard side''; three flashes to mean 
``I am operating astern propulsion'';
    (2) The duration of each flash shall be about one second, the 
interval between flashes shall be about one second, and the interval 
between successive signals shall be not less than ten seconds;
    (3) The light used for this signal shall, if fitted, be an all-round 
white light, visible at a minimum range of 5 miles, and shall comply 
with the provisions of Annex I of the 72 COLREGS.
    (c) When in sight of one another:
    (1) A power-driven vessel intending to overtake another power-driven 
vessel shall indicate her intention by the following signals on her 
whistle: one short blast to mean ``I intend to overtake you on your 
starboard side''; two short blasts to mean ``I intend to overtake you on 
your port side''; and
    (2) The power-driven vessel about to be overtaken shall, if in 
agreement, sound a similar sound signal. If in doubt she shall sound the 
danger signal prescribed in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) When vessels in sight of one another are approaching each other 
and from any cause either vessel fails to understand the intentions or 
actions of the other, or is in doubt whether sufficient action is being 
taken by the other to avoid collision, the vessel in doubt shall 
immediately indicate such doubt by giving at least five short and rapid 
blasts on the whistle. This signal may be supplemented by a light signal 
of at least five short and rapid flashes.
    (e) If whistles are fitted on a vessel at a distance apart of more 
than 100 meters, one whistle only shall be used for giving maneuvering 
and warning signals.
    (f) When a power-driven vessel is leaving a dock or berth, she shall 
sound one prolonged blast.
    (g) A vessel that reaches agreement with another vessel in a 
meeting, crossing or overtaking situation by using radiotelephone on the 
customary frequencies is not obliged to sound whistel signals prescribed 
by this section, but may do so. If agreement is not reached, then 
whistle signals shall be exchanged in a timely manner and shall prevail.
    (h) When a power-driven vessel or motorboat is approaching a 
pipeline obstrucing the channel, and desires to pass through the gate, 
she shall give a signal of two blasts, namely, one polonged blast 
followed by a short blast, which signal shall be promptly answered by 
the gate tender with the same signal if she is ready to have the 
approaching vessel pass or by the danger signal if it is not safe for 
her to pass. In no case shall the approaching vessel attempt to pass 
until the gate tender signifies by a signal of one prolonged and one 
short blast that the channel is open. The gate tender shall so signify 
as soon as practicable, and the approaching vessel shall answer with a 
similar signal.

[[Page 106]]


<R05>
Sec. 111.35  Sound signals in restricted visibility (Rule 35).

    In or near an area of restricted visibility, whether by day or 
night, the signals prescribed in this section shall be used as follows:
    (a) A power-driven vessel making way through the water shall sound 
at intervals of not more than 2 minutes one prolonged blast.
    (b) A power-driven vessel under way but stopped and making no way 
through the water shall sound at intervals of not more than 2 minutes 
two prolonged blasts in succession with an interval of about 2 seconds 
between them.
    (c) A vessel not under command, a vessel restricted in her ability 
to maneuver, a sailing vessel and a vessel engaged in towing or pushing 
another vessel shall, instead of the signals prescribed in paragraph (a) 
or (b) of this section, sound at intervals of not more than 2 minutes 
three blasts in succession, namely one prolonged followed by two short 
blasts.
    (d) A vessel restricted in her ability to maneuver when carring out 
her work at anchor, shall instead of the signals prescribed in paragraph 
(g) of this section sound the signal prescribed in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (e) A vessel towed or if more than one vessel is towed the last 
vessel of the tow, if manned, shall at intervals of not more than 2 
minutes sound four blasts in succession, namely one prolonged followed 
by three short blasts. When practicable, this signal shall be made 
immediately after the signal made by the towing vessel.
    (f) When a pushing vessel and a vessel being pushed ahead are 
rigidly connected in a composite unit they shall be regarded as a power-
driven vessel and shall give the signals prescribed in paragraph (a) or 
(b) of this section.
    (g) A vessel at anchor shall at intervals of not more than one 
minute ring the bell rapidly for about 5 seconds. In a vessel of 100 
meters or more in length the bell shall be sounded in the forepart of 
the vessel and immediately after the ringing of the bell the gong shall 
be sounded rapidly for about 5 seconds in the after part of the vessel. 
A vessel at anchor may in addition sound three blasts in succession, 
namely one short, one prolonged and one short blast, to give warning of 
her position and of the possibility of collision to an approaching 
vessel.
    (h) A vessel aground shall give the bell signal and if required the 
gong signal prescribed in paragraph (g) of this section and shall, in 
addition, give three separate and distinct strokes on the bell 
immediately before and after the rapid ringing of the bell. A vessel 
aground may in addition sound an appropriate whistle signal.
    (i) A vessel of less than 12 meters in length shall not be obliged 
to give the above-mentioned signals, but, if she does not, shall make 
some other efficient sound signal at intervals of not more than 2 
minutes.
    (j) A pilot vessel when engaged on pilotage duty may in addition to 
the signals prescribed in paragraphs (a), (b) or (g) of this section 
sound an identity signal consisting of four short blasts.


<R05>
Sec. 111.36  Signals to attract attention (Rule 36).

    (a) If necessary to attract the attention of another vessel, any 
vessel may make light or sound signals that cannot be mistaken for any 
signal authorized elsewhere in this part, or may direct the beam of her 
searchlight in the direction of the danger, in such a way as not to 
embarrass any vessel. Any light to attract attention of another vessel 
shall be such that it cannot be mistaken for any aid to navigation. For 
the purpose of this section the use of high intensity intermittent or 
revolving lights, such as strobe lights, shall be avoided.
    (b) Under no circumstances shall the rays of a searchlight or any 
other type of blinding light be directed into the pilot house, or in any 
other manner or direction which would interfere with the navigation of 
another vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 111.37  Distress signals (Rule 37).

    (a) Need of assistance. The following signals used or exhibited 
either together or separately, indicate distress and need of assistance:
    (1) A gun or other explosive signal fired at intervals of about a 
minute;
    (2) A continuous sounding with any fog-signaling apparatus;

[[Page 107]]

    (3) Rockets or shells, throwing red stars fired one at a time at 
short intervals;
    (4) A signal made by radiotelegraphy or by any other signaling 
method consisting of the group . . . - - - . . . (SOS) in the Morse 
Code;
    (5) A signal sent by radiotelephony consisting of the spoken word 
``mayday'';
    (6) The International Code Signal of distress indicated by N.C.;
    (7) A signal consisting of a square flag having above or below it a 
ball or anything resembling a ball;
    (8) Flames on the vessel (as from a burning tar barrel, oil barrel, 
etc.);
    (9) A rocket parachute flare or a hand flare showing a red light;
    (10) A smoke signal giving off orange-colored smoke;
    (11) Slowly and repeatedly raising and lowering arms outstretched to 
each side;
    (12) The radiotelegraph alarm signal;
    (13) The radiotelephone alarm signal;
    (14) Signals transmitted by emergency position-indicating radio 
beacons.
    (b) The use of exhibition of any of the foregoing signals except for 
the purpose of indicating distress and need of assistance and the use of 
other signals which may be confused with any of the above signals is 
prohibited.
    (c) Attention is drawn to the relevant sections of the International 
Code of Signals, the Merchant Ship Search and Rescue Manual and the 
following signals:
    (1) A piece of orange-colored canvas with either a black square and 
circle or other appropriate symbol (for identification from the air);
    (2) A dye marker.

[48 FR 52704, Nov. 22, 1983; 49 FR 1184, Jan. 10, 1984]


<R04>
                        Subpart E--Miscellaneous


<R05>
Sec. 111.38  Diving operations (Rule 38).

    (a) When industrial or commercial diving operations are being 
conducted in the Canal, or waters adjacent thereto, a revolving red 
light shall be displayed in all weathers from sunset to sunrise from the 
diving barge or other craft serving the diver. The light shall be so 
mounted and of sufficient intensity as to be visible for not less than 1 
mile. The International Code Flag ``A'', not less than 18 inches in 
height and of standard proportions, shall be displayed from such craft 
by day where it may best be seen. A rigid replica of this flag may be 
substituted in lieu thereof.
    (b) Recreational skin diving in waters of the Canal, including 
Gaillard Cut and the channel through Gatun and Miraflores Lakes and in 
the waters of all ships' anchorages, is prohibited unless authorized in 
writing by the Marine Director or his designee. Authorization shall not 
be given for skin diving at night. When recreational skin diving 
activities are under way in the Canal, or waters adjacent thereto, a 
flag of the type described in paragraph (a) of this section shall be 
displayed from the craft serving the skin diver in a manner which allows 
all-round visibility; however, the flag displayed for recreational 
diving shall be not less than 12 inches in height and of the standard 
proportions.
    (c) Vessels approaching or passing an area where diving activities 
are under way shall reduce speed sufficiently to avoid creating a 
dangerous wash or wake.

[49 FR 30466, July 31, 1984, as amended at 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 111.39  Water skiing prohibited (Rule 39).

    No person shall operate a motorboat or other vessel in or across the 
navigable channels or merchant vessel anchorages while towing a person 
or persons on water skis, or aquaplane or similar device at any time.


<R05>
Sec. 111.40  Operation of small craft and recreational vessels in the Canal waters (Rule 40).

    (a) For the purpose of this section, a small craft is defined as any 
vessel for recreational purposes which is not required to have the 
assistance of locomotives when transiting the locks.
    (b) A small craft shall not be operated by any person who is 
intoxicated or who is a habitual user, or under the influence of any 
narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug to a 
degree which renders him incapable of safely operating the craft or 
vessel. The fact that one lawfully is or

[[Page 108]]

has been using any drug shall not constitute a defense against a charge 
of violating this section.
    (c) No person shall operate a small craft so close to a transiting 
or other vessel so as to hamper the safe operation of either vessel; nor 
shall any person operate a small craft in a negligent manner so as to 
endanger life or property.
    (d) No person shall operate a small craft in the navigation channels 
of the Canal except when such operation is incidental to movement 
between points on either side of the navigation channel.


<R05>
Sec. 111.41  Lights; marking of pipeline laid in navigable waters (Rule 41).

    Whenever a pipeline is laid in navigable waters, it shall be marked 
at night by amber lights at intervals of 200 feet. The lights marking 
the limits of the gate shall be a vertical display of a white and a red 
light, the white light to be at least 4 feet above the red light. These 
lights shall be so constructed as to show all around the horizon and be 
visible from a distance of at least 1 mile.


<R03>
PART 113--DANGEROUS CARGOES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
113.1  Application.
113.2  Definitions.
113.3  Classifications.
113.4  Safety and alarm systems.
113.5  Inspections.

          Subpart B--Vessels Carrying Dangerous Cargoes in Bulk

113.21  Application.
113.22  Advance notice.
113.23  Anchoring requirements.
113.24  Signals.
113.25  Vessel requirements.
113.26  Transit requirements.
113.27  Cargo requirements.
113.28  Documents.
113.29  Prohibited cargoes.

          Subpart C--Vessels Carrying Dangerous Packaged Goods

113.41  Application.
113.42  Advance notice.
113.43  Anchoring requirements.
113.44  Vessel requirements.
113.45  Transit requirements.
113.46  Cargo requirements.
113.47  Documents.
113.48  Prohibited cargoes.
113.49  Class 1, Explosives.
113.50  Class 7, Radioactive Substances.

    Authority: Issued under authority vested in the President by 22 
U.S.C. 3811; E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 113.1  Application.

    This part does not apply to vessels of war or auxiliary vessels, as 
those terms are defined in the Treaty Concerning the Permanent 
Neutrality and Operation of the Panama Canal (September 7, 1977). This 
part applies to all other vessels, regardless of character, tonnage, 
size, service, and whether self-propelled or not, and whether arriving 
or departing, under way, moored, anchored, aground, transiting or 
passing through Canal waters, that are carrying dangerous cargo as 
defined in Sec. 113.2(e).


<R05>
Sec. 113.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part, the following definitions will apply:
    (a) Bulk Chemical Code means the Code for the Construction and 
Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, including 
amendments thereto, which is generally applicable to ships built on or 
after April 12, 1972, but before July 1, 1986, and the International 
Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous 
Chemicals in Bulk, which is generally applicable to ships built on or 
after July 1, 1986.
    (b) Certificate of Compliance means a certificate issued by a 
national government, or a society on behalf of a government, certifying 
that the ship is in compliance with the requirements of the Bulk 
Chemical Code or Gas Carrier Codes.
    (c) Certificate of Fitness means a certificate issued by or on 
behalf of a national government in accordance with the Bulk Chemical 
Code or the Gas Carrier Codes, certifying that the construction and 
equipment of the vessel

[[Page 109]]

are adequate to permit the safe carriage of specified dangerous 
substances in the vessel.
    (d) Combustible liquids means a volatile liquid having a flashpoint 
at
61<SUP>+</SUP>C (141 <SUP>+</SUP>F) or above.
    (e) Dangerous cargo means (1) any substance whether packaged or in 
bulk, intended for carriage or storage and having properties coming 
within the classes listed in the IMDG Code, and (2) any substance 
shipped in bulk not coming within the IMDG Code classes but which is 
subject to the requirements of the Bulk Chemical Code, the Gas Carrier 
Codes, or Appendix B of the Solid Bulk Code.
    (f) Dangerous cargo in bulk means any dangerous substance, carried 
without any intermediate form of containment, in a tank or cargo space 
which is a structural part of a vessel or in a tank permanently fixed in 
or on a vessel.
    (g) Gas Carrier Codes means the International Code for the 
Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, 
which is generally applicable to ships built on or after July 1, 1986, 
and the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying 
Liquefied Gases in Bulk, which is generally applicable to ships built on 
or after December 31, 1976, but before July 1, 1986, and the Code for 
Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, which is generally 
applicable to ships delivered before December 31, 1976.
    (h) IMDG means the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code.
    (i) IMO means the International Maritime Organization (formerly 
International Maritime Consultative Organization).
    (j) IMO Class means the classification of a dangerous substance 
under the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1960, 
as amended. Under this system of classification, dangerous substances 
are divided into 9 classes and subdivisions based on their particular 
properties.
    (k) IOPP Certificate means an IMO International Oil Pollution 
Prevention Certificate certifying that the ship has been surveyed in 
accordance with regulations of MARPOL 73/78.
    (l) MARPOL 73/78 means the IMO International Convention for the 
Prevention of Pollution From Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 
1978 relating thereto. Any annex thereto applies to vessels in waters of 
the Panama Canal beginning the date on which the annex enters into force 
by its terms.
    (m) Packaged dangerous goods means any dangerous cargo contained in 
a receptable, portable tank, freight container or vehicle. The term 
includes an empty receptacle, portable tank or tank vehicle which has 
previously been used for the carriage of a dangerous substance unless 
such receptacle or tank has been cleaned and dried, or when the nature 
of the former contents permits transport with safety.
    (n) SOLAS means the International Convention for the Safety of Life 
at Sea, 1974, as amended.
    (o) Solid Bulk Code means the International Code of Safe Practice 
for Solid Bulk Cargoes.
    (p) Reference to codes, international agreements, or other 
regulations shall also be deemed to refer to any amendments or additions 
thereto on or after the date such amendments or additions become 
effective.


<R05>
Sec. 113.3  Classifications.

    (a) Dangerous cargo shall be classified in accordance with the IMO 
class and division. Whenever there is a doubt as to the explosive or 
dangerous nature of any commodity, or in case of conflict as to its 
classification, determination of the nature and classification of such 
cargoes shall be made by the Marine Safety Advisor or his designee. 
Dangerous cargoes shall be divided into the following classes:
    (1) Class 1--Explosives.
    (i) 1.1--Substances and articles which have a mass explosion hazard.
    (ii) 1.2--Substances and articles which have a projection hazard but 
not a mass explosion hazard.
    (iii) 1.3--Substances and articles which have a fire hazard and 
either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection hazard, or both, but 
not a mass explosion hazard.
    (iv) 1.4--Substances and articles which present no significant 
hazard.
    (v) 1.5--Very insensitive substances which has a mass explosion 
hazard.
    (2) Class 2--Gases: Compressed, liquefied or dissolved under 
pressure.

[[Page 110]]

    (i) 2.1--Inflammable gases.
    (ii) 2.2--Nonflammable gases.
    (iii) 2.3--Poisonous gases.
    (3) Class 3--Inflammable liquids.
    (i) 3.1--Low flashpoint group (flashpoint below -18  deg.C or 0 
deg.F).
    (ii) 3.2--Intermediate flashpoint group (flashpoint between -18 
deg.C (0  deg.F) and 23  deg.C (73  deg.F)).
    (iii) 3.3--High flashpoint group (flashpoint between 23  deg.C (73 
deg.F) and 61  deg.C (141  deg.F)).
    (4) Class 4--Inflammable solids or substances.
    (i) 4.1--Inflammable solids.
    (ii) 4.2--Substances liable to spontaneous combustion.
    (iii) 4.3--Substances emitting inflammable gases when wet.
    (5) Class 5--Oxidizing substances and organic peroxides.
    (i) 5.1--Oxidizing substances.
    (ii) 5.2--Organic peroxides.
    (6) Class 6--Poisonous and infectious substances.
    (i) 6.1--Poisonous substances.
    (ii) 6.2--Infectious substances.
    (7) Class 7--Radioactive substances.
    (8) Class 8--Corrosives.
    (9) Class 9--Miscellaneous dangerous substances.

This class includes any other substance which experience has shown, or 
may show, to be of such a dangerous character that the application of 
the hazardous cargo rules are warranted. Class 9 includes a number of 
substances and articles which cannot be properly covered by the 
provisions applicable to the other classes, or which present a 
relatively low transportation hazard.
    (b) Combustible liquids having flashpoints above 61  deg.C (141 
deg.F) are not considered to be dangerous by virtue of their fire 
hazard.

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37326, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.4  Safety and alarm systems.

    (a) All dangerous cargo alarms, safety devices, and the vessel's 
firefighting systems shall be tested 24 hours prior to arrival in Canal 
waters by any vessel carrying dangerous cargoes. An entry shall be made 
in the ship's log stating that such tests were conducted and the systems 
found in proper working order or, if not in proper order, a detailed 
listing of discrepancies shall be included.
    (b) This log entry shall be available for inspection by the boarding 
officer. Any deviations from the ``proper working order'' condition 
shall be brought to the attention of the boarding officer.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.5  Inspections.

    The Canal Operations Captain or the Marine Safety Advisor or their 
designees may inspect vessels carrying dangerous cargoes to ensure that 
such vessels are in compliance with the requirements of this part.

[54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R04>
          Subpart B--Vessels Carrying Dangerous Cargoes in Bulk


<R05>
Sec. 113.21  Application.

    This subpart applies to vessels carrying dangerous liquefied gases, 
liquids and solids in bulk, or tankers in ballast condition which are 
not gas free. It does not apply to vessels carrying combustible liquids 
in bulk as prescribed in Sec. 113.3(b), subpart A, of this part.

[54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.22  Advance notice.

    Vessels subject to this subpart shall provide not less than 48 hours 
advance notice to Canal authorities by radio of the information required 
by the ``GOLF'' item in the prearrival radio message prescribed in 
Sec. 123.4(a) of this subchapter.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001).

[54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.23  Anchoring requirements.

    (a) Vessels subject to this subpart shall communicate with the 
signal stations at Flamenco Island or Christobal prior to arrival as 
required by Sec. 101.1 of this title and await instructions before 
anchoring.

[[Page 111]]

    (b) Such vessels will be instructed to anchor in one of the 
explosive anchorage areas as described in Sec. 101.8(a) (2) and (3) and 
(c)(2) of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 113.24  Signals.

    Vessels subject to this subpart shall display the flags and lights 
described in Sec. 111.23(d) of this subchapter.


<R05>
Sec. 113.25  Vessel requirements.

    (a) Vessels subject to this subpart shall comply with the following 
standards set forth in IMO Conventions and Codes, which are hereby 
incorporated by reference:
    (1) All vessels subject to this subpart shall comply with MARPOL 73/
78.
    (2) Vessels carrying dangerous chemicals in bulk shall comply with 
the Bulk Chemical Code.
    (3) Bulk liquefied gas carriers shall comply with the Gas Carrier 
Codes.
    (4) Solid bulk carriers shall comply with the Solid Bulk Code.
    (b) The standards incorporated by reference in paragraph (a) of this 
section, are further described as follows:
    (1) MARPOL 73/78 is the International Convention for the Prevention 
of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 
relating thereto. The Convention is contained in IMO publication number 
520 77.14.E ``International Conference on Marine Pollution, 1973.'' The 
1978 Protocol is contained in IMO publication number 088 78.09.E 
``International Conference on Tanker Safety and Pollution Prevention, 
1978.'' The Bulk Chemical Code is in two parts: the Code for the 
Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in 
Bulk, which is generally applicable to ships built on or after April 12, 
1972, and before July 1, 1986, and is contained in IMO publications 767 
80.13.E and 770 83.13.E. (For a complete set of the Code and its most 
recent amendments, both of these publications must be consulted.) The 
other part is the International Code for the Construction and Equipment 
of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, which is generally 
applicable to ships built on or after July 1, 1986, and is contained in 
IMO publication number 100 83.11.E. The Gas Carrier Codes are the 
International Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying 
Liquefied Gases in Bulk, which is generally applicable to ships built on 
or after July 1, 1986, and which is contained in IMO publication number 
104 83.12.E, the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships 
Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, which is generally applicable to ships 
built on or after December 31, 1976, but before July 1, 1976, and which 
is contained in IMO publication number 782 83.16.E, and the Code for 
Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, which is generally 
applicable to ships delivered before December 31, 1976, and which is 
contained in IMO publication number 788 76.11.E. The Solid Bulk Code is 
the International Code of Safe Practice for Solid Bulk Cargoes, 
contained in IMO publication number 258 83.18.E. These publications are 
for sale from the International Maritime Organization, Publications 
Section, 4 Albert Embankment, London, SE1 7SR, England.


<R05>
Sec. 113.26  Transit requirements.

    (a) To better ensure the safe passage of vessels subject to this 
subpart, operating restrictions beyond those applicable to other vessels 
may be imposed by the Canal Operations Captain or his designee.
    (b) Such vessels shall have safety towing pendants ready at hand, 
fore and aft, prior to entering the locks. Such pendants shall be rigged 
over the side when anchored or moored in Canal waters.

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.27  Cargo requirements.

    (a) The loading, handling, inspection, stowage, segregation, 
maintenance, and certification of dangerous bulk cargoes shall be in 
compliance with the IMO standards and regulations which are incorporated 
by reference in Sec. 113.25.
    (b) Any special requirements for carrying chemicals or liquefied 
gases in bulk as stated on a vessel's Certificate of Fitness or 
Certificate of Compliance shall be complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 113.28  Documents.

    (a) Vessels subject to this subpart shall have ready for delivery to 
the

[[Page 112]]

Canal boarding officer a loading plan, as described in Sec. 101.10(e) of 
this subchapter.
    (b) Such vessels shall have ready for examination, as prescribed by 
Sec. 101.10(a), the following certificates:
    (1) A valid MARPOL 73/78 Certificate (same as International Oil 
Pollution Prevention Certificate).
    (2) A valid SOLAS Certificate.
    (3) A valid Certificate of Fitness or Certificate of Compliance 
(required for bulk chemical and liquefied gas carriers only.)

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)


<R05>
Sec. 113.29  Prohibited cargoes.

    (a) Unstable or explosive substances in bulk which are unduly 
sensitive or so reactive as to be subject to spontaneous reaction are 
prohibited in Canal waters.
    (b) Bulk dangerous cargoes not listed in the Bulk Chemical Code, Gas 
Carrier Codes, or Solid Bulk Code are prohibited in Canal waters unless 
advance approval is given by the Marine Safety Advisor or his designee 
to carry such cargoes.
    (c) Bulk chemical and liquefied gas carriers are prohibited from 
carrying in Canal waters dangerous cargoes that are not listed on their 
Certificate of Fitness or Certificate of Compliance, unless 30 days 
advance notice is given by the vessel and the Marine Safety Advisor or 
his designee approves the carriage of such cargoes in Canal waters.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R04>
          Subpart C--Vessels Carrying Dangerous Packaged Goods


<R05>
Sec. 113.41  Application.

    This subpart applies to vessels carrying packaged dangerous goods.


<R05>
Sec. 113.42  Advance notice.

    Vessels subject to this subpart shall provide not less than 48 hours 
advance notice to Canal authorities by radio of the information required 
in the ``HOTEL'' item of the radio message prescribed in Sec. 123.4 of 
this subchapter, except that vessels carrying explosives shall provide 
the information required in the ``GOLF'' item of the message.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.43  Anchoring requirements.

    (a) Vessels subject to this subpart shall communicate with the 
signal stations at Flamenco Island or Cristobal prior to arrival as 
required in Sec. 101.1 of this subchapter and await instructions before 
anchoring.
    (b) Such vessels will be instructed to anchor in one of the 
designated anchorage areas as described in Sec. 101.8(a) or (c).
    (c) Vessels carrying explosives or especially reactive or large 
amounts of dangerous materials as determined by the Canal Operations 
Captain, or his designee, may be instructed to anchor in one of the 
explosive anchorage areas described in Sec. 101.8(a) (2), (3) and (c)(2) 
of this subchapter.

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.44  Vessel requirements.

    (a) Vessels subject to this subpart shall comply with the standards 
set forth in SOLAS and the IMDG pertaining to the construction, 
maintenance, inspection, certification, and classification of the 
vessel, its safety equipment including alarms, and its cargo stowage and 
handling systems, which are hereby incorporated by reference.
    (b) SOLAS, which is incorporated by reference in paragraph (a) of 
this section, is the International Convention for the Safety of Life at 
Sea, 1974, together with the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto. The 
Convention is set forth in Treaties and Other International Acts Series 
number 9700 and the Protocol is set forth in number 10009 of the same 
series. These publications are for sale from the Superintendent of 
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. The 
Convention is also contained in IMO publication number 080 75.01.E 
``International Conference on Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,'' and the 
Protocol is contained in IMO publication number

[[Page 113]]

088 78.09.E ``International Conference on Tanker Safety and Pollution 
Prevention, 1978.'' IMDG is the International Maritime Dangerous Goods 
Code, which is contained in IMO publication numbers 200 81.10.E, 236 
81.17.E, and 238 82.21.E. (For current version of the IMDG, all three 
publications must be consulted.) The IMO publications referred to in 
this paragraph are for sale from the International Maritime 
Organization, Publications Section, 4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, 
England.


<R05>
Sec. 113.45  Transit requirements.

    Normal operating restrictions will generally apply unless such 
vessels are carrying more than five tons of explosives or carrying 
especially more reactive or large amounts of dangerous goods as 
determined by the Marine Safety Advisor or his designee, in which case 
additional operating restrictions may be imposed.

[54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.46  Cargo requirements.

    The loading, packing, labeling, marking, handling, stowage, 
segregation, maintenance, inspection, and certification of packaged 
dangerous goods shall be in compliance with the IMDG Code, which is 
incorporated by reference. See Sec. 113.44, Vessel Requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 113.47  Documents.

    Vessels subject to this subpart shall have ready for delivery to the 
Commission boarding officer a dangerous cargo manifest, as described in 
Sec. 101.10(d) of this subchapter.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)


<R05>
Sec. 113.48  Prohibited cargoes.

    Packaged dangerous goods which are not carried in compliance with 
the IMDG Code are prohibited in Canal waters.


<R05>
Sec. 113.49  Class 1, Explosives.

    (a) Vessels carrying explosives shall comply with the IMDG Code, 
which is incorporated by reference. See Sec. 113.44, Vessel 
Requirements, and Sec. 113.46, Cargo Requirements.
    (b) Explosive cargo may be loaded and discharged only at the Mindi 
Dock. Explosive anchorages prescribed in Sec. 101.8 (a) (2), (3) and 
(c)(2), respectively, may be used upon approval of the Marine Safety 
Advisor, or his designee.
    (c) The Marine Safety Advisor or his designee, upon application, may 
permit the discharge of explosives, whether intended for civilian or 
military use, at Commission docks and other locations within Canal 
waters in an emergency or when the character or packing of the 
explosives permits their safe discharge there.

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 113.50  Class 7, Radioactive substances.

    (a) Vessels carrying radioactive substances shall comply with the 
IMDG Code, which is incorporated by reference. See Sec. 113.44, Vessel 
Requirements, and Sec. 113.46, Cargo Requirements.
    (b) Any cask or container containing radioactive substances, 
together with any attachments thereto, may not weigh more than 150 tons.
    (c) For the purpose of approval of shipments and prior notification 
of radioactive substances under the IMDG Code, Panama Canal waters will 
be considered a country en route. Notification shall be given to Canal 
authorities 30 days in advance of the arrival of the vessel in Canal 
waters for all fissionable materials, in order that approval may be 
given by the Marine Safety Advisor, or his designee, to transit such 
cargoes.
    (d) Vessels carrying nuclear materials shall be required to provide 
current proof of financial responsibility and adequate provision for 
indemnity covering public liability and loss to the United States or any 
agency thereof, comparable in general scope to the protection afforded 
under section 170 of the United States Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended, 68 Stat. 919, 71 Stat. 576, or consistent with international 
practice and standards as set forth by the Treaty Concerning the 
Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama Canal. Vessels shall 
also be required to furnish the Commission

[[Page 114]]

with the results of cargo radiation survey reports in accordance with 
the standards in IMO class 7.
    (e) For the following radioactive substances, not less than 48-hour 
advance information required under Sec. 123.4 shall be provided, 
indicating the specifics required by the IMDG Code:
    (1) Low Specific Activity Substances or Low Level Solid Radioactive 
Substances as specified in Class 7 schedules 5, 6, and 7 of the IMDG 
Code.
    (2) Radioactive Substances carried in limited quantities as 
specified in Class 7 schedules 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the IMDG Code.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[50 FR 19679, May 10, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 37327, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R03>
PART 115--BOARD OF LOCAL INSPECTORS: COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
115.1  Board of Local Inspectors; Supervising Inspector.
115.2  Composition of the Board.
115.3  Employment of inspectors and examiners.
115.4  Recorder of Board; duties.
115.5  Recorder may administer oaths.
115.6  Assistance of owners or operators and masters.
115.7  Inspection of records of Board.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3778. 93 Stat. 492; E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 31 FR 12310, Sept. 16, 1966, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 115.1  Board of Local Inspectors; Supervising Inspector.

    (a) There is hereby continued the Board of Local Inspectors of the 
Panama Canal Commission, constituted as provided in Sec. 115.2, which 
shall perform, conduct and execute, under the supervision of the 
Supervising Inspector:
    (1) The investigations called for by section 1417, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 
Stat. 487;
    (2) The functions and responsibilities with which it is vested by 
this part and by Parts 117, 119 and 121 of this chapter; and
    (3) Such other duties in matters of a marine character as it may be 
assigned to it from time to time by the Administrator.
    (b) The Marine Director of the Panama Canal Commission shall serve, 
ex officio, as Supervising Inspector of the Commission except when he is 
designated to serve as Chairman of the Board in accordance with 
Sec. 115.2(c). When the Marine Director is so designated, the Deputy 
Administrator or such other official as the Administrator may designate 
in his stead, shall serve as Supervising Inspector.

[46 FR 63187, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 115.2  Compostion of the Board.

    (a) The Board of Local Inspectors, referred to in this part as ``the 
Board,'' shall, except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) 
of this section, consist of the following officials who shall serve in 
the capacities stated:
    (1) Chairman, Board of Local Inspectors.
    (2) Canal Operations Captain, as member.
    (3) Senior Canal Port Captain, as member.
    (b) Where the subject matter of circumstances of a particular 
accident warrant such action, the Supervising Inspector may designate 
the Chief, Industrial Division to serve, ex officio, as member of the 
Board in place of the members listed in paragraph (a)(2) or (3) of this 
section. In the absence of the Chairman, the Supervising Inspector will 
appoint a member to act as Chairman.
    (c) If the Supervising Inspector deems it appropriate in a 
particular investigation, he may designate an alternate to replace any 
official regularly serving on the Board. If he himself serves as such an 
alternate, he shall serve as Chairman of the Board.
    (d) Any accident investigation or other proceeding may, in the 
discretion of the Supervising Inspector, be conducted by one or more 
officials of the Board. The report of any such investigation or 
proceeding is subject, however, to the requirements of Part 117 of this 
subchapter.

[35 FR 12274, July 31, 1970, as amended at 46 FR 63187, Dec. 30, 1981; 
55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]

[[Page 115]]


<R05>
Sec. 115.3  Employment of inspectors and examiners.

    The Board may employ or assign such inspectors and examiners as it 
may require in the inspection of vessels and in the classification and 
licensing of pilots, masters, mates, and engineers.


<R05>
Sec. 115.4  Recorder of Board; duties.

    There shall be a Recorder of the Board, whose duty it shall be to 
keep a record of its proceedings; of all applications for licenses; of 
those issued or refused; suspended, extended, or modified; together with 
the name, grade, and serial number of all such licenses; and of all 
casualties, collisions, founderings, sinkings, fires and other disasters 
or matters of interest that may come before the Board. Under the 
direction of the Chairman he shall prepare, submit, and register all 
licenses and certificates of inspection, and the reports mentioned in 
this part or in Part 117, 119, or 121 of this chapter, and shall perform 
such other duties as may be directed by the Chairman.


<R05>
Sec. 115.5  Recorder may administer oaths.

    The Recorder is authorized to administer the oaths required for the 
completion of official documents of, or which are presented to, the 
Board.

    Cross Reference: For authority of the Board to administer oaths, see 
2 C.Z.C. 1101, 76A Stat. 38.


<R05>
Sec. 115.6  Assistance of owners or operators and masters.

    Owners or operators and masters of vessels shall render all 
requested assistance to the Board in its investigations and inspections, 
and shall, when requested, put machinery and gear in operation when 
necessary to demonstrate the efficiency of the machinery, equipment, 
appliances or other gear.


<R05>
Sec. 115.7  Inspection of records of Board.

    All official records and documents in the office of the Board, after 
official action thereon has been concluded, shall be open to public 
inspection and examination in the office of the Board.


<R03>
PART 117--MARINE ACCIDENTS: INVESTIGATIONS; CONTROL; RESPONSIBILITY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
117.1  Investigation of marine accidents.
117.1a  Scheduling of investigations.
117.1b  Rights of party in interest.
117.2  Change in physical status of property affected by accident 
          forbidden.
117.3  Reports by Board to the Administrator.
117.4  Reports of accidents by officer in command to Board.
117.5  Control of wrecked, injured, or burning vessels.
117.6  Liability of vessel for injury to Canal structures or equipment.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3777, 3778, 93 Stat. 487; E.O. 12215, 45 FR 
36043.

    Source: 46 FR 63188, Dec. 30, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 117.1  Investigation of marine accidents.

    (a) Whenever, within Panama Canal waters, including the locks of the 
Canal, a vessel, or its cargo, crew, or passenger, meets with a serious 
marine accident, or whenever, within the harbors, anchorages, and areas 
adjacent thereto, including the ports of Balboa and Cristobal, there is 
a serious marine accident involving Commission personnel or equipment, 
the Board of Local Inspectors shall promptly investigate in detail the 
conditions and circumstances under which such accident occurred.
    (b) Any other marine accident occurring in such waters may be 
investigated by the Board at the discretion of the Supervising 
Inspector.
    (c) The Master of a vessel involved in a marine accident may request 
an investigation of an accident not considered by the Board to fall 
within paragraph (a) of this section. The request must be addressed to 
the Supervising Inspector or the Chairman of the Board, and must be in 
writing. If the Master does not so request such an investigation in 
writing, he shall be deemed to have waived all rights to the 
investigation called for by section 1417, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 487, 
which provides that a claim may not be considered by the Panama Canal 
Commission, or an action for damages lie thereon,

[[Page 116]]

unless, prior to the departure from the Panama Canal of the vessel 
involved:
    (1) The investigation by the competent authorities of the accident 
or injury giving rise to the claim has been completed; and,
    (2) The basis for the claim has been laid before the Commission.
    (d) For the purpose of this section, the term ``serious marine 
accident'' includes:
    (1) Any accident involving substantial damage to any structure, 
plant, or equipment of the Panama Canal Commission or the United States; 
and
    (2) Any accident (i) involving death or resulting in personal injury 
that requires admission of a person to a hospital as a bed patient; or 
(ii) resulting in damages to a vessel which require the making of 
repairs prior to the vessel's departure from the Canal; Provided that 
the Supervising Inspector or his designee has reason to believe that 
personnel or equipment of the Panama Canal Commission were then aboard 
or were assisting the vessel involved in the accident or were situated 
(aboard another vessel, ashore or otherwise) so as to have been a factor 
in the accident.

    Cross Reference: Compelling attendance and testimony of witnesses 
and production of books and papers by Board, see section 1418, Pub. L. 
96-70, 93 Stat. 487.


<R05>
Sec. 117.1a   Scheduling of investigations.

    (a) Marine-accident investigations shall be scheduled so as to 
afford pilots and other parties in interest a period of time not less 
than that provided below for rest and consultation prior to the 
commencement of an investigation:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Relief time                     Time of investigation      
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0000-0400...........................  1400-1800 (12 hours minimum)      
0400-0800...........................  1600-2000 (12 hours minimum)      
0800-1200...........................  1800-2200 (10 hours minimum)      
1200-1600...........................  0800 Next Day.                    
1600-2000...........................  1000 Next Day.                    
2000-2400...........................  1000 Next Day.                    
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) The column ``Relief Time'', set out in paragraph (a) of this 
section, indicates the period during which the pilot or other party in 
interest completed the transit during which an accident occurred or the 
time at which he was relieved of duty following the occurrence of an 
accident. The column ``Time of Investigation'', set out in paragraph (a) 
of this section, indicates the earliest time at which the investigation 
may be scheduled. In exceptional cases a departure from this schedule 
may be made, as for example in the case of warships or other vessels 
that have an imperative need to resume the voyage as soon as possible. 
Unless a pilot or other party in interest requests the time provided in 
this schedule, the hearing may be set for an earlier hour.

[32 FR 3830, Mar. 8, 1967]


<R05>
Sec. 117.1b  Rights of party in interest.

    Any Panama Canal pilot or other individual who is a party in 
interest at a marine-accident investigation may obtain counsel of his 
own choosing, testify in his own behalf, cross-examine witnesses, call 
witnesses, and introduce any relevant evidence. The Board shall advise 
all parties in interest of such rights.


<R05>
Sec. 117.2  Change in physical status of property affected by accident forbidden.

    In the event of a marine accident or casualty affecting any property 
in Panama Canal waters, or waters adjacent thereto, or any property 
owned or operated by the Panama Canal Commission or the United States, 
which imposes on the Board an obligation to investigate, no change in 
the physical status of the property affected by the accident or casualty 
may be made or permitted prior to inspection by properly constituted 
authority, unless such change in status be imperative in order to 
preserve life or property.


<R05>
Sec. 117.3  Reports by Board to the Administrator.

    The Board shall make reports forthwith in detail to the 
Administrator of all marine-accident investigations conducted by it, 
setting forth the facts and circumstances surrounding the accident and 
bearing upon its proximate causation, the nature and extent of the 
injury and the amount of damages, if any, occasioned by such injury. The 
reports shall include a transcript of the record of the Board's 
investigation, together with its findings and opinions respecting the 
accident. All findings

[[Page 117]]

and opinions of the Board shall be rendered by a full Board after a 
review of the entire transcript, even though the hearing may have been 
conducted by a single member of the Board or by a two-man Board. Reports 
to the Administrator shall be forwarded in duplicate through the 
Supervising Inspector, who may place thereon such endorsement as he may 
see fit.


<R05>
Sec. 117.4  Reports of accidents by officer in command to Board.

    The Master or other officer in command of a vessel shall, prior to 
the vessel's departure from Panama Canal waters, report in writing to 
the Board any accident involving his vessel in Canal waters that 
resulted in loss of life or serious personal injury or in substantial 
damage to property.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[46 FR 63188, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 54 FR 29336, July 12, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 117.5  Control of wrecked, injured, or burning vessels.

    When a vessel in the Panama Canal waters goes aground, or is 
wrecked, or is so injured that it is liable to become an obstruction in 
such waters, or is on fire, the Canal Operations Captain shall have the 
right to supervise and direct, or to take complete charge of and 
conduct, all operations which may be necessary to float the vessel, to 
clear the wreckage, to remove the injured vessel to a safe location, or 
to extinguish the fire, as the case may be. The Canal Operations Captain 
may, when necessary, take such action without awaiting the permission of 
the owner or agent of the vessel, and may require the Master of the 
vessel and all persons under his supervision and control to place the 
vessel, and all equipment on board, at the disposal of the Canal 
Operations Captain without costs to the Commission. Unless the Panama 
Canal Commission is subsequently found or determined to be responsible 
for the accident or the condition necessitating action by the Canal 
Operations Captain, the necessary expenses incurred by the Commission in 
carrying out the provisions of this section shall be a proper charge 
against such vessel, her owners and her operators.

[46 FR 63188, Dec. 30, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 11909, Mar. 30, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 117.6  Liability of vessel for injury to Canal structures or equipment.

    A vessel, or her owner or operator, shall be held liable for any 
injury to any structure, plant, or equipment of or pertaining to the 
Canal, the Panama Canal Commission or the United States when the injury 
is proximately caused by the negligence or fault of the vessel or its 
master or crew. No vessel shall make fast, or run any line, to any 
marker, buoy, beacon, or other aid to navigation; and a vessel shall so 
navigate as not to strike such aids in passing.


<R03>
PART 119--LICENSING OF OFFICERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
119.1  License defined; classification and licensing of Masters, mates, 
          engineers, pilots, and motorboat operators.
119.2  Term of licenses.
119.3  Appeal from action refusing license.
119.5  Revocation for parting with license.
119.6  Employment of licensed officers.
119.7  Original license defined.
119.8  Application form.
119.9  Service records and endorsements.
119.10  Age and literacy requirements.
119.11  Knowledge of first aid.
119.12  Physical and experience requirements.
119.13  Burden of establishing qualifications.
119.14  Applicant to appear for examination.
119.15  Reexamination.
119.16  Raise of grade.
119.17  Renewal of license.
119.18  Sea service as member of armed forces of the United States or 
          the Republic of Panama or on vessels owned by either nation.
119.19  Evaluation of equivalent experience.
119.20  Increase in scope of license; removal of limitations.
119.21  Written statement of reasons for denying license.
119.23  Limitations on license.
119.24  Oath of licensee.
119.25  Duplicate license.

                           Subpart B--Masters

119.61  Master, steam and motor vessels; experience required.

[[Page 118]]

119.63  Master, non-self-propelled floating equipment; experience.

                            Subpart C--Mates

119.101  Mate, non-self-propelled floating equipment; experience 
          required.
119.103  Mate, steam or motor; experience required.

                            Subpart D--Pilots

119.141  Pilot, Panama Canal; qualifications.
119.143  Pilot, United States Government local vessel; employment 
          requirement.

                     Subpart E--Motorboat Operators

119.183  Motorboat operator; age and job requirements.
119.187  Operating test.

                          Subpart F--Engineers

119.221  Grade and type of engineer licenses.
119.222  Chief engineer, steam vessels; experience required.
119.223  Chief engineer, motor vessels; experience required.
119.224  Assistant engineer, steam vessels; experience required.
119.225  Assistant engineer, motor vessels; experience required.
119.226  Assistant Engineer (watch standing), motor vessel; experience 
          required.
119.227  Chief and assistant engineer; steam and motor vessels.

    Authority: Issued under authority of the President by 22 U.S.C. 
3811, E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 46 FR 63189, Dec. 30, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 119.1  License defined; classification and licensing of Masters, mates, engineers, pilots, and motorboat operators.

    (a) The word license when used in this part means a Panama Canal 
Commission license unless specifically identified as one from another 
issuing authority.
    (b) The Board of Local Inspectors shall recommend the classification 
of Masters, mates and engineers of steam and motor vessels owned and 
operated by the Panama Canal Commission, and of operators of U.S. 
Government motorboats operating in Panama Canal waters, excluding 
pleasure craft, and of Panama Canal pilots, and upon such recommendation 
licenses may be issued by the Supervising Inspector, or by such other 
officer as he may designate. No person shall act or serve as a pilot, 
Master, mate or engineer, or operate said motorboats, unless he holds a 
valid license to do so.


<R05>
Sec. 119.2  Term of licenses.

    Licenses issued to marine personnel of the Panama Canal Commission 
are granted to such personnel for such periods as they are employed by 
the Commission in a position requiring such license. Annually, all 
marine personnel licensed by the Panama Canal Commission shall have a 
physical examination attesting to their physical condition to perform 
their assigned work. Such examination shall include an examination of 
the applicant's acuity of vision and color sense.


<R05>
Sec. 119.3  Appeal from action refusing license.

    An applicant for a license as Master, mate, engineer, or pilot, for 
whom the Board of Local Inspectors has refused to recommend such license 
may appeal to the Supervising Inspector or to such other officer as the 
Supervising Inspector may designate. The appeal must be entered within 
15 days after the final action of the Board. Upon the appeal, the 
Supervising Inspector or other designated officer has authority either 
to grant or to deny the license.


<R05>
Sec. 119.5   Revocation for parting with license.

    A license shall be immediately revoked if, for any purpose, the 
holder thereof voluntarily parts with its possession, or places it 
beyond his personal control by selling or lending it to, or pledging or 
depositing it with, another person.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.6  Employment of licensed officers.

    Only persons who are actually employed in, or conditionally eligible 
for appointment to, a position subject to licensing under this part, or 
who can establish that they have a bona fide intention to operate a U.S. 
Government local craft within Panama Canal waters, may be issued an 
original license

[[Page 119]]

under this part. Renewals may be issued irrespective of the employment 
requirement if, in the judgment of the Supervising Inspector, the 
likelihood of return to Canal employment or other circumstances warrant 
renewal.

[46 FR 63189, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 119.7   Original license defined.

    The first license issue to an applicant shall be considered an 
original license, where the records show no previous issuance of a 
license of the kind concerned to such applicant.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.8   Application form.

    The applicant for a license shall make written application upon the 
form furnished by the Board.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.9  Service records and endorsements.

    (a) Applicants for original licenses or raise in grade of license 
other than motorboat operator, shall present to the Board, to be filed 
with their applications, letters, discharges, or other official 
documents, certifying to the amount and character of their experience 
and names of the vessels on which it was acquired. Certified photostatic 
copies of the aforementioned documents may be accepted.
    (b) The Board shall, when practicable, require an applicant for 
Master's, mate's, pilot's, or engineer's license to have the written 
endorsement of the Master or chief engineer of the vessels upon which he 
has served. Applicants for license as pilot shall have the endorsement 
of at least two licensed pilots as to their qualifications.


<R05>
Sec. 119.10  Age and literacy requirements.

    To be eligible for examination for any license an applicant must, 
except as provided by Sec. 119.183(b), be at least 21 years of age, and 
have the necessary experience as specified in this part. In addition, an 
applicant for license as pilot, Master, mate, or engineer must have a 
working knowledge of the English language. Proficiency in English will 
be determined by the Supervisory Training Instructor, Language Training 
Program, Office of Personnel Administration. The examination will be 
given in either English or Spanish, according to the choice of the 
applicant.


<R05>
Sec. 119.11   Knowledge of first aid.

    An applicant for an original license as master, mate, pilot, or 
engineer, may not be examined unless he presents satisfactory evidence 
to the Board that he has completed a course of instruction and passed an 
examination in the principles of first aid administered by an agency 
recognized as competent by the Supervising Inspector. Possession of any 
valid U.S. Coast Guard license shall constitute satisfactory evidence of 
the applicant's compliance with this requirement.

[43 FR 13380, Mar. 30, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 119.12  Physical and experience requirements.

    (a) All applicants for original license must pass a physical 
examination given by a physician recognized by the Commission, and 
present a certificate executed by the examining physician to the Board. 
The certificate shall attest to the applicant's acuity of vision, color 
sense, and general physical condition.
    (b) For original license as master, mate, or pilot, the applicant 
must have either with or without glasses, at least 20/20 vision in one 
eye, and at least 20/40 in the other. An applicant who wears glasses, 
however, must also be able to pass a test without glasses of at least 
20/40 in one eye and at least 20/70 in the other. The applicant's color 
sense shall be tested by an approved method.
    (c) Applicants for original license as engineer shall be examined 
only as to their ability to distinguish the colors red, blue, green, and 
yellow.
    (d) For original license as engineer, the applicant must have either 
with or without glasses at least 20/30 vision in one eye, and at least 
20/50 vision in the other. An applicant who wears glasses, however, must 
also be able to pass a test without glasses of at least 20/50 in one eye 
and at least 20/70 in the other.
    (e) If an applicant is not possessed of the vision, hearing, and 
general physical condition considered necessary, the Board, after 
consultation with the

[[Page 120]]

examining physician, may make recommendations to the Supervising 
Inspector for an exception to these requirements if, in its opinion, 
extenuating circumstances warrant special consideration.
    (f) No original license shall be issued to any person unless 25 
percent of the required experience has been obtained within the three 
years immediately preceding the date of application. Such period shall 
include, in addition to the three years specified, any service in the 
Armed Forces of the United States or the Republic of Panama that 
immediately preceded or interrupted the last three years spent by the 
applicant in a civilian status prior to the date of the application. 
When an applicant for a license as engineer does not meet the 
requirement of this paragraph, but is otherwise qualified, the Board may 
examine him and recommend to the Supervising Inspector that he be 
licensed. In such cases a license may be issued provided the applicant 
has satisfactorily completed a 90-day period as trainee aboard 
applicable equipment of the Panama Canal Commission.
    (g) It is not required that an applicant has obtained his experience 
on United States vessels. Experience on foreign vessels will be given 
due credit.
    (h) An applicant for a license may not be given a grade of license 
higher than that in which he has served. However, this paragraph shall 
not apply to persons qualifying for license under the Panama Canal pilot 
Master and engineer training programs.
    (i) When a qualified person makes application for license it shall 
be the duty of the Board to give the applicant the required examination 
as soon as practicable.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 46 FR 63190, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 119.13  Burden of establishing qualifications.

    Applicants for licenses must establish to the satisfaction of the 
Board that they possess all of the qualifications necessary, such as 
age, experience and character before they shall be entitled to be issued 
licenses.


<R05>
Sec. 119.14  Applicant to appear for examination.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, before an 
original license or raise in grade is issued to any person to act as 
Master, mate, pilot, or engineer, he shall personally appear before the 
Board and pass a written examination, covering such subjects as will 
demonstrate that the applicant has sufficient knowledge of maritime 
matters necessary for the license for which he has applied. A list of 
subjects to be tested may be obtained from the Board.
    (b) Applicants will also be required to pass a practical 
examination.
    (c) Upon the recommendation of the Board that he do so, the 
Supervising Inspector may, at his discretion, issue an original license 
either without an examination or with an examination covering only 
subjects of a local nature, to an applicant who possesses a currently 
valid marine license issued by a competent national authority and who is 
otherwise eligible under this part.

[46 FR 63189, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 119.15   Reexamination.

    An applicant for license who has been duly examined and refused a 
license, may come before the Board for reexamination at any time 
thereafter fixed by the Board.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.16  Raise of grade.

    (a) Upon the issuance of a license involving a raise of grade, the 
applicant shall surrender the old license to the Board.
    (b) The Board shall, before granting a raise of grade of license, 
require the applicant to make written application on a prescribed form.
    (c) The grade of a license as Master, mate, or pilot may not be 
raised except upon the certificate of a physician recognized by the 
Panama Canal Commission, attesting that the color sense of the applicant 
is normal. Applicants for raise of grade of engineer license are not 
subject to this requirement. Nothing herein contained shall debar an 
applicant who has lost the sight of one

[[Page 121]]

eye from securing a raise of grade of his license if he is qualified in 
all other respects and his vision in his one eye passes the test 
required for the better eye of an applicant having vision in both eyes.
    (d) Applicants for raise of grade of license shall present to the 
Board letters, discharges, or other official documents certifying to the 
amount and character of their experience and the names of the vessels on 
which it was acquired.
    (e) A raise of grade of license may not be granted to any applicant 
unless 25 percent of the required sea service shall have been served 
within the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
Service in the armed forces of the United States or Republic of Panama 
shall not be counted in computing the three years.
    (f) Sea service acquired prior to the issuance of the license held 
may not be accepted as any part of the service required for raise of 
grade.


<R05>
Sec. 119.17   Renewal of license.

    (a) Applicants for renewal of master's, mate's, or pilot's license 
shall present evidence of service on waters for which licensed obtained 
within the 3 years next preceding the date of application, or shall 
present evidence of employment in a position closely related to the 
operation of vessels within the same 3-year period. If this requirement 
is not met, the Board shall determine to its satisfaction that the 
licensed officer is thoroughly familiar with the International rules of 
the road or the pilot or special rules applicable to the waters for 
which the applicant is licensed. A written examination may be required 
for this purpose or the applicant may be examined orally and a summary 
of the oral examination placed on the officer's license file.
    (b) A license may not be renewed if title to it has been forfeited 
or if facts which would render renewal improper have come to the 
attention of the Board.
    (c) A 12-month period of grace shall be allowed after the expiration 
date of the license held, during which period it may be renewed. Active 
service in the armed forces or the merchant marine shall not be included 
in computing the period of grace: Provided, however, That this exception 
applies only to such periods of service, or portions thereof, during 
which there was no reasonable opportunity for renewal.
    (d) A license may not be renewed more than 30 days in advance of the 
date of expiration thereof, unless there are extraordinary circumstances 
that justify a renewal beforehand, in which case the reasons must appear 
in detail in the records of the Board.
    (e) A license as Master, mate, or pilot may not be renewed except 
upon the official certificate of a physician recognized by the 
Commission that the color sense of the applicant is normal. Applicants 
for renewal of license as engineer are not subject to this requirement.
    (f) [Reserved]
    (g) Nothing contained herein shall debar an applicant who has lost 
the sight of one eye from securing a renewal of his license, if he is 
qualified in all other respects, and the vision in his one eye passes 
the test required for the better eye of an applicant having sight in 
both eyes.
    (h) An officer making application for a renewal of his license shall 
appear in person before the Board, except in cases where the distance 
from the office of the Board is such as to put the applicant to great 
inconvenience and expense to appear in person. In this event he may, 
upon taking the oath of office before a person authorized to administer 
oaths, and upon forwarding the oath, together with the license to be 
renewed, and the written application and certificate of visual 
examination where required, have the license renewed by the Board, if a 
valid reason to the contrary is not known. The Board shall attach the 
oath to the stub end of the license, which is to be retained on file in 
the Board's office.
    (i) If an applicant applies for renewal of his license for the same 
grade, after 12 months after the date of its expiration, he must pass an 
examination for the same grade of license, of such length and scope as 
will, in the judgment of the Board, be sufficient to demonstrate 
adequately the continued professional knowledge of the examinee, except 
that a professional examination shall not be required if the license 
expired during the time of the

[[Page 122]]

holder's service with the armed forces or the merchant marine, and there 
was no reasonable opportunity for renewal.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 46 FR 63190, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 119.18   Sea service as member of armed forces of the United States or the Republic of Panama or on vessels owned by either nation.

    (a) Sea service as a member of the armed forces of the United States 
or the Republic of Panama will be accepted as qualifying experience for 
an original, raise of grade, or extension of route of license. Such 
service will be subject to evaluation to determine its equivalent to the 
sea service required on merchant-type vessels, and to determine the 
appropriate grade, class, and limit of license for which the applicant 
is eligible. An applicant may be permitted to omit the examination for 
intermediate grades of license if his experience is of such character as 
to qualify him for a higher, or the highest, grade of license.
    (b) If a person who has served in a civilian capacity as commanding 
officer, Master, mate, engineer, or pilot, etc., of any vessel owned and 
operated by the United States or the Republic of Panama, in a service in 
which a license as Master, mate, engineer, or pilot was not required at 
the time of the service, applies for examination for license, the Board 
shall evaluate the time or service and allow appropriate credit 
therefor.


<R05>
Sec. 119.19   Evaluation of equivalent experience.

    If an applicant presents evidence of service or experience which 
does not meet the specific requirements of these regulations, but which, 
in the opinion of the Board, is a reasonable equivalent thereof, the 
Board may evaluate the experience and allow appropriate credit therefor.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.20   Increase in scope of license; removal of limitations.

    (a) If the Board is satisfied on the basis of documentary evidence 
submitted that an applicant is entitled by experience and knowledge to 
an increase in the scope of his license, the Board may recommend removal 
or modification of any limitations which may have previously been placed 
upon the license.
    (b) A limitation on a license may not be changed before the 
applicant has made up any deficiency in the experience prescribed for 
the license desired and has passed the necessary examination.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.21   Written statement of reasons for denying license.

    If the Board declines to recommend the applicant for the license 
applied for, it shall furnish him a statement, in writing, setting forth 
the reasons for its refusal to make the recommendation.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.23  Limitations on license.

    The Board may limit, as appropriate, the tonnage, length, 
horsepower, type of vessel(s) and the waters upon which any licensee may 
act. The Board will note any such limitations on the license.


<R05>
Sec. 119.24   Oath of licensee.

    Every person receiving a license or certificate of lost license 
shall sign same upon the back thereof immediately upon its receipt, and 
execute an oath faithfully to perform the duties of this position, which 
shall be attached to the stub end of the license retained by the Board.

[31 FR 12311, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 119.25  Duplicate license.

    If a person to whom a license has been issued loses his license, he 
shall promptly report the loss to the Board. The Board shall issue a 
duplicate license after receiving from the person a properly executed 
affidavit giving satisfactory evidence of the loss. The license shall be 
issued as a duplicate by the addition of the following written 
endorsement: ``This license replaces License Number ---- issued at ---- 
on the above date.'' The duplicate license shall have the same force and 
effect as the original, lost license.

[[Page 123]]


<R04>
                           Subpart B--Masters


<R05>
Sec. 119.61  Master, steam and motor vessels; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for a Panama Canal license as Master of 
steam and motor vessels, an applicant must--
    (a) Hold a currently valid Panama Canal license as mate of steam and 
motor vessels, and have served at least 260 eight-hour watches in charge 
of a deck watch on Panama Canal Commission vessels of 75 feet in length 
engaged in towing; or
    (b) Hold a license as Master or mate of steam and motor vessels 
issued by an authority outside the Panama Canal, and have served at 
least 260 eight-hour watches as a licensed officer in charge of a deck 
watch on steam or motor vessels over 75 feet in length engaged in 
towing.


<R05>
Sec. 119.63  Master, non-self-propelled floating equipment; experience.

    In order to be eligible for examination for the license of Master of 
non-self-propelled floating equipment, an applicant must have at least 
260 eight-hour watches of experience as mate on Panama Canal Commission 
non-self-propelled floating equipment or such experience on other 
vessels as the Supervising Inspector determines to be equivalent 
thereto.


<R04>
                            Subpart C--Mates


<R05>
Sec. 119.101   Mate, non-self-propelled floating equipment; experience required.

    An applicant for mate of non-self-propelled floating equipment shall 
be eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory 
documentary evidence to the Board that he has:
    (a) Served a 4-year apprenticeship as mate, dredge; or
    (b) Completed 2 years of qualifying experience in the deck 
department of non-self-propelled floating equipment and completed 
adequate apprenticeship training; or
    (c) Such other experience as upon the recommendation of the Chief, 
Dredging Division is considered to be a satisfactory equivalent thereto.

[34 FR 7912, May 20, 1969]


<R05>
Sec. 119.103  Mate, steam or motor; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for examination for the license of mate of 
steam or motor vessels, an applicant must--
    (a)(1) Have graduated from either the Panama Nautical School's 
program for deck officers, a maritime academy in the United States 
recognized by the U.S. Coast Guard for licensing purposes, or from 
another maritime academy located outside the United States which is 
determined by the Supervising Inspector to have standards substantially 
equal to United States academies; (2) be serving as Mate Trainee, 
Towboat in a Panama Canal Commission training program; and (3) completed 
at least 260 eight-hour deck watches as Mate Trainee, Towboat: or
    (b) Have graduated from the Panama Canal Commission apprentice 
program for Mate, Towboat, and have satisfactorily completed at least 
260 eight-hour deck watches as Mate Trainee, Towboat: or
    (c) Hold a license as mate issued by an authority recognized and 
approved by the Supervising Inspector and have at least 260 eight-hour 
watches of experience as a licensed officer in charge of deck watch on 
steam or motor vessels over 75 feet in length engaged in towing: or
    (d) Present evidence of recent service or experince which is 
considered at least equivalent to the requirements provided in paragraph 
(a), (b), or (c), of this section, as determined by a review board 
composed of three Commission officials, appointed by the Supervising 
Inspector.

[52 FR 3800, Feb. 6, 1987]


<R04>
                            Subpart D--Pilots


<R05>
Sec. 119.141  Pilot, Panama Canal; qualifications.

    (a) An applicant for a license as Pilot, Panama Canal, Of Vessels 
Not Over 225 Feet in Length Upon All Panama Canal Waters must have been 
employed by the Panama Canal Commission as Pilot-in-Training for at 
least 17 weeks and must meet the following minimum requirements:

[[Page 124]]

    (1) He must have served at least three years as a licensed deck 
officer on vessels of 1,000 gross tons or over, one year of which must 
have been as a chief mate while holding a license issued by the U.S. 
Coast Guard as Chief Mate Unlimited, or its equivalent as determined by 
the Supervising Inspector; or
    (2) He must have served at least three years as a pilot on vessels 
of 4,000 gross tons or over on the Great Lakes while holding license 
issued by the U.S. Coast Guard as First Class Pilot, Great Lakes; or
    (3) He must have served at least 520 eight-hour watches as Master of 
Panama Canal Commission vessels of 1,000 horsepower or over while 
holding a Panama Canal license as Master of Steam and Motor Vessels; or
    (4) He must have completed the Pilot Training Program conducted by 
the Panama Canal Commission.
    (b) An applicant for a license as Pilot, Panama Canal, Of Vessels 
Not Over 526 Feet in Length Upon All Panama Canal Waters must have been 
employed by the Panama Canal Commission as pilot of vessels not over 225 
feet in length for at least 12 weeks.
    (c) An applicant for a license as Pilot, Panama Canal, Of Vessels of 
Any Tonnage Upon All Panama Canal Waters must have been employed by the 
Panama Canal Commission as pilot of vessels not over 526 feet in length 
for at least 52 weeks.
    (d) Prior to receiving any license as Pilot under this section, an 
applicant must pass a prescribed examination.
    (e) The qualifying periods of employment specified in paragraphs 
(a), (b) and (c) of this section may be shortened or lengthened by the 
Administrator, upon recommendation of the Supervising Inspector where 
the pilot demonstrates other than normal competence.

[38 FR 27386, Oct. 3, 1973, as amended at 46 FR 63191, Dec. 30, 1981; 48 
FR 6709, Feb. 15, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 119.143  Pilot, United States Government local vessel; employment requirement.

    An applicant for pilot, U.S. Government local vessel, must be in the 
employment of the Panama Canal Commission as Master or mate of a Panama 
Canal Commission vessel or the employment of the U.S. Army or U.S. Navy 
as Master or mate of a U.S. Government local vessel, such as a mine 
sweeper, landing craft, patrol boat or tug, or he must be conditionally 
eligible for such employment.


<R04>
                     Subpart E--Motorboat Operators


<R05>
Sec. 119.183  Motorboat operator; age and job requirements.

    (a) The Board may examine and the Supervising Inspector may issue 
licenses to operate motorboats to qualified applicants. To be eligible 
for examination, an applicant shall establish that his is conditionally 
eligible for appointment to a position with the Panama Canal Commission 
or with another U.S. Government agency operating in Canal waters 
requiring a motorboat operator's license. Licenses to operate motorboats 
will be issued only to the extent, and subject to such conditions and 
limitations, as the Supervising Inspector determines appropriate.
    (b) A person must be 18 years of age or over to be issued a 
motorboat operator's license.


<R05>
Sec. 119.187  Operating test.

    An applicant for motorboat operator's license shall pass a practical 
demonstration of his ability to operate a motorboat properly and safely, 
in the presence of an inspector, or submit satisfactory proof of such 
capability.


<R04>
                          Subpart F--Engineers


<R05>
Sec. 119.221  Grade and type of engineer licenses.

    Engineer licenses issued under this part are limited to the grades 
of Chief Engineer, Assistant Engineer and Assistant Engineer (Watch 
Standing) on steam vessels, motor vessels or steam and motor vessels.

[55 FR 4837, Feb. 12, 1990 and 55 FR 15228, Apr. 23, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 119.222  Chief engineer, steam vessels; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for examination for the license of chief 
engineer of steam vessels, an applicant must--

[[Page 125]]

    (a) Hold a valid license as assistant engineer of steam vessels, 
meet the experience requirements of paragraph (a) or (b) of 
Sec. 119.224, and have served at least 260 eight-hour watches as 
assistant engineer on Panama Canal Commission steam vessels; or
    (b) Hold a valid license as assistant engineer of steam vessels, and 
have served at least 260 eight-hour watches as a licensed officer in 
charge of an engine room watch on steam vessels of at least 3,000 
horsepower; or
    (c) Meet the experience requirements of paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 119.223, and, while holding a license as chief engineer of motor 
vessels, have served at least 130 eight-hour watches as observer-chief 
engineer on steam vessels; or
    (d) Hold a valid license as chief or assistance engineer of steam 
vessels issued by an authority outside the Panama Canal and meet the 
hourly watch requirements of paragraphs (a) (b) or (c) of this section.

[43 FR 13381, Mar. 30, 1978, as amended at 46 FR 63192, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 119.223  Chief engineer, motor vessels; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for examination for the license of chief 
engineer of motor vessels, an applicant must--
    (a) Hold a valid license as assistant engineer of motor vessels, 
meet the experience requirements of paragraphs (a) or (b) of Sec.  
119.225, and have served at least 260 eight-hour watches as assistant 
engineer of motor vessels; or
    (b) Meet the experience requirements of paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 119.222, and while holding a license as chief engineer of steam 
vessels, have served at least 65 eight-hour watches as observer-chief 
engineer of motor vessels; or
    (c) Hold a valid license as Chief or Assistant Engineer of motor 
vessels issued by an authority outside the Panama Canal and have served 
at least 260 eight-hour watches as a licensed officer in charge of an 
engine room on motor vessels of at least 3000 horsepower; or
    (d) Hold a valid license as Assistant Engineer (Watch Standing) of 
motor vessels, and have served at least 520 eight-hour watches as 
licensed officer in charge of an engine room watch on motor vessels of 
at least 3000 horsepower.

[43 FR 13381, Mar. 30, 1978, as amended at 46 FR 63192, Dec. 30, 1981; 
55 FR 4837, Feb. 12, 1990; 55 FR 15228, Apr. 23, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 119.224  Assistant engineer, steam vessels; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for examination for the license of assistant 
engineer of steam vessels, an applicant therefor must--
    (a)(1) Have graduated from either the Panama Nautical School's 
program for engineer officers, from a maritime academy in the United 
States recognized by the U.S. Coast Guard for licensing purposes, or 
from another maritime academy located outside the United States which is 
determined by the Supervising Inspector to have standards substantially 
equal to the U.S. Academies, and (2) be participating in an approved 
Panama Canal Commission training program for chief engineer of steam 
vessels; or
    (b) Have satisfactorily completed an approved Panama Canal 
Commission training program for chief engineer of steam vessels of at 
least four years' duration and have completed at least 260 eight-hour 
watches in the engine room of a Panama Canal Commission steam vessel 
under the supervision of a licensed engineer.
    (c) While holding a license as assistant engineer of motor vessels, 
have served at least 130 eight-hour watches as observer-assistant 
engineer on steam vessels.

[43 FR 13382, Mar. 30, 1978, as amended at 46 FR 63192, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 119.225  Assistant engineer, motor vessels; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for examination the license of assistant 
engineer of motor vessels, an applicant therefor must--
    (a)(1) Have graduated from either the Panama Nautical School's 
program for engineer officers, from a maritime academy in the United 
States recognized by the U.S. Coast Guard for licensing purposes or from 
another maritime academy located outside the United States which is 
determined by the Supervising Inspector to have standards substantially 
equal to the

[[Page 126]]

U.S. Academies, and (2) be participating in an approved Panama Canal 
Commission training program for chief engineer of motor vessels; or
    (b) Have satisfactorily completed an approved Panama Canal 
Commission training program for chief engineer of motor vessels of at 
least four years' duration and have completed at least 260 eight-hour 
watches in engine room of a Panama Canal Commission motor vessel under 
the supervision of a licensed engineer; or
    (c) While holding a license as assistant engineer of steam vessels, 
have served at least 130 eight-hour watches as observer-assistant 
engineer on motor vessels.


<R05>
Sec. 119.226  Assistant engineer (watch standing), motor vessel; experience required.

    In order to be eligible for examination for the license of Assistant 
Engineer (Watch Standing) of motor vessels, an applicant therefore must:
    (a) Have graduated from the marine engineering program of a 
recognized maritime academy; or
    (b) Have graduated from a recognized marine engineer apprentice 
program; or
    (c) Have graduated from the professional (college-level) marine 
engineering program of a recognized school of technology, and have 
completed three months of service in the engine department of a steam 
and/or motor vessel under the supervision of a licensed engineer; or
    (d) Have graduated from the professional (college level) mechanical 
or electrical engineering program of a recognized school of technology, 
and have completed six months of service in the engine department of a 
steam and/or motor vessel under the supervision of a licensed engineer; 
or
    (e) Have three years of service in the engine room of a steam and/or 
motor vessel, eighteen months of which must have been as a qualified 
member of the engine department or equivalent supervisory position. (A 
qualified member of the engine department is any person below the rating 
of license officer and above the rating of coal passer, wiper or 
assistant electrician, who holds a current, valid permanent certificate 
of service as a qualified member of the engine department issued by the 
U.S. Coast Guard or a currently valid equivalent certificate of service 
issued by the Government of Panama. Ratings included are those of 
donkeyman, refrigerating engineer, oiler, deck engineer, fireman, 
electrician, water tender, junior engineer, machinist, pumpman, deck 
engine mechanic, and engineman.)

[55 FR 4837, Feb. 12, 1990, as amended at 55 FR 15229, Apr. 23, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 119.227  Chief and assistant engineer; steam and motor vessels.

    Upon request, the Supervising Inspector may issue (a) a single 
license for chief engineer of steam and motor vessels to persons holding 
currently valid licenses as chief engineer of steam vessels and chief 
engineer of motor vessels and (b) a single license for assistant 
engineer of steam and motor vessels to persons holding currently valid 
licenses as assistant engineer of steam vessels and assistant engineer 
of motor vessels.

[43 FR 13382, Mar. 30, 1978]


<R03>
PART 121--INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF VESSELS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
121.1  Applicability of part.
121.2  Definitions.

                          Subpart B--Inspection

                                 Vessels

121.41  Certificates of inspection.
121.42  Distribution of certificates.
121.43  Fee for inspection.
121.44  Standards in inspection of hulls.
121.45  Drawings of new vessels to be furnished to the Marine Safety 
          Unit.
121.46  Inspection of tank vessels.
121.47  Inspection of hulls.
121.48  Sea chests, sea valves and strainers.
121.49  Pumping arrangements.
121.50  Steering arrangements.
121.51  Watertight bulkheads and doors.
121.52  Engine room signal gear.
121.53  Materials, construction, and repairs of boilers and machinery.
121.54  Preparation of boilers for inspection.
121.55  Tests and inspections of new boilers.
121.56  Tests and inspections of boilers and main steam pipes in 
          service.

[[Page 127]]

121.57  Inspection of mountings and attachments.
121.58  Safety valves.
121.59  Fusible plugs.
121.60  Water columns, test cocks, and water gages.
121.61  Steam gages.
121.62  Safety valves or relief valves on reduced pressure lines, 
          evaporators, etc.
121.63  Guards in dangerous places.
121.64  Unfired pressure vessels.
121.65  Notice to the Marine Safety Unit of vessel on dock; alterations.
121.66  Whistles.
121.67  Fog bells.
121.68  Engine signals; voice tubes.
121.69  Proceeding to another port for repairs.
121.70  Marking of draft on vessel.
121.71  Emergency lighting system.
121.72  Repairs to firefighting and lifesaving apparatus.
121.73  Extra steering apparatus.
121.74  Repairs on boilers and unfired pressure vessels.
121.75  Increase in passenger allowance.
121.76  Inclining test.
121.77  Inspection of steam pipes.
121.78  Deep-sea sounding apparatus.
121.79  Carrying of excess steam.
121.80  Signaling lamps.
121.81  Steering gear tests.
121.82  Hatches.
121.83  Draft.
121.84  Lookouts and fire patrolmen.
121.85  Sanitation.
121.86  Fuel tanks; fuel piping.
121.87  Examination of boilers and machinery by engineer.
121.88  Fusible plug report.
121.89  Boiler steam hours.
121.90  Annual report of floating equipment on hand.
121.91  Inspectors not to accept statements.
121.92  Lifesaving apparatus.
121.93  Care of lifeboats.
121.94  Lifeboat equipment.
121.95  Line-throwing appliances and equipment.
121.96  Life preservers; number required.
121.97  Life preserver inspection.
121.98  Means of escape from vessels.
121.99  Fire axes.
121.100  Fire detecting and alarm system.
121.101  Steam and inert-gas fire extinguishing systems, fire pumps, 
          outlets and hoses.
121.102  Portable fire extinguishers.
121.103  Station bills.
121.104  Fire alarm signals; drills.
121.105  Fire hazards, and fire extinguishing equipment.
121.106  Fire-fighting equipment on steam propelled vessels.
121.107  Non-self-propelled vessels; equipment.
121.108  Complement of officers and crew.

                               Motorboats

121.131  Equipment on motorboats.
121.132  Motorboat filling, venting, and sounding pipes; shut-off 
          valves.
121.133  Carburetor back-fire flame arrestor.
121.134  Ventilation of motorboats.

                  Subpart C--Registration and Numbering

121.171  Registration and numbering of motorboats.
121.172  Numbers to be displayed on motorboats.
121.173  Registration and numbering of vessels under 20 meters (65') in 
          length not propelled by machinery.
121.174  Numbers to be displayed on vessels under 65 feet other than 
          motorboats.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3811, E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043, and 44 U.S.C. 
3501.

    Source: 31 FR 12316, Sept. 16, 1966, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 121.1  Applicability of part.

    Except as otherwise specifically herein provided, the regulations in 
this part apply only to vessels, floating equipment and motorboats owned 
or operated by the Panama Canal Commission or by the United States or 
any of its agencies operating in Panama Canal waters.

[46 FR 63192, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 121.2   Definitions.

    As used in this part, the following terms have the meanings 
indicated:
    (a) Vessel means any vessel as defined in Sec. 111.3 other than a 
motorboat as defined in this section.
    (b) Motorboat means any vessel not more than 20 meters (65 feet) in 
length propelled by machinery except tugboats and towboats. The word 
``motorboat'' includes a boat temporarily or permanently equipped with a 
detachable motor. Motorboats are classed as follows:

    Class A--Any motorboat less than 7 meters (23 feet) in length.
    Class B--Any motorboat 7 meters (23 feet) or over and less than 12 
meters (40 feet) in length.
    Class C--Any motorboat 12 meters (40 feet) or over and less than 20 
meters (65 feet) in length.
    Class D--Any cayuco or piragua not more than 20 meters (65 feet) in 
length equipped

[[Page 128]]

with an outboard motor or motors operating in Madden or Gatun Lakes.

[54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R04>
                          Subpart B--Inspection

                                 Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 121.41  Certificates of inspection.

    (a) Certificates of inspection shall be issued for a period of 1 
year to passenger vessels, vessels equipped with boilers, and vessels 
whose hull or machinery is, in the judgment of the Marine Safety Unit, 
in such condition as to require inspection annually.
    (b) Certificates of inspection will normally be issued for 2 years 
to all vessels not covered by paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Application shall be made by the owner or other responsible 
person for inspection and issuance of a new certificate of inspection 
prior to expiration of the certificate.

[31 FR 12316, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.42  Distribution of certificates.

    Two copies of the certificate of inspection shall be retained on 
file by the Marine Safety Unit. The original and one copy shall be given 
to the master or owner of the vessel named therein.

[54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.43  Fee for inspection.

    Before a certificate of inspection may be issued to any transiting 
vessel, or U.S. Government local craft, the Master or owner of such 
vessel or other responsible person shall pay to the Treasurer, Panama 
Canal Commission the fees established by the Canal authorities for 
inspection and examination and for the issuance of certificates.

[46 FR 63192, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 121.44   Standards in inspection of hulls.

    In the inspection of hulls of vessels, the rules promulgated by the 
American Bureau of Shipping or other recognized classification society 
respecting material and construction of hulls, except where otherwise 
provided for in this part shall be accepted as the standard.


<R05>
Sec. 121.45  Drawings of new vessels to be furnished to the Marine Safety Unit.

    The owner or other responsible person, when applying for the first 
inspection to a new vessel, shall furnish the Marine Safety Unit the 
following drawings and prints for review prior to construction: Midship 
section, inboard profile, outboard profile, arrangement of decks and 
hatch details, capacity of double bottoms and fuel compartments, hull 
penetrations and shell connections, machinery installation, piping 
systems, lifesaving equipment, fire fighting equipment, electrical, 
general alarm, radio, and emergency light circuits, and such other 
drawings or prints as show the general construction of the vessel, 
including dimensions, spacing of frames, disposition of hull plates, 
construction of transverse and longitudinal bulkheads, and location of 
same.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.46   Inspection of tank vessels.

    Tank vessels shall be inspected in accordance with the provisions of 
this part and of Part 113 of this chapter. Conditions and design of tank 
vessels not specifically covered by the provisions of this part or by 
the provisions of Part 113 of this chapter shall conform to the 
pertinent provisions of the Tank Vessel Regulations of the U.S. Coast 
Guard.

    Cross Reference: Tank vessel regulations of United States Coast 
Guard, see 46 CFR Part 30 et seq.


<R05>
Sec. 121.47   Inspection of hulls.

    (a) In the inspection of hulls of vessels, the inspector shall 
carefully inspect every accessible part of the hull, and carefully 
examine the wood or metal of which the hull is constructed to determine 
the condition of same, making all necessary hammer tests of hulls 
constructed of iron or steel. If the inspector shall not have 
satisfactory evidence otherwise of the soundness of the hull of a wooden 
vessel, he shall have the hull bored or opened up to his satisfaction.

[[Page 129]]

    (b) All scupper, sanitary, and other similar discharges which lead 
through the ship's hull shall be fitted with efficient means for 
preventing the ingress of water in the event of a fracture of such 
pipes. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply to the discharges 
in the machinery space connected with the main and auxiliary engines, 
pumps, etc.
    (c) The outboard shaft or shafts on every ocean or coastwise vessel 
shall be drawn for examination at least once every 3 years: Provided, 
that when it is shown that a vessel has had a long period of lay-up the 
Marine Safety Unit may grant an extension equal to the time the vessel 
has been out of commission, but in no case shall the extension exceed 1 
year.
    (d) Where the propelling machinery is located amidships the 
afterbearing shall be rebushed when it is worn down to \1/4\ inch 
clearance for shafts of 9 inches or less in diameter, \5/16\ inch 
clearance for shafts exceeding 9 inches but not exceeding 12 inches in 
diameter, and \3/8\ inch clearance for shafts exceeding 12 inches 
diameter. Where the propelling machinery is located aft the maximum 
clearance shall be one grade (\1/16\ inch) less than the above 
clearance.

[31 FR 12316, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.48   Sea chests, sea valves and strainers.

    Sea chests, sea valves, and strainers shall be carefully examined by 
the inspector when the vessel is in drydock, and, if deemed necessary, 
they shall be opened up for internal examination. This requirement also 
applies to bilge injection valves. All iron or steel fastenings of sea 
cocks and valves to the shell plating shall be examined and shall be 
renewed if necessary.


<R05>
Sec. 121.49   Pumping arrangements.

    The pumps and pumping arrangements, including valves, pipes and 
stainers, from the several holds, as well as from the engine and boiler 
spaces shall be examined at each inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 121.50   Steering arrangements.

    All parts of the steering arrangements, including the gear, 
quadrants, blocks, rods, chains, or other transmission gear and brakes 
shall be carefully examined by the inspector at each inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 121.51   Watertight bulkheads and doors.

    All watertight bulkheads and watertight doors shall be examined and 
found or required to be placed in good and efficient condition. 
Watertight bulkheads shall be tested with a head of water if considered 
necessary.


<R05>
Sec. 121.52   Engine room signal gear.

    Signal systems between engine room and pilot house, whether they be 
telegraph, bell, whistle, telephone, or voice tubes, shall be examined 
and tested at each inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 121.53   Materials, construction, and repairs of boilers and machinery.

    Materials used and the methods employed in the construction and 
repairs of boilers and machinery, and the design of boilers and 
machinery, shall be in accordance with the marine engineering 
regulations and material specifications of the U.S. Coast Guard, or the 
rules for building and classing steel vessels of the American Bureau of 
Shipping, or other recognized classification society, unless otherwise 
provided in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 121.54   Preparation of boilers for inspection.

    It shall be the duty of the chief engineer to have the boilers which 
are to be inspected filled with water, safety valves secured by clamps 
or gags, tubes swept, back connections and furnaces cleaned out, and the 
water in boilers at a temperature of not more than 180 deg. F. for 
watertube boilers and not more than 100 deg. F. for fire-tube boilers.


<R05>
Sec. 121.55   Tests and inspections of new boilers.

    All boiler tests and inspections of new boilers shall conform to the 
standards of the U.S. Coast Guard ``Marine

[[Page 130]]

Engineering Regulations'' (46 CFR, Subchapter F).


<R05>
Sec. 121.56   Tests and inspections of boilers and main steam pipes in service.

    All tests and inspections of boilers and main steam pipes in service 
shall conform to the standards of the U.S. Coast Guard ``Marine 
Engineering Regulations'' (46 CFR, Subchapter F).


<R05>
Sec. 121.57   Inspection of mountings and attachments.

    All valves on boilers shall be opened up every 4 years at the time 
of annual inspection or the next regular drydocking period thereafter. 
All valves shall be removed from the boiler at least once every 8 years 
to determine the condition of the stud bolts connecting the valves to 
the boiler. These examinations may be made at intermediate periods if 
there is any evidence to indicate that defects have started or excessive 
corrosion exists.


<R05>
Sec. 121.58  Safety valves.

    (a) At the annual inspection of each boiler, the marine safety 
inspector shall check the setting of each boiler safety valve and make 
any adjustments that may be necessary to keep the boiler within the 
maximum allowable pressure. After adjusting the boiler safety valves, 
the marine safety inspector shall seal each safety valve separately with 
the official seal of the Marine Safety Unit.
    (b) Each chief engineer, upon taking charge of the power plant of a 
vessel, shall examine all safety valves and if any seals are broken, or 
there is any evidence that valves have been tampered with, he shall 
report same in writing to the Marine Safety Unit. If at any time it is 
necessary to break the seal on a safety valve for any purpose, the chief 
engineer shall advise the Marine Safety Unit in writing, giving the 
reason for breaking the seal and requesting the valve be examined, 
adjusted, and resealed.

[54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.59   Fusible plugs.

    The inspector shall examine fusible plugs when inspecting the 
boilers. The number of such plugs inserted in each boiler, the 
manufacturer's name, and the heat number shall be included in the boiler 
inspection report.


<R05>
Sec. 121.60   Water columns, test cocks, and water gages.

    Water columns, test cocks, and water gages shall be carefully 
examined, tested and checked by the inspector at each inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 121.61   Steam gages.

    All steam gages connected to boilers or main steam lines shall be 
carefully checked for accuracy at each inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 121.62   Safety valves or relief valves on reduced pressure lines, evaporators, etc.

    Inspectors shall give the same attention and inspection to safety 
valves or relief valves installed on reduced pressure lines, 
evaporators, superheaters, feed water heaters, etc., as to the safety 
valves installed on the main boilers. The setting of such valves shall 
be carefully checked at each inspection and adjusted if necessary.


<R05>
Sec. 121.63  Guards in dangerous places.

    Inspectors shall examine all places where there is a possibility of 
a person being caught in machinery to see that they are provided with 
substantial guards over such mechanisms as gearings and couplings, 
flywheels or generators, refrigerating machinery, etc.


<R05>
Sec. 121.64   Unfired pressure vessels.

    (a) Unfired pressure vessels in service which are fitted with 
manholes or other inspection openings so that they can be satisfactorily 
examined internally, shall be opened biennially and thoroughly examined 
internally and externally.
    (b) Unfired pressure vessels which have neither manholes nor 
inspection openings and cannot be satisfactorily examined shall be 
tested biennially to a hydrostatic test of one and one-fourth times the 
maximum allowable working pressure.
    (c) Unfired pressure vessels shall be protected by a relief valve 
set to relieve at a pressure not exceeding that for which the vessel is 
designed, and of

[[Page 131]]

sufficient relieving capacity to prevent a pressure increase exceeding 
10 percent above the maximum allowable pressure. In no case shall the 
diameter of the relief valve be less than one-half inch.
    (d) At each inspection period the inspector shall check the setting 
of the relief valves and make any adjustments that may be necessary to 
keep the pressure vessel within the maximum allowable pressure.
    (e) As used in this part, ``unfired pressure vessel'' means a tank 
containing gas, vapor, or liquid, or a combination thereof, under 
pressure and not exposed to the products of combustion.


<R05>
Sec. 121.65  Notice to the Marine Safety Unit of vessel on dock; alterations.

    (a) Whenever any vessel under the supervision of the Marine Safety 
Unit is placed upon the dock for repairs it shall be the duty of the 
owner or responsible official to report same to the Marine Safety Unit 
so that a thorough inspection may be made to determine what is necessary 
to make such vessel seaworthy. No repairs or alterations affecting the 
safety of the vessel, either in regard to hull or machinery, shall be 
made without the knowledge and authority of the Marine Safety Unit. 
Notice of such repairs and alterations is necessary even if such work 
does not require the vessel to be placed in a drydock.
    (b) When a repair or alteration ordered by the Marine Safety Unit 
has been completed the same shall be reported to the Marine Safety Unit 
in writing by the owner or responsible official.

[54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.66  Whistles.

    Every inspected vessel under the supervision of the Marine Safety 
Unit shall be provided with an efficient whistle suitable for sounding 
the necessary whistle signals. Means shall be provided to operate the 
whistle from a position adjacent to the main steering station and from 
the remote steering station where such steering station is fitted. 
Details of the whistle operating devices shall meet the requirements of 
46 CFR chapter I, subchapter J (Electrical Engineering).

[54 FR 37328, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.67  Fog bells.

    Inspected vessels 12 meters in length or greater, under the 
supervision of the Marine Safety Unit, shall be provided with an 
efficient fog bell. The bell, of corrosion resistant material, shall 
produce a clear tone at a sound pressure level of not less than 110 
decibels at a distance of 1 meter. The diameter of the mouth of the bell 
shall not be less than 300mm for vessels of 20 meters or more in length, 
and shall be not less than 200mm for vessels of 12 meters to 20 meters 
in length. The mass of the striker shall not be less than 3 percent of 
the mass of the bell.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.68   Engine signals; voice tubes.

    Inspected vessels using bell signals between the pilot house and 
engine room shall have a tube, of proper size, so arranged as to return 
the sound of the bell signals to the pilot house, and shall also be 
provided with a speaking tube or other device for the purpose of 
conversation between the pilot house and engine room. In all cases where 
a telegraph is used the signal shall be capable of being repeated back 
to the pilot house.


<R05>
Sec. 121.69  Proceeding to another port for repairs.

    The Marine Safety Unit may issue a permit to proceed to another port 
for repairs, if in its judgment this can be done with safety. Such a 
permit shall state the conditions upon which it is granted.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.70  Marking of draft on vessel.

    All vessels 20 gross tons and over, under supervision of the Marine 
Safety Unit, shall have the draft of the vessel plainly and legibly 
marked upon the stem and upon the stern post or rudder post or at such 
other place at the stern of the vessel as may be necessary for easy 
observance. The draft shall be taken from the bottom of the lowest part 
of the keel to the surface of the

[[Page 132]]

water, the bottom of the mark to indicate the draft in feet. Sufficient 
marks shall be used to cover all working and loading conditions of the 
vessel. If any part of the hull or permanent equipment extends below the 
lowest part of the keel, the master or other responsible person shall 
produce evidence from which the vessel's maximum immersion may be 
determined.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.71  Emergency lighting system.

    Provision shall be made on passenger vessels, tug boats and dredges 
for an electric system of lighting, sufficient for all requirements of 
safety, throughout the vessel. There shall be a self-contained electric 
source capable of supplying power when necessary. Emergency lights shall 
be tested at least once each week. The date of the tests required by 
this section shall be noted in the vessel's logbook.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.72  Repairs to firefighting and lifesaving apparatus.

    No extensive repairs or alterations, except in an emergency, shall 
be made to lifesaving or firefighting equipment without prior notice to 
the Marine Safety Unit.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.73   Extra steering apparatus.

    Extra steering apparatus consisting of relieving tackle, or of 
auxiliary power, or hand steering gear attached to the rudder stock 
independent of the regular steering gear shall be provided on vessels 
under jurisdiction of the Board.


<R05>
Sec. 121.74  Repairs on boilers and unfired pressure vessels.

    (a) Before undertaking repairs to a boiler or unfired pressure 
vessel, the engineer in charge of such vessel shall report the condition 
necessitating repairs and the nature of the proposed repairs to the 
Marine Safety Unit in writing.
    (b) When damage occurs to boilers or pressure vessels through an 
accident that tends to render the further use of such boilers or 
pressure vessels unsafe until repairs are made, the engineer in charge 
thereof shall promptly report the facts of the accident and the proposed 
repairs to the Marine Safety Unit in writing.
    (c) In cases requiring a written report under this section, repairs 
shall not commence until the Marine Safety Unit's Inspector has approved 
the proposed plan of repairs.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.75   Increase in passenger allowance.

    Increase in the passenger allowance of any vessel, whether specified 
in regular certificate or by special certificate for excursion, shall be 
permitted only after a careful inspection which shows that the vessel is 
properly equipped, and that the increase is safe and proper.


<R05>
Sec. 121.76  Inclining test.

    When the Marine Safety Unit has any reason to question the stability 
of any vessel under its supervision, it shall require the owners of the 
vessel to make inclining tests on such vessels, under the general 
supervision of the Marine Safety Unit.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.77   Inspection of steam pipes.

    When inspecting a vessel the inspectors shall carefully examine all 
steam pipes passing through woodwork, and if the same are deemed unsafe 
they shall be provided with an air space and fitted with metal collars.


<R05>
Sec. 121.78   Deep-sea sounding apparatus.

    All ocean passenger or freight steam vessels of 500 gross tons and 
upwards shall be equipped with an efficient mechanical deep-sea sounding 
apparatus ready for immediate use in addition to the ordinary deep-sea 
hand lead.


<R05>
Sec. 121.79  Carrying of excess steam.

    When it is known or comes to the knowledge of the Marine Safety Unit 
that any steam vessel is or has been carrying an excess of steam beyond 
that which is allowed by her certificate of inspection, the Marine 
Safety Unit shall require the owner of said vessel to place on the 
boiler a lockup safety valve, that will prevent the carrying of

[[Page 133]]

an excess of steam, which shall be under the control of the Marine 
Safety Unit.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.80   Signaling lamps.

    Ocean and coastwise vessels of over 150 gross tons shall be equipped 
with an efficient signaling lamp. The lamp shall be so connected that it 
can be operated from the normal source of ship's current, the emergency 
source, and other emergency batteries if provided.


<R05>
Sec. 121.81   Steering gear tests.

    On all ocean vessels subject to the provisions of this part, making 
voyages of more than 48 hours duration, the entire steering gear, the 
whistle, the means of communication and signaling appliance between the 
bridge or pilot house and the engine room shall be examined and tested 
by a licensed officer of the vessel within a period of not more than 12 
hours before leaving port. All such vessels making voyages of less than 
48 hours duration shall be so examined and tested at least once in every 
week. The fact and time of such examination and test shall be recorded 
in the vessel's log book.


<R05>
Sec. 121.82   Hatches.

    The master of any vessel subject to this part shall assure himself 
before proceeding to sea that all exposed cargo hatches of his vessel 
are properly covered.


<R05>
Sec. 121.83   Draft.

    The master of every seagoing vessel subject to this part shall, 
whenever leaving port, enter the maximum draft of his vessel in the log 
book.


<R05>
Sec. 121.84   Lookouts and fire patrolmen.

    (a) Every vessel subject to this part shall have a lookout at all 
times at or near the bow during the nighttime.
    (b) On every passenger vessel having berth or stateroom 
accommodations for passengers there shall be maintained an efficient 
watch by the fire patrol so as to cover all parts of the vessel 
accessible to passengers or crew, except machinery spaces, spaces 
occupied by passengers or crew as sleeping accommodations and cargo 
compartments which are inaccessible to passengers or crew while the 
passenger vessel is being navigated.
    (c) A patrolman while on duty shall have no other tasks assigned to 
him and shall report to the bridge once every hour.


<R05>
Sec. 121.85  Sanitation.

    The master and chief engineer of any vessel under supervision of the 
Marine Safety Unit shall see that the vessel and the passenger and crew 
quarters are kept in a sanitary condition.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.86   Fuel tanks; fuel piping.

    Fuel tanks and fuel piping on vessels subject to this part shall be 
installed in accordance with the marine engineering regulations and 
material specifications of the United States Coast Guard, unless 
otherwise provided for in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 121.87  Examination of boilers and machinery by engineer.

    When an engineer assumes charge of the boilers and machinery of a 
vessel he shall examine the same immediately and thoroughly, and if he 
finds any part thereof in bad condition, he shall immediately report the 
fact to the master or employer and to the Marine Safety Unit, which 
shall thereupon investigate the matter to determine whether the former 
engineer has been negligent in his duties.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.88  Fusible plug report.

    The chief engineer of a steam vessel subject to this part shall 
report promptly to the Marine Safety Unit every renewal of every fusible 
plug in a boiler or boilers of a steam vessel upon which he is in charge 
as chief engineer.

[54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.89  Boiler steam hours.

    (a) Boilers on floating equipment of the Panama Canal Commission 
which are inspected by the Marine Safety Unit may not be operated under 
steam for more than the following prescribed number of hours between 
boiler washout periods:

[[Page 134]]

    (1) Boilers which are operated under an approved system of boiler 
feed water conditioning and with respect to which copies of reports of 
boiler water conditioning are filed with the Marine Safety Unit: 2,880 
hours.
    (2) Condensing water-tube boilers not included within paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section: 1,050 hours.
    (3) Fire and water tube boilers, no approved feed-water treatment, 
operating noncondensing: 750 hours.
    (4) All other boilers: 2,160 hours.
    (b) The chief engineer of the vessel shall report all washouts to 
the Marine Safety Unit on Form 1588-4 when the washout is completed and 
steam raised in a boiler. The original of this report shall be forwarded 
to the Marine Safety Unit and a copy to his master or employer.

[31 FR 12316, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 46 FR 63193, Dec. 30, 1981; 
54 FR 37329, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.90  Annual report of floating equipment on hand.

    The accountable officials of the Panama Canal Commission shall 
furnish the Marine Safety Unit with an annual report of all vessels and 
floating craft on hand by January 1st of each year. This report shall 
show:
    (a) The accountable official.
    (b) The responsible official.
    (c) The location of vessel or craft.
    (d) The number or name of vessel or craft.
    (e) The description of vessel or craft.

[54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.91   Inspectors not to accept statements.

    Inspectors shall be governed by conditions as actually found by them 
and in no case shall they be justified in accepting the statements of 
others.


<R05>
Sec. 121.92  Lifesaving apparatus.

    Unless otherwise provided by this part, lifesaving apparatus for 
vessels subject to this part shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of the general rules and regulations for vessel inspection 
of the United States Coast Guard, or with the requirements of the 
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea.

[54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.93   Care of lifeboats.

    At each inspection period lifeboats shall be stripped, cleaned, and 
thoroughly overhauled and painted. Tests and inspections shall be in 
accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Coast Guard rules and 
regulations for vessel inspection.

    Cross Reference: Vessel inspection, rules and regulations of U.S. 
Coast Guard, see 46 CFR.


<R05>
Sec. 121.94   Lifeboat equipment.

    Lifeboats on board vessels subject to this part shall be equipped in 
accordance with the requirements of the general rules and regulations 
for vessel inspection service, the U.S. Coast Guard, or with the 
requirements of the international convention for the safety of life at 
sea, unless otherwise provided in this part.

    Cross Reference: Vessel inspection, rules and regulations of U.S. 
Coast Guard, see 46 CFR.


<R05>
Sec. 121.95   Line-throwing appliances and equipment.

    (a) All ocean vessels shall be equipped with a line-throwing 
appliance of an approved type with the necessary equipment. The 
equipment shall include not less than four projectiles and four service 
lines.
    (b) Vessels under 500 gross tons may use a shoulder gun. All 
coastwise vessels of 150 gross tons and over shall be equipped with a 
line-throwing appliance and equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 121.96   Life preservers; number required.

    All vessels shall be provided with one approved life preserver for 
each person carried. Passenger vessels shall be provided with an 
additional number suitable for children, equal to at least 10 percent of 
the total number of persons carried. They shall be properly distributed 
throughout the staterooms, berthings and other places convenient for 
passengers and crew.

[[Page 135]]


<R05>
Sec. 121.97   Life preserver inspection.

    At each regular inspection of a vessel, and oftener if deemed 
necessary, the inspector shall examine and inspect all life preservers 
in accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Coast Guard rules and 
regulations for vessel inspection. If found to be satisfactory, they 
shall be plainly stamped with the word ``Passed,'' the date of 
inspection, and the inspector's initial.

    Cross Reference: Vessel inspection, rules and regulations of U.S. 
Coast Guard, see 46 CFR.


<R05>
Sec. 121.98   Means of escape from vessels.

    (a) On all vessels where the plans and arrangements will possibly 
permit, all enclosures where passengers or crews may be quartered shall 
be provided with not less than two avenues of escape, so located that if 
one of such avenues is not available another may be.
    (b) Every vessel of 50 tons or over carrying passengers shall be 
provided with permanent stairways forward and aft. Every vessel shall be 
provided with sufficient means of escape from lower to upper deck, or 
vice versa.


<R05>
Sec. 121.99   Fire axes.

    (a) All vessels shall be equipped with fire axes, as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Gross tons                              Axes 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over 25 tons and not over 50 tons..............................        1
Over 50 tons and not over 200 tons.............................        2
Over 200 tons and not over 500 tons............................        4
Over 500 tons and not over 1,000 tons..........................        6
Over 1,000 tons................................................        8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) All axes shall be located so as to be readily found in time of 
need, shall not be used for general purposes, and shall be kept in good 
condition.
    (c) The vessel's name shall be marked on each ax handle.


[31 FR 12316, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.100   Fire detecting and alarm system.

    (a) All passenger vessels of more than 150 feet in length having 
berth or stateroom accommodations for passengers shall be provided with 
an efficient fire alarm or fire detecting system, which will 
automatically indicate or register at one or more points or stations, 
where it can be most quickly observed by officers and crew, the presence 
or indication of fire in any part of the vessel not accessible to a 
patrol system.
    (b) All passenger vessels with sleeping quarters for passengers 
shall be provided with a manual fire alarm system which operates alarm 
bells in the pilot house and engine room. The manual alarm system shall 
have a suitable number of stations on all decks so as to enable the 
alarm to be given immediately in case of fire.
    (c) All vessels over 100 gross tons shall have all sleeping 
accommodations equipped with a sufficient number of alarm bells so 
located as to warn all occupants. The alarm bells, if electric, shall be 
operated from an open switch in the pilot house or bridge. The bells 
shall be of such size and character as to provide an alarm throughout 
the spaces for which they are provided.


<R05>
Sec. 121.101   Steam and inert-gas fire extinguishing systems, fire pumps, outlets and hoses.

    Steam and inert-gas fire extinguishing systems, fire pumps, fire 
pump outlets and hoses shall be provided on passenger and cargo vessels 
in accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Coast Guard general 
rules and regulations for vessel inspection, or, with the requirements 
of the international convention for the safety of life at sea; unless 
otherwise provided in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 121.102   Portable fire extinguishers.

    All vessels subject to this section shall be provided with good and 
efficient U.S. Coast Guard approved marine portable fire extinguishers. 
The number and type required shall be determined by the Marine Safety 
Unit.

[54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.103   Station bills.

    The master of every vessel of 150 gross tons or over shall have 
station bills prepared and posted in conspicuous places in several parts 
of the vessel, particularly in the crews quarters. They must contain 
full particulars of the signals which will be used for calling the crew 
to their stations for emergency duties, and indicate the station to 
which each man must go and the duties he has to perform.

[[Page 136]]


<R05>
Sec. 121.104   Fire alarm signals; drills.

    (a) The general fire alarm signal shall be a continuous rapid 
ringing of the ship's bell for a period of not less than 10 seconds, 
supplemented by the continuous ringing of the general alarm bells for 
not less than 10 seconds. For dismissal from fire alarm stations, the 
general alarm bells shall be sounded three times.
    (b) The officer in command shall, once at least in each week, call 
all hands to quarters and exercise them in the unlashing and swinging 
out of the life boats, weather permitting, the closing of all water 
tight doors and fire doors, the use of fire pumps and all other 
apparatus for the safety of life on board such vessels, and to see that 
all the equipment required is in good working order for immediate use. 
Special attention shall be given to drilling the crew and educating 
passengers in the method of adjusting life preservers and condition of 
same. The fact of the exercise of the crew shall be entered on the 
vessel's log book giving the hours and days such drills were held.
    (c) The inspectors shall observe the drills at intervals 
sufficiently frequent to assure themselves that the requirements of this 
section are complied with.
    (d) Three copies of this section shall be furnished vessels. The 
copies furnished shall be framed under glass, and posted in conspicuous 
places about the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 121.105   Fire hazards, and fire extinguishing equipment.

    (a) At each inspection period the inspector shall examine the tank 
tops and bilges in the machinery spaces to see that there is no 
accumulation of oil which might create a fire hazard.
    (b) At each inspection period the inspector shall conduct tests and 
inspections of fire extinguishing equipment in accordance with the 
requirements of the U.S. Coast Guard rules and regulations for vessel 
inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 121.106   Fire-fighting equipment on steam propelled vessels.

    Each fire room of a steam propelled vessel burning oil for fuel 
shall contain:
    (a) A metal receptacle containing not less than five (5) cubic feet 
of sand, and scoop or shaker for distributing same; and
    (b) Two or more approved fire extinguishers of the foam type of not 
less than 2 \1/2\-gallon capacity each, or two or more carbon-dioxide 
(CO<INF>2</INF>) type of not less than 15 pounds each, accessible to the 
fire room and ready for immediate use. These extinguishers shall be in 
addition to the regular extinguishers required for the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 121.107   Non-self-propelled vessels; equipment.

    Panama Canal non-self-propelled vessels shall carry the following 
equipment:
    (a) Dredges, floating cranes, and drill boats:

    4 Life rings (2 luminous), U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Life preserver for each person on board, U.S. Coast Guard 
approved.
    1 Fire pump. Outlets from fire mains to be so arranged that one 50-
foot length of hose can reach any part of the vessel.
    6 Portable fire extinguishers.
    4 Fire axes.
    1 Anchor and anchor chain as approved by the Marine Safety Unit.
    Lights and day marks as required by Sec. 111.27 (Rule 27, 72 
COLREGS).

    (b) Floating pile drivers:

    2 Life rings (1 luminous), U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Life preserver for each person on board, U.S. Coast Guard 
approved.
    2 Fire axes.
    2 Portable fire extinguishers.
    1 Anchor and anchor chain as approved by the Marine Safety Unit.
    Lights and day marks as required by Sec. 111.27 (Rule 27, 72 
COLREGS).

    (c) Barges, lighters and scows:

    1 Life ring, U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Suitable anchor with cable.
    1 Life preserver for each person on board, U.S. Coast Guard 
approved.
    Lights as required by part 111 of this chapter and Rule 24 (72 
COLREGS).
    1 Stern light, white, and so fixed as to show the light 67.5 degrees 
from right aft on each side, an arc of 135 degrees, visibility of 3 
miles.
    1 Each sidelight, green starboard and red port, showing an unbroken 
light over an arc of the horizon of 112.5 degrees and so fixed as

[[Page 137]]

to show the light from right ahead to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on its 
respective side, visibility of 3 miles.
    1 Diamond black shape (on tows exceeding 200 meters) for daylight 
display where best seen.

    (d) Inconspicuous, partly submerged vessels or objects, or 
combination of such vessels or objects being towed, shall exhibit:

    (1) White, 32-point, 3-mile lights, one at or near the forward end 
and one at or near the after end, if less than 25 meters in breadth, 
except that dracones need not exhibit a light at or near the forward 
end;
    (2) In vessels 25 meters or more in breadth, two additional all-
round white lights at or near the extremities of its breadth;
    (3) In vessels more than 100 meters in length, additional all-round 
white lights between the lights prescribed in paragraphs (d) (1) and (2) 
of this section so that the distance between the lights shall not exceed 
100 meters;
    (4) A diamond shape at or near the aftermost extremity of the last 
vessel or object being towed; and, if the length of the tow exceeds 200 
meters, an additional diamond shape where it can best be seen and 
located as far forward as is practicable.

[31 FR 12316, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.108   Complement of officers and crew.

    A certificate of inspection will not be granted to a vessel unless 
it has in service and on board such complement of officers and crew as 
may, in the judgment of the Marine Safety Unit, be necessary for safe 
navigation.

[54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]

                               Motorboats


<R05>
Sec. 121.131  Equipment on motorboats.

    (a) Motorboats less than 7 meters (23') in length shall carry the 
following equipment:

    2 Oars or paddles.
    1 Whistle.
    1 Bailer.
    20 Meters (65') of manila line, not less than 15mm (\5/8\") 
diameter, or synthetic line of comparable strength.
    2 Fire extinguishers, either 1\1/4\ gallon foam, 4-lb. CO-2, or 2-
lb. dry chemical, when engine is inboard, or one such extinguisher, if 
fixed system installed in engine space or if the engine is outboard. 
Extinguishers to be U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Combination light showing red to port and green to starboard or 
individual red and green side lights, visibility of one mile.
    1 Stern light or all-round white light, visibility of two miles.
    1 Anchor and suitable cable, 40 meters (130').
    1 Red flag.
    1 Life preserver for each person carried, U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Copy of the ``Motorboat Operator's Handbook''.

    (b) Motorboats 7 meters (23') or over and less than 12 meters (40') 
in length shall carry the following equipment:

    1 Life ring buoy of not less than 600mm (24") outside diameter, U.S. 
Coast Guard approved.
    1 Whistle, power-operated, audible at least one mile.
    1 Bailer.
    20 Meters (65') of manila line, not less than 18mm (\3/4\") 
diameter, or synthetic line of comparable strength.
    3 Fire extinguishers, 2 of which shall be 2\1/2\ gallon foam, 15-lb. 
CO-2, or 10-lb. dry chemical. The third extinguisher shall be 1\1/4\ 
gallon foam, 4-lb. CO-2, or 2-lb. dry chemical. This third extinguisher 
is not required if a fixed system is installed in the engine space. 
Extinguishers to be U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Boat hook.
    1 Combination light showing red to port and green to starboard, or 
individual red and green side lights, visibility one mile.
    1 Stern light or all-round white light, visibility of two miles.
    1 Anchor and suitable cable, 40 meters (130').
    1 Red flag.
    1 Red lantern.
    1 Life preserver for each person carried, U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Copy of the ``Motorboat Operator's Handbook''.

    (c) Motorboats 12 meters (40') or over and not more than 20 meters 
(65') in length shall carry the following equipment:

    2 Life ring buoys not less than 600mm (24") in outside diameter, 
U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Approved fog horn.
    1 Whistle, power-operated, audible at least one mile.
    1 Bailer.

[[Page 138]]

    25 Meters (82') of manila line, not less than 21mm (\7/8\") 
diameter, or synthetic line of comparable strength.
    4 Fire extinguishers, 3 of which shall be 2\1/2\ gallon foam, 15-lb. 
CO-2, or 10-lb. dry chemical. The fourth extinguisher may be 1\1/4\ 
gallon foam, 4-lb. CO-2, or 2-lb. dry chemical. This fourth extinguisher 
is not required if a fixed system is installed in engine space. 
Extinguishers to be U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    2 Boat hooks.
    1 Masthead light, white, 225 degrees, fixed to show the light from 
right ahead to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on either side, minimum 2.5 
meters above the gunwale, visibility three miles.
    1 Combination light showing red to port and green to starboard or 
individual red and green sidelights, visibility two miles.
    1 Stern light, white, 135 degrees, placed as nearly as practicable 
at the stern, and so fixed to show the light 67.5 degrees from right aft 
on each side, visibility two miles.
    2 Emergency lights, red and all-round in a vertical line where they 
can best be seen, visibility two miles (daylight: two black balls) used 
when restricted in ability to maneuver.
    1 Red lantern.
    1 Red flag.
    1 Anchor with 40 meters (130') suitable cable.
    1 Fog bell.
    1 Life preserver for each person carried, U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Copy of the ``Motorboat Operator's Handbook''.

    (1) Pilot vessels only:

    2 Lights at or near the masthead, one all-round white upper and one 
all-round red lower not less than one meter apart, visibility two miles.

    (2) For those vessels engaged in towing and pushing:

    2 Masthead lights in a vertical line. When the length of the tow, 
measured from the stern of the towing vessel to the after end of the 
tow, exceeds 200 meters, three such lights in a vertical line (daylight: 
a black diamond shape where it can best be seen).

    (d) Cayucos or piraguas less than 20 meters (65 feet) in length and 
equipped with an outboard motor or motors and operating in Madden and 
Gatun Lakes shall carry the following equipment:

    2 Oars or paddles.
    1 Whistle.
    1 Bailer.
    20 Meters (65') of manila line, not less than 21mm (\7/8\") 
diameter, or synthetic line of comparable strength.
    1 Flashlight.
    1 Red flag.
    1 Life preserver for each person carried, U.S. Coast Guard approved.
    1 Copy of the ``Motorboat Operator's Handbook''.

    (e) Life preservers, ring buoys and fire extinguishers required by 
this section shall be U.S. Coast Guard approved and shall be permanently 
marked with the name of the motorboat on which they are carried.

[54 FR 37330, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.132   Motorboat filling, venting, and sounding pipes; shut-off valves.

    (a) Filling, venting, and sounding pipes shall be so arranged that 
vapors or possible overflow when filling cannot escape to the inside of 
the hull but will run overboard. A pipe made tight to the tank and to 
the filling plate on deck clear of any coamings, etc., meets this 
requirement. Filling and sounding pipes shall extend to within one-half 
their diameter from the bottom of the tank. A flame screen of 
noncorrodible wire mesh shall be fitted in the throat of the fill pipe.
    (b) Shut-off valves shall be installed in the fuel line; one as 
close to each tank as practicable, and one as close to each carburetor 
as practicable. Arrangements shall be provided for operating all shut-
off valves at the tanks from outside the compartments in which they are 
located, preferably from an accessible position on deck. The operating 
gear for the shut-off valves at the tanks shall be accessible at all 
times and in efficient working condition.


<R05>
Sec. 121.133   Carburetor back-fire flame arrestor.

    Carburetors of engines installed on motorboats using gasoline for 
fuel, except outboard motors, shall be fitted with an approved device to 
arrest backfire. Air intakes, where practicable, shall be so directed 
that back-fire cannot blow down into the bilge.


<R05>
Sec. 121.134   Ventilation of motorboats.

    (a) All motorboats which use gasoline or other liquid fuel having a 
flash point of less than 110 deg. F. shall be provided with at least two 
ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the

[[Page 139]]

purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every 
engine and fuel tank compartment in order to remove any inflammable or 
explosive gases.
    (b) Motorboats constructed so that the greater portion of the bilges 
under the engine and fuel tanks are open and exposed to the natural 
atmosphere at all times are not required to be fitted with ventilators.


<R04>
                  Subpart C--Registration and Numbering


<R05>
Sec. 121.171  Registration and numbering of motorboats.

    All motorboats shall be registered, certificated, and assigned 
numbers by the Marine Safety Unit.

[54 FR 37331, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.172   Numbers to be displayed on motorboats.

    Every motorboat shall have its assigned number painted or attached 
on each bow. The numbers shall be in block character of not less than 3 
inches in height, and located as high above the water line as 
practicable, but in no case shall there be less than 3 inches of space 
from the bottom of the numbers to the water.


<R05>
Sec. 121.173  Registration and numbering of vessels under 20 meters (65') in length not propelled by machinery.

    Vessels not more than 20 meters (65') in length and not propelled in 
whole or in part by machinery shall be registered and numbered by the 
Marine Safety Unit.

[54 FR 37331, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 121.174   Numbers to be displayed on vessels under 65 feet other than motorboats.

    Every vessel not more than 65 feet in length and not propelled in 
whole or in part by machinery shall have its assigned number painted or 
attached on each bow. The numbers shall be in block character of not 
less than 3 inches in height, and located as high above the water line 
as practicable, but in no case shall there be less than 3 inches of 
space from the bottom of the numbers to the water.


<R03>
PART 123--RADIO COMMUNICATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
123.1  Radio communication defined.
123.2  Control of communications.
123.3  Radiotelephones required.
123.4  Advance notification required by radio from vessels approaching 
          the Canal.
123.5  Radio communication between vessels in Canal waters and other 
          vessels or places.
123.7  Operator on board during transit.
123.8  Precedence of messages relative to vessel's movements and Canal 
          business; use of vessel's radio by pilot.
123.9  Immediate report of accidents, delays, or casualties.
123.10  Operation of vessel radios in conformity with treaties.
123.11  Radio charges.

    Authority: Issued under authority of the President by 22 U.S.C. 
3811; E.O. 12215, 45 FR 36043.

    Source: 31 FR 12322, Sept. 16, 1966, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 123.1   Radio communication defined.

    For the purposes of this part, unless the context otherwise 
requires, ``radio communication'' means the transmission by radio of 
writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds, including 
all instrumentalities, facilities, apparatus, and services (among other 
things the receipt, forwarding, and delivery of communications) 
incidental to such transmission.


<R05>
Sec. 123.2  Control of communications.

    The Panama Canal Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this 
part, have control of radio communications in the Canal operating areas 
so far as concerns or affects vessels in Panama Canal waters or the 
navigation of such waters.

[46 FR 63193, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 123.3  Radiotelephones required.

    (a) Except for vessels operated by the Panama Canal Commission or 
another agency of the United States, the following vessels shall comply 
with the requirements of this section:
    (1) Every power-driven vessel of 300 gross tons or over;
    (2) Every power-driven vessel of 100 gross tons or over, carrying 
one or more passengers for hire; and

[[Page 140]]

    (3) Every commercial towing vessel of 26 feet in length or over.
    (b) A vessel of a type described in paragraph (a) of this section 
shall be equipped with a radiotelephone which can be operated from the 
navigation bridge and which can be used to communicate on the following 
channels in the 156-162 MHz frequency band:
    (1) Channel 12, 156.600 MHz;
    (2) Channel 13, 156.650 MHz;
    (3) Channel 16, 156.800 MHz.
    (c) A vessel of a type described in paragraph (a) of this section, 
which has notified the Traffic Management Division that it is ready to 
transit or otherwise navigate in Panama Canal waters and requires a 
Panama Canal pilot, shall, until a pilot boards the vessel, maintain a 
continuous watch on Channel 12. Channel 12 will be used for notification 
to vessels of their transit time and for advisory harbor control 
communication in Limon Bay.
    (d) A vessel of a type described in paragraph (a) of this section 
shall maintain a continuous watch on Channel 13 when under way in Panama 
Canal waters for bridge-to-bridge navigational communications only. One 
watt maximum power shall be used on that frequency, except that in 
emergencies or unusual circumstances more power may be used. When such 
vessels have a Panama Canal pilot aboard, Channel 13 may be used only by 
the pilot or at his direction for navigational communications.
    (e) The Signal Stations on Flamenco Island and in Cristobal may be 
called on Channel 12 or 16. Channel 16, however, is reserved for cases 
of distress, urgency, safety and calling only. Once radio contact is 
established on Channel 16, another channel should be selected for 
routine communications.

[41 FR 21778, May 28, 1976, as amended at 46 FR 63193, Dec. 30, 1981; 48 
FR 6709, Feb. 15, 1983; 54 FR 37331, Sept. 8, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 123.4  Advance notification required by radio from vessels approaching the Canal.

    (a) Vessels approaching the Panama Canal shall communicate by radio 
to the Traffic Management Division not less than 48 hours in advance of 
arrival at the Canal (or earlier if radio communication is practicable 
at an earlier time), the information required by this section unless 
this information has been previously communicated to the Canal 
authorities by other means. Symbols of the phonetic alphabet shall be 
used to identify each item and the word ``NEGAT'' shall be used after 
the items that can be answered ``no'', ``none'', or ``not applicable''. 
The following items of information shall be provided.

    ALFA--The Panama Canal Identification Number of the vessel.
    BRAVO--Estimated date and time of arrival, port of arrival and 
request for Canal transit if desired.
    CHARLIE--Estimated draft upon arrival, and estimated transit draft 
if scheduled to work cargo or take bunker prior to transiting, in 
meters, fore and aft, in Tropical Fresh Water.
    DELTA--Any changes in the vessel's name, country of registry, 
structure or use of tanks that have occurred since the vessel last 
called in Panama Canal waters.
    ECHO--Will the vessel dock at Balboa or Cristobal? What is the 
reason for docking? If it is for cargo operations, fuel or water, give 
the tonnage involved in each case. Is there any other reason the vessel 
will not be ready to transit upon arrival? What is the reason?
    FOXTROT--The nature and tonnage of any deck cargo.
    GOLF--If the vessel is carrying any explosives or bulk dangerous 
cargoes, as classified in Sec. 113.3, state the technical name, quantity 
(in long tons), United Nations number, the International Maritime 
Organization class and division (include compatibility group for 
explosives only), and the stowage for each dangerous cargo carried. If 
the vessel is a tanker in ballast condition and not gas free, state the 
technical name, United Nations number and the International Maritime 
Organization class and division of the previously carried cargo. Tankers 
reporting ``GOLF:NEGAT'' shall, in addition, state the technical names 
of non-dangerous cargoes carried.
    HOTEL--If the vessel is carrying any packaged dangerous goods, as 
specified in Sec. 113.3, other than explosives, state the International 
Maritime Organization class and division and the total quantity (in long 
tons) within each class.
    INDIA--Quarantine and immigration information:
    (1) Is radio pratique desired?
    (2) State the ports at which the vessel has called within 15 days 
preceeding its arrival at the Canal.
    (3) State all cases of communicable disease aboard and the nature of 
the disease or diseases, if known.

[[Page 141]]

    (4) The number of deaths which have occurred since departure from 
the last port and the cause of each death, if known.
    (5) The number of passengers disembarking and their port of 
disembarkation.
    (6) The number and ports of origin of any stowaway and a brief 
description of the identity papers of each stowaway.
    (7) The number, kind and country of origin of any animals aboard. 
Are any animals to be landed?
    (8) The country of origin of all meat, whether carried as cargo or 
as ship's stores.
    (9) Has the vessel called at a port in any country infected with 
foot-and-mouth disease or rinderpest during its present voyage? 
Countries considered to be infected are:
    (a) All countries east of the 30th meridian west longitude and west 
of the international date line, except Australia, Channel Islands, Fiji, 
Greenland, Iceland, Japan, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, Norway, 
Republic of Ireland;
    (b) All countries of South America;
    (c) Curacao (the leeward islands of the Netherlands Antilles);
    (d) Martinique;
    (e) Cuba;
    (f) Guadaloupe.
    (10) Specify whether the vessel has a valid deratting certificate or 
a deratting exemption certificate issued 180 days prior to arrival.

    (b) The following additional information shall be transmitted via 
radio to Transit Operations Division from all vessels as applicable:
    (1) Vessels approaching from the Pacific shall report actual time of 
passing Cape Mala, or the latitude of Cape Mala, and the vessel's speed.
    (2) Vessels approaching from the Atlantic shall report 12 hours 
prior to arrival at Cristobal any change of one hour or more in the 
expected time of arrival.
    (3) Any other matters of importance and interest.
    (c) Timely receipt of the above information will facilitate the 
transit or docking of arriving vessels. Failure to comply with these 
reporting requirements may subject a vessel to delay since vessels which 
do comply will receive priority of service and handling over those which 
do not.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
3207-0001)

[31 FR 12322, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 38 FR 3963, Feb. 9, 1973; 40 
FR 8348, Feb. 27, 1975; 41 FR 21778, May 28, 1976; 46 FR 63193, Dec. 30, 
1981; 50 FR 19682, May 10, 1985; 54 FR 37331, Sept. 8, 1989; 61 FR 
36498, July 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 123.5  Radio communication between vessels in Canal waters and other vessels or places.

    Except for emergency traffic and routine bridge-to-bridge VHF 
communication, no vessel in transit through the Canal shall communicate 
by radio with any other vessel or shore station, local or distant. This 
restriction shall not apply to government vessels of the United States 
or of the Republic of Panama.

[46 FR 63193, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 123.7  Operator on board during transit.

    All vessels equipped with radio shall have a qualified radio 
operator on board, available to operate the radio installation if 
necessary, at any time the vessel is under way in Panama Canal waters 
and at any other time her navigation is under the control of a Panama 
Canal pilot. Vessels equipped with radio telephones operating on the 
frequencies designated by the Panama Canal Commission are deemed to meet 
the requirements of this section provided they have someone aboard 
capable and qualified to operate such equipment.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981; 47 FR 54072, Dec. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 123.8   Precedence of messages relative to vessel's movements and Canal business; use of vessel's radio by pilot.

    Messages relating to a vessel's movements and Canal business shall 
take precedence over all commercial messages. The pilot on a vessel 
passing through the Canal shall be afforded free use of the vessel's 
radio for the transaction of Canal business.


<R05>
Sec. 123.9  Immediate report of accidents, delays, or casualties.

    Vessels within Panama Canal waters shall report by radio to the 
Canal authorities any accident or anything else that may delay them or 
require assistance, any sickness or casualties that require medical 
attendance or any other matter of importance that may arise. If a pilot 
is on board, such report

[[Page 142]]

shall be made by the pilot or under his direction.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 123.10  Operation of vessel radios in conformity with treaties.

    Except as may be otherwise provided by this part, while in Panama 
Canal waters, vessels equipped with radio shall operate such equipment 
at all times in conformity with the principles and rules stipulated in 
the treaties or conventions to which the United States is a party.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 123.11   Radio charges.

    No receiving or relaying charges, will be imposed against ships on 
radiograms transmitted by ships on Canal business nor in the cases of 
dispatches involving medical assistance to ships.


<R03>
PART 125--SANITARY REQUIREMENTS: VESSEL WASTES; GARBAGE; BALLAST--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
125.1  Discharging vessel wastes into waters.
125.2  Handling ballast.
125.4  Removing wastes when anchored for considerable time.

    Authority: Issued under authority vested in the President by secs. 
1701 and 1801, Pub. L. 96-70, 93 Stat. 492; EO 12215, 45 FR 36043.


<R05>
Sec. 125.1  Discharging vessel wastes into waters.

    (a) Vessels may not discharge or throw into Panama Canal waters any 
ballast, ashes, cinders, boxes, barrels, straw, paper, or other solid 
matter; nor discharge heavy slops, engine or fire room bilge water, oil, 
or any other matter that will tend to deface or make Canal waters 
unsanitary. This requirement does not apply to the water used in cooking 
or in cleaning tableware.
    (b) Ballast tanks may not be discharged in Canal waters.
    (c) Before arrival from sea at either of the terminal ports, vessels 
should, in a manner consistent with the requirements of the 
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by 
Oil, 1954, and all amendments thereto which are currently in force, 
dispose of all waste forbidden to be discharged in Canal waters.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 125.2   Handling ballast.

    Vessels wishing to unload or load ballast must have proper chutes, 
so arranged as to prevent ballast from falling overboard.

[31 FR 12324, Sept. 16, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 125.4  Removing wastes when anchored for considerable time.

    A vessel anchored in Panama Canal waters for a considerable length 
of time may get rid of vessel wastes by requesting Canal authorities to 
place a garbage scow alongside. This service is chargeable to the 
vessel.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R03>
PART 131--NEUTRALITY OF CANAL--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R05>
Sec. 131.1   Applicability of Treaty.

    Matters concerning the neutrality of the Panama Canal are governed 
by the Treaty Concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the 
Panama Canal, signed in Washington, D.C., on September 7, 1977.

(Treaty Concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama 
Canal, signed September 7, 1977)

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R03>
PART 133--TOLLS FOR USE OF CANAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


                        Subpart A--Rates of Toll

Sec.
133.1  Rates of toll.

                       Subpart B--Levying of Tolls

133.31  Measurement of vessels; vessels to secure tonnage certificate.
133.32  Measurement of vessels; making and correction of measurement; 
          plans and copies.
133.33  Measurement of vessels; temporary retention of certificate at 
          Canal.
133.34  Tolls for vessels in ballast.
133.36  Tolls for vessels making partial transit and return.
133.37  Partial transits by small vessels.

[[Page 143]]

          Subpart C--Payment of Tolls and Other Vessel Charges

133.71  Time of making payment.
133.72  Same; exception; vessels operated by the United States.
133.73  Payment to be in cash.
133.74  Same; exception; payment secured by deposit of cash or bonds.
133.75  To whom payment is to be made.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3791-3792, 3794.

    Source: 31 FR 12326, Sept. 16, 1966, unless otherwise noted.

    Note: Section 133.1; Presidential Proc. 2247, 2 FR 2061, Aug. 25, 
1937, as amended by Presidential Proc. 2249, 2 FR 2099, Aug. 31, 1937, 
Secs. 133.31, 133.32; Rules 14, 15, E.O. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925. 
Sec. 133.34: Rule 16, E.O. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925; Secs. 133.35, 133.36. 
E.O. 8068, 4 FR 1258, Mar. 21, 1939. Secs. 133.71-133.75; Resolution of 
Board of Directors, Panama Canal Company, Oct. 9, 1954. Provisions of 
Presidential Proc. and E.O. continue in force by virtue of sec. 19 of 
Oct. 18, 1962, 76A Stat. 1, 700.


<R04>
                        Subpart A--Rates of Toll


<R05>
Sec. 133.1  Rates of toll.

    The following rates of toll shall be paid by vessels using the 
Panama Canal:
    (a) On merchant vessels, yachts, army and navy transports, colliers, 
hospital ships, and supply ships, when carrying passengers or cargo, 
$2.39 per PC/UMS Net Ton--that is, the Net Tonnage determined in 
accordance with part 135 of this chapter, effective January 1, 1997, and 
$2.57 per PC/UMS Net Ton, effective January 1, 1998.
    (b) On vessels in ballast without passengers or cargo, $1.90 per PC/
UMS Net Ton, effective January 1, 1997, and $2.04 per PC/UMS Net Ton, 
effective January 1, 1998.
    (c) On other floating craft including warships, other than 
transports, colliers, hospital ships, and supply ships, $1.33 per ton of 
displacement, effective January 1, 1997, and $1.43 per ton of 
displacement, effective January 1, 1998.

[61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R04>
                       Subpart B--Levying of Tolls


<R05>
Sec. 133.31  Measurement of vessels; vessels to secure tonnage certificate.

    The rules for the measurement of vessels are fixed by part 135 of 
this chapter. Vessels desiring to transit the Canal shall provide 
themselves with a tonnage certificate in accordance with Sec. 133.32.

[59 FR 43254, Aug. 22, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 133.32  Measurement of vessels; making and correction of measurements; plans and copies.

    Measurements may be made by the admeasurers of the Canal or certain 
other officials worldwide as designated by the Panama Canal Commission. 
Each transiting vessel should have aboard and available to Canal 
authorities a full set of plans and a copy of the measurements which 
were made at the time of issue of its International Tonnage Certificate 
(1969), as well as the tonnage certificate itself. A copy of the 
International Tonnage Certificate (1969) shall be provided to Canal 
authorities. The Commission reserves the right to check and correct the 
total volume that is to be used in the calculation of the PC/UMS Net 
Tonnage.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under control 
number 3207-0001)

[59 FR 43254, Aug. 22, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 133.33  Measurement of vessels; temporary retention of certificate at Canal.

    The official PC/UMS Net Tonnage certificate shall be delivered by 
the Canal authorities to the vessel or to the owner or agent of the 
vessel after transit completion. This certificate shall be retained on 
board the vessel and shall be used to certify that the vessel has been 
inspected and its PC/UMS Net Tonnage has been determined by the 
Commission.

[59 FR 43254, Aug. 22, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 133.34  Tolls for vessels in ballast.

    In order for a vessel to secure the reduced rate of toll for vessels 
in ballast, it may not be carrying any passengers or cargo nor any fuel 
for its own consumption in a quantity which exceeds the spaces on the 
vessel which are available for the carriage of fuel (i.e., the actual 
volume of tanks or fixed compartments, including settling tanks, used 
for the storage of lubricating oil or fuel, which spaces cannot be used 
to stow cargo or stores and which

[[Page 144]]

have been certified by official marking to be spaces for the vessel's 
own fuel).

[54 FR 35148, Aug. 23, 1989; 54 FR 36096, Aug. 31, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 133.36   Tolls for vessels making partial transit and return.

    Vessels passing through the locks at either end of the Panama Canal 
and returning to the original point of entry without passing through the 
locks at the other end of the Canal, shall pay the tolls prescribed for 
a single passage through the Canal. In case such vessels carry cargo or 
passengers either in passing or returning through the locks, the rate of 
tolls on laden vessels shall apply.


<R05>
Sec. 133.37   Partial transits by small vessels.

    Section 133.36 shall not be interpreted as authorizing vessels less 
than 65 feet in length, or barges, or rafts of any size not on regular 
transit schedules and not paying tolls, to navigate the waters of any 
locks, or of Gaillard Cut to or from Gatun Lake in partial transit of 
the Canal; specific authority of the Administrator must be obtained 
through the Marine Director for each such partial transit.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R04>
          Subpart C--Payment of Tolls and Other Vessel Charges


<R05>
Sec. 133.71  Time of making payment.

    (a) Payment of tolls in full shall be made, or secured as provided 
by Sec. 133.74, before a vessel is permitted to enter a lock.
    (b) All vessel charges shall be paid, or secured as provided by 
Sec. 133.74, before permission to depart is given a vessel at the port 
of departure from the Canal: Provided, however, That in cases involving 
emergency or other special circumstances, the requirement of this 
paragraph may be waived by the Administrator of the Panama Canal 
Commission.

[31 FR 12326, Sept. 16, 1966, as amended at 46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 133.72   Same; exception; vessels operated by the United States.

    Section 133.71 shall not apply to vessels operated by the Government 
of the United States; and bills for tolls, where applicable, and for 
other charges against such vessels, shall be settled as are other 
obligations between agencies of the Federal Government.


<R05>
Sec. 133.73   Payment to be in cash.

    All payments for tolls and other charges shall be made in cash, in 
lawful money of the United States, except as provided in by Sec. 133.74.


<R05>
Sec. 133.74  Same; exception; payment secured by deposit of cash or bonds.

    (a) The payment of tolls and vessel charges may be secured by making 
cash deposits for that purpose with the Treasurer of the Panama Canal 
Commission or such United States depository as may be designated by the 
Panama Canal Commission.
    (b) In lieu of payment in cash or a cash deposit, the payment of 
tolls and vessel charges may be secured by making deposits, pursuant to 
written agreement with the Panama Canal Commission, of negotiable bonds 
of the United States Treasury Department as collateral security for the 
deposit of public moneys. Such bonds shall be under the full control of 
the Panama Canal Commission; shall be deposited with the Treasurer of 
the Panama Canal Commission or such United States depository as may be 
designated by the Panama Canal Commission and shall be subject to sale 
or other disposition by the Panama Canal Commission upon any failure in 
prompt payment of any bill for tolls or vessel charges for which the 
said bonds are deposited as security.

[46 FR 63194, Dec. 30, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 133.75   To whom payment is to be made.

    Payment for tolls and vessel charges shall be made to the Treasurer, 
Panama Canal Commission.

[46 FR 63195, Dec. 30, 1981]

[[Page 145]]


<R03>
PART 135--RULES FOR MEASUREMENT OF VESSELS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
135.1  Scope.
135.2  Vessels generally to present tonnage certificate or be measured.
135.3  Determination of total volume and VMC.
135.4  Administration and interpretation of rules.

                Subpart B--PC/UMS Net Tonnage Measurement

135.11  Tonnage.
135.12  Definitions.
135.13  Determination of PC/UMS Net Tonnage.
135.14  Change of PC/UMS Net Tonnage.
135.15  Calculation of volumes.
135.16  Measurement and calculation.

           Subpart C--Warships, Dredges and Floating Drydocks

135.21  Warships, dredges and floating drydocks to present documents 
          stating displacement tonnage.
135.22  Tolls on warships, dredges and floating drydocks levied on 
          actual displacement.

                 Subpart D--Transitional Relief Measures

135.31  Transitional relief measures.

        Subpart E--Alternative Method for Measurement of Vessels

135.41  Measurement of vessels when volume information is not available.
135.42  Measurement of vessels when tonnage cannot be otherwise 
          ascertained.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3791-3792, 3794.

    Source: 59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 135.1  Scope.

    This part establishes the procedures for determining the Panama 
Canal Universal Measurement System (hereinafter PC/UMS) Net Tonnage. The 
tonnage shall be used to assess tolls for use of the Panama Canal. Also, 
the tonnage may be used, when adequate volume information is not 
provided, to assess the charge for admeasurement services.


<R05>
Sec. 135.2  Vessels generally to present tonnage certificate or be measured.

    All vessels except warships, floating drydocks, dredges, and vessels 
subject to transitional relief measures, applying for passage through 
the Panama Canal shall present a duly authenticated International 
Tonnage Certificate (1969) (hereinafter ITC 69), or suitable substitute 
(i.e., a certificate derived from a system which is substantially 
similar to that which was provided for in the 1969 International 
Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, and which contains the total 
volume or allows for the direct mathematical determination of total 
volume). Vessels without such total volume information shall be 
inspected by Canal authorities who shall determine an appropriate volume 
for use in the calculation of a PC/UMS Net Tonnage of such vessels. In 
addition, these same vessels shall provide documentation, such as plans 
and classification certificates, with sufficient information to 
determine the volume of the maximum capacity of containers that may be 
carried on or above the upper deck, or VMC as defined in section 
135.13(a)(11).

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) control number 
3207-0001)

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.3  Determination of total volume and VMC.

    (a) Determination of total volume and VMC used to calculate PC/UMS 
Net Tonnage shall be carried out by the Panama Canal Commission. In so 
doing, however, the Commission may rely upon total volume and VMC 
information provided by such officials as are authorized by national 
governments to undertake surveys and issue national tonnage 
certificates. Total volume and VMC information presented to the 
Commission shall be subject to verification, and if necessary, 
correction as necessary to ensure accuracy to a degree acceptable to the 
Commission.
    (b) The Commission may, when it is deemed necessary to verify 
information contained on the ITC 69, require the submission of 
additional documents. Failure to submit the requested

[[Page 146]]

documentation may result in the Commission's developing a figure that 
accurately reflects the vessel's volume.

(Approved by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under control number 
3207-0001)

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.4  Administration and interpretation of rules.

    The rules of measurement provided in this part shall be administered 
and interpreted by the Administrator of the Panama Canal Commission.


<R04>
                Subpart B--PC/UMS Net Tonnage Measurement


<R05>
Sec. 135.11  Tonnage.

    (a) The tonnage of a ship shall consist of PC/UMS Net Tonnage.
    (b) The net tonnage shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions of the regulations in this subpart.
    (c) The net tonnage of novel types of craft whose constructional 
features are such as to render the application of the provisions of the 
regulations in this subpart unreasonable or impracticable shall be 
determined in a manner which is acceptable to the Panama Canal 
Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 135.12  Definitions.

    (a) Upper Deck means the uppermost complete deck exposed to weather 
and sea, which has permanent means of weathertight closing of all 
openings in the weather part thereof, and below which all openings in 
the sides of the ship are fitted with permanent means of watertight 
closing. In a ship having a stepped upper deck, the lowest line of the 
exposed deck and the continuation of that line parallel to the upper 
part of the deck is taken as the upper deck.
    (b) Moulded Depth means the vertical distance measured from the top 
of the keel to the underside of the upper deck at side.
    (1) In wood and composite ships the distance is measured from the 
lower edge of the keel rabbet. Where the form at the lower part of the 
midship section is of a hollow character, or where thick garboards are 
fitted, the distance is measured from the point where the line of the 
flat of the bottom continued inwards cuts the side of the keel.
    (2) In ships having rounded gunwales, the moulded depth shall be 
measured to the point of intersection of the moulded lines of the deck 
and side shell plating, the lines extending as though the gunwales were 
of angular design.
    (3) Where the upper deck is stepped and the raised part of the deck 
extends over the point at which the moulded depth is to be determined, 
the moulded depth shall be measured to a line of reference extending 
from the lower part of the deck along a line parallel with the raised 
part.
    (c) Breadth or moulded breadth means the maximum breadth of the 
ship, measured amidships to the moulded line of the frame in a ship with 
a metal shell and to the outer surface of the hull in a ship with a 
shell of any other material.
    (d) Enclosed spaces mean all spaces which are bounded by the ship's 
hull, by fixed or portable partitions or bulkheads, by decks or 
coverings other than permanent or movable awnings. No break in a deck, 
nor any opening in the ship's hull, in a deck or in a covering of a 
space, or in the partitions or bulkheads of a space, nor the absence of 
a partition or bulkhead, shall preclude a space from being included in 
the enclosed space.
    (e) Excluded spaces mean, notwithstanding the provisions of 
paragraph (d) of this section, the spaces referred to in paragraphs 
(e)(1) to (e)(5) of this section. Excluded spaces shall not be included 
in the volume of enclosed spaces, except that any such space which 
fulfills at least one of the following three conditions shall be treated 
as an enclosed space:

--The space is fitted with shelves or other means for securing cargo or 
stores;
--The openings are fitted with any means of closure; or
--The construction provides any possibility of such openings being 
closed.

    (1)(i) A space within an erection opposite an end opening extending 
from deck to deck except for a curtain plate of a depth not exceeding by 
more than 25 millimeters (one inch) the depth of the adjoining deck 
beams, such opening having a breadth equal to or greater

[[Page 147]]

than 90 percent of the breadth of the deck at the line of the opening of 
the space. This provision shall be applied so as to exclude from the 
enclosed spaces only the space between the actual end opening and a line 
drawn parallel to the line or face of the opening at a distance from the 
opening equal to one-half of the width of the deck at the line of the 
opening (Figure 1).

    In the figure:

O = excluded space
C = enclosed space
I = space to be considered as an enclosed space
Hatched-in parts to be included as enclosed spaces.
B = breadth of the deck in way of the opening.

    In ships with rounded gunwales the breadth is measured as indicated 
in Figure 11 in paragraph (e)(5).

[[Page 148]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.000


    (ii) Should the width of the space because of any arrangement except 
by convergence of the outside plating, become less than 90 percent of 
the breadth of the deck, only the space between the line of the opening 
and a parallel line drawn through the point where the athwartships width 
of the space becomes equal to, or less than, 90 percent of the breadth 
of the deck shall be excluded from the volume of enclosed spaces. 
(Figures 2, 3 and 4).

    In the figures:

O = excluded space
C = enclosed space
I = space to be considered as an enclosed space
Hatched-in parts to be included as enclosed spaces.
B = breadth of the deck in way of the opening.

    In ships with rounded gunwales the breadth is measured as indicated 
in Figure 11 in paragraph (e)(5).

[[Page 149]]

      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.001
    

[[Page 150]]


      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.002
    
    (iii) Where an interval which is completely open except for bulwarks 
or open rails separates any two spaces, the exclusion of one or both of 
which is permitted under paragraphs (e)(1)(i) and/or (e)(1)(ii) of this 
section, such exclusion shall not apply if the separation between the 
two spaces is less than the least half breadth of the deck in way of the 
separation. (Figures 5 and 6).

    In the figures:

O = excluded space
C = enclosed space
I = space to be considered as an enclosed space
Hatched-in parts to be included as enclosed spaces.
B = breadth of the deck in way of the opening.

    In ships with rounded gunwales the breadth is measured as indicated 
in Figure 11 in paragraph (e)(5).

[[Page 151]]

      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.003
    

[[Page 152]]


    (2) A space under an overhead deck covering open to the sea and 
weather, having no other connection on the exposed sides with the body 
of the ship than the stanchions necessary for its support. In such a 
space, open rails or a bulwark and curtain plate may be fitted or 
stanchions fitted at the ship's side, provided that the distance between 
the top of the rails or the bulwark and the curtain plate is not less 
than 0.75 meters (2.5 feet) or one-third of the height of the space, 
whichever is the greater. (Figure 7).
      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.004
    
    (3) A space in a side-to-side erection directly in way of opposite 
side openings not less in height than 0.75 meters (2.5 feet) or one-
third of the height of the erection, whichever is the greater. If the 
opening in such an erection is provided on one side only, the space to 
be excluded from the volume of enclosed spaces shall be limited inboard 
from the opening to a maximum of one-half of the breadth of the deck in 
way of the opening. (Figure 8).

    In the figures:

O = excluded space
C = enclosed space
I = space to be considered as an enclosed space
Hatched-in parts to be included as enclosed spaces.
B = breadth of the deck in way of the opening.

    In ships with rounded gunwales the breadth is measured as indicated 
in Figure 11 in paragraph (e)(5).

[[Page 153]]

      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.005
    
    (4) A space in an erection immediately below an uncovered opening in 
the deck overhead, provided that such an opening is exposed to the 
weather and the space excluded from enclosed spaces is limited to the 
area of the opening. (Figure 9).

[[Page 154]]

      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.006
    
    (5) A recess in the boundary bulkhead of an erection which is 
exposed to the weather and the opening of which extends from deck to 
deck without means of closing, provided that the interior width is not 
greater than the width at the entrance and its extension into the 
erection is not greater than twice the width of its entrance. (Figure 
10).

    In the figure:

O = excluded space
C = enclosed space
I = space to be considered as an enclosed space
Hatched-in parts to be included as enclosed spaces.

[[Page 155]]

      
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU94.007
    
    (f) Passenger means every person other than:
    (1) the master and the members of the crew or other persons employed 
or engaged in any capacity on board a ship on the business of that ship; 
and
    (2) a child under one year of age.
    (g) Weathertight means that in any sea conditions water will not 
penetrate into the ship.


<R05>
Sec. 135.13  Determination of PC/UMS Net Tonnage.

    PC/UMS Net Tonnage shall be determined as follows:
    (a) For all vessels with tolls fixed in accordance with 
Sec. 133.1(a) or (b) of this chapter, unless subject to the transitional 
relief measures established in Sec. 135.31 of this chapter, the formula 
for determining PC/UMS Net Tonnage is:

PC/UMS Net Tonnage=K<INF>4</INF>(V)+K<INF>5</INF>(V) 
+CF<INF>1</INF>(VMC)

in which formula:

[[Page 156]]

    (1) ``K<INF>4</INF>''={0.25 + [0.01  x  Log<INF>10</INF>(V)]}  x  
0.830
    (2) ``K<INF>5</INF>''=[Log<INF>10</INF>(DA-19)]/
{[Log<INF>10</INF>(DA-16)]  x  17}. If the number of passengers 
(N<INF>1</INF> + N<INF>2</INF>) is greater than 100 or DA is equal to or 
less than 20.0 meters then K5 is equal to zero.
    (3) ``V''=Total volume of all enclosed spaces of the ship in cubic 
meters and is identical to V as specified in the 1969 International 
Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships.
    (4) ``DA'' (Average depth)=The result of the division of the Total 
Volume by the product of the length in meters multiplied by the moulded 
breadth in meters. DA=V/(L  x  MB).
    (5) ``L'' (Length) is defined as 96 percent of the total length on a 
waterline at 85 percent of the least moulded depth measured from the top 
of the keel, or the length from the fore side of the stem to the axis of 
the rudder stock on that waterline, if that be greater. In ships 
designed with a rake of keel, the waterline on which this length is 
measured shall be parallel to the designed waterline.
    (6) Moulded breadth is defined in Sec. 135.12(c).
    (7) N<INF>1</INF>=number of passengers in cabins with not more than 
8 berths.
    (8) N<INF>2</INF>=number of other passengers.
    (9) N<INF>1</INF> + N<INF>2</INF>=total number of passengers the 
ship is permitted to carry as indicated in the ship's passenger 
certificate.
    (10) ``CF<INF>1</INF>''=.031 for ships which the Commission 
determines are designed to carry containers on or above the upper deck; 
otherwise ``CF<INF>1</INF>''=0. In making the foregoing determination, 
the Commission may consider documentation provided by such officials as 
are authorized by national governments to undertake surveys and issue 
national tonnage certificates.
    (11) ``VMC''=the volume (in cubic meters) of maximum capacity of the 
containers that can be carried on or above the upper deck. This volume 
may be calculated by multiplying the maximum number of containers by 
29.2 m<SUP>3</SUP>, or by other generally accepted methods that meet the 
Commission's accuracy standards. VMC will not include any container 
capacity that is included in ``V''.

    (b) For vessels subject to transitional relief measures, the 
existing Panama Canal Net Tonnage as specified on the certificate issued 
by the Commission plus CF<INF>1</INF> (VMC) shall be the PC/UMS Net 
Tonnage. In such case, the formula for determining PC/UMS Net Tonnage 
is: PC/UMS Net Tonnage=Panama Canal Net Tonnage+CF<INF>1</INF>(VMC).

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.14  Change of PC/UMS Net Tonnage.

    (a) Vessels whose PC/UMS Net Tonnage is determined in accordance 
with Sec. 135.13(a) shall have a new PC/UMS Net Tonnage issued if ``V'' 
changes.
    (b) A vessel whose PC/UMS Net Tonnage is determined in accordance 
with Sec. 135.13(b) shall retain that tonnage until the vessel undergoes 
a significant structural change as defined in Sec. 135.14(c). In the 
event of a significant structural change, the vessel's PC/UMS Net 
Tonnage shall be determined in accordance with Sec. 135.13(a).
    (c) For the purposes of paragraph (b) of this section, significant 
structural change means an actual change of at least 10 percent in the 
total volume of the vessel. Vessels without comparative ITC 69 total 
volumes, or other suitable sources of total volume comparison, shall 
have a fair and equitable volume comparison made by the Commission to 
determine if a significant structural change has occurred.
    (d) If the VMC of a vessel is changed due to any physical 
modification after the vessel's PC/UMS Net Tonnage has been determined 
at the Canal, the PC/UMS Net Tonnage may be revised by the Commission.

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.15  Calculation of volumes.

    (a) All volumes included in the calculation of PC/UMS Net Tonnage 
shall be measured, irrespective of the fitting of insulation or the 
like, to the inner side of the shell or structural boundary plating in 
ships constructed of metal, and to the outer surface of the shell or to 
the inner side of structural boundary surfaces in ships constructed of 
any other material.

[[Page 157]]

    (b) Volumes of appendages shall be included in the total volume.
    (c) Volumes of spaces open to the sea may be excluded from the total 
volume.
    (d) VMC may be calculated by multiplying the maximum number of 
containers by 29.2 m<SUP>3</SUP>, or by other generally accepted methods 
that meet the Commission's accuracy standards.
    (e) For purposes of this part, the outside dimension of a container 
is 8 ft. x 8 ft. x 20 ft., or 36.25 m<SUP>3</SUP>. These parameters will 
be used for determining the maximum above-deck container capacity.

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.16  Measurement and calculation.

    (a) All measurements used in the calculation of volumes shall be 
taken to the nearest centimeter or one-twentieth of a foot.
    (b) The volumes shall be calculated by generally accepted methods 
for the space concerned and with an accuracy acceptable to the 
Commission.
    (c) The calculation shall be sufficiently detailed to permit easy 
checking.


<R04>
           Subpart C--Warships, Dredges and Floating Drydocks


<R05>
Sec. 135.21  Warships, dredges and floating drydocks to present documents stating displacement tonnage.

    All warships, dredges and floating drydocks shall present documents 
stating accurately the tonnage of displacement at each possible mean 
draft. The term ``warship'' means any vessel of government ownership 
that is being employed by its owners for military or naval purposes and 
shall include armed coast guard vessels and vessels devoted to naval 
training purposes, but shall not include naval auxiliary vessels such as 
tankers, ammunition ships, refrigerator ships, repair ships, tenders or 
vessels used to transport general military supplies.

(Approved by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under control number 
3207-0001)


<R05>
Sec. 135.22  Tolls on warships, dredges and floating drydocks levied on actual displacement.

    The toll on warships, dredges and floating drydocks shall be based 
upon their tonnage of actual displacement at the time of their 
application for passage through the Canal. The actual displacement of 
these vessels shall be determined in a manner acceptable to the 
Commission and shall be expressed in tons of 2240 pounds. Should any of 
these vessels not have on board documents from which the displacement 
can be determined, Commission officials may use any practicable method 
to determine the displacement tonnage for assessment of tolls.


<R04>
                 Subpart D--Transitional Relief Measures


<R05>
Sec. 135.31  Transitional relief measures.

    Transitional relief measures as specified in Sec. 135.13(b) shall be 
applied to a vessel which has made a transit of the Panama Canal between 
March 23, 1976 and September 30, 1994, inclusive, and has not had a 
significant structural change as defined in Sec. 135.14(c) since the 
last transit during the above period. Any significant structural change 
made after the granting of transitional relief measures shall disqualify 
a vessel for further relief, and the vessel shall be handled in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 135.13(a). Transitional relief 
measures are applied to the vessel during its entire active service life 
as long as the vessel does not undergo a significant structural change. 
Vessels subject to transitional relief measures shall present their 
existing Panama Canal Tonnage Certificate on their first transit after 
September 30, 1994. Vessels subject to relief measures shall not be 
required to present an ITC 69 or any other total volume certification. 
Vessels subject to relief measures shall provide Canal authorities with 
sufficient documentation, such as plans and classification certificates, 
for the Commission to determine the VMC.

(Approved by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under control number 
3207-0001)

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]

[[Page 158]]


<R04>
        Subpart E--Alternative Method for Measurement of Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 135.41  Measurement of vessels when volume information is not available.

    When an ITC 69 or suitable substitute and documentation for the 
calculation of the VMC are not presented, or when the certificate, 
substitute or VMC documentation presented does not meet accuracy 
standards acceptable to the Commission, vessels will be measured in a 
manner that will include the entire cubical contents of V and VMC as 
defined in this part. The Commission shall endeavor to determine an 
accurate total volume of the vessel using the best information available 
at the time of the determination. The total volume shall be calculated 
by generally accepted methods for the space concerned and with an 
accuracy acceptable to the Commission.

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.42  Measurement of vessels when tonnage cannot be otherwise ascertained.

    (a) Vessels without an ITC 69, a suitable substitute or 
documentation from which to calculate total volume shall be measured as 
follows:
    (1) The volume of structures above the upper deck may be determined 
by any accepted method or combination of methods. These methods include 
but are not limited to simple geometric formulas, Simpson's rules, and 
other standard mathematical formulas. If special procedures are used, 
they should be identified. In all cases, measurements and calculations 
should be sufficiently detailed to permit easy review.
    (2) The volume of the hull below the upper deck (UDV) shall be 
determined as follows:
    (i) The formula:

UDV={0.91  x  [(LOA  x  MB)  x  (D-SLD)]} + (SLDISP/1.025)
Where:

UDV=Total volume of all enclosed spaces below the upper deck in cubic 
          meters.
LOA=The Length overall, i.e., the length of the ship in meters from the 
          foremost to the aftermost points, including a bulbous bow if 
          present.
MB=Moulded breadth in meters as defined in Sec. 135.12(c).
D=Moulded depth in meters as defined in Sec. 135.12(b).
SLD=Summer loaded draft (in meters), i.e., the maximum depth to which 
          the vessel's hull may be immersed when in a summer zone.
SLDISP=Summer loaded displacement, i.e., the actual weight in metric 
          tons of the water displaced by the vessel when immersed to her 
          SLD.

    (ii) If Sec. 135.42(a)(2)(i) proves unworkable, the total volume of 
the hull below the upper deck shall be determined by multiplying the 
product of the LOA, MB and D by the appropriate coefficient listed in 
the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       LOA in meters                         Coefficient
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 to 30....................................................       .7150 
> 30 to 60.................................................       .7250 
> 60 to 90.................................................       .7360 
> 90 to 120................................................       .7453 
> 120 to 150...............................................       .7328 
> 150 to 180...............................................       .7870 
> 180 to 210...............................................       .8202 
> 210 to 240...............................................       .7870 
> 240 to 270...............................................       .7328 
> 270......................................................       .7453 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) The total volume of a vessel is the sum of the volume of the 
structures above the upper deck as determined in accordance with 
Sec. 135.42(a)(1) and the volume of the hull below the upper deck as 
determined in accordance with Sec. 135.42(a)(2) (i) or (ii).
    (b) Vessels which have had their total volume determined in 
accordance with Sec. 135.41 or this section may apply for 
readmeasurement when they have a new or corrected ITC 69, a suitable 
substitute or present documentation sufficient to calculate total 
volume.
    (c) VMC may be determined by any accepted method or combination of 
methods, including but not limited to, simple geometric formulas, 
multiplication of a container by 29.2 m<SUP>3</SUP>, or other standard 
mathematical formula. The on-deck container capacity of a vessel for VMC 
purposes will be determined by the Commission.

[59 FR 43255, Aug. 22, 1994; 59 FR 52862, Oct. 19, 1994, as amended at 
61 FR 60612, Nov. 29, 1996]

[[Page 159]]


<R03>
                        SUBCHAPTER D--[RESERVED]

<R05>


<R03>
    SUBCHAPTER E--EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION UNDER THE PANAMA CANAL 
                            EMPLOYMENT SYSTEM

<R05>


<R03>
PART 251--REGULATIONS OF THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY (PANAMA CANAL EMPLOYMENT SYSTEM)--PERSONNEL POLICY--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
251.1  Purpose.
251.2  Definitions.
251.3  Panama Area Personnel Board.
251.4  Adoption of Panama Canal Employment System by Department of 
          Defense.
251.5  Compliance with regulations.
251.6  Deviations.

Subpart B--Compensation and Allowances Under the Panama Canal Employment 
                                 System

251.11  Uniformity of job classification standards.
251.12  Uniformity of compensation.
251.13  Establishment of basic wages.
251.21  Use of categories.
251.22  Non-manual category.
251.23  Manual category.
251.24  Special category.
251.25  Basic compensation.
251.31  Tropical differential.
251.32  Additional remuneration under Panama Canal Treaty.
251.41  Salary protection upon conversion of pay base.
251.42  Individual pay determinations.
251.43  Within-grade increases.
251.71  Environmental and night shift differential for manual-type 
          positions.
251.72  Physical hardship or hazard differentials for non-manual 
          positions.
251.73  Premium pay.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3641-3701, E.O. 12173, 12215.

    Source: 47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 251.1  Purpose.

    The regulations in this part are prescribed for the purposes of 
coordinating the personnel policies and activities of the respective 
agencies participating in the Panama Canal Employment System and 
excluding employees in the Department of Defense from certain provisions 
of the Panama Canal Employment System.


<R05>
Sec. 251.2  Definitions.

    (a) Agency means: (1) The Panama Canal Commission, and (2) an 
executive agency or the Smithsonian Institution, to the extent of any 
election in effect under section 1212(b)(2) of the Panama Canal Act.
    (b) Employee means an individual serving in a position.
    (c) The Panama Canal Treaty means the Panama Canal Treaty between 
the United States of America and the Republic of Panama, signed 
September 7, 1977, and related agreements.
    (d) Position means a civilian position in an agency, if a 
substantial portion of the duties and responsibilities of the position 
are performed in the Republic of Panama.
    (e) Subchapter II means Subchapter II of Chapter 2 of Title I of the 
Panama Canal Act of 1979 (93 Stat. 463).
    (f) PAPB means the Panama Area Personnel Board.


<R05>
Sec. 251.3  Panama Area Personnel Board.

    (a) There is hereby established the Panama Area Personnel Board 
(PAPB). The purpose of the PAPB shall be to assist the Secretary of the 
Army in carrying out his responsibility to coordinate the policies and 
the activities of the agencies participating in the Panama Canal 
Employment System.
    (b) Functions. The Panama Area Personnel Board shall:
    (1) Provide leadership and advice in all aspects of personnel 
management so as to promote uniformity of policies and practices to the 
extent compatible with the missions and governing rules of the various 
agencies.
    (2) Formulate and issue such additional regulations, guidelines, and 
procedures as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of Parts 251 
and 253 of this subchapter.
    (3) Approve qualification standards which will be applied uniformly 
in

[[Page 160]]

effecting all personnel actions. In general, qualification standards 
issued by the Office of Personnel Management and those developed by 
individual agencies which are appropriate for general use will be used 
for this purpose.
    (4) Provide technical direction to the Central Examining Office.
    (5) Consider requests for conversion to Canal Area Career or Career-
Conditional appointments.
    (6) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as prescribed by 
the Secretary of the Army or his designee.
    (c) Agencies shall consult with each other concerning any matter of 
interest within the scope of the Panama Canal Employment System and 
refer any recommendations for changes to the Panama Area Personnel 
Board.
    (d) Composition. The PAPB shall be composed of the Administrator of 
the Panama Canal Commission, the Commander-in-Chief, United States 
Southern Command, and one member appointed by the Secretary of the Army 
who will serve as permanent chairman. The extent to which any member may 
serve through a representative designated by the member will be 
determined by the PAPB.
    (e) Any member may enter topics on a meeting agenda.
    (f) Records. The Panama Canal Commission shall have control of the 
systems of records of the PAPB that are subject to 5 U.S.C. 552 and 552a 
(the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts). The regulations in Parts 
9 and 10 of this title are adopted as regulations of the PAPB. The 
Administrator shall act as agency head for the purposes of the Freedom 
of Information and Privacy Acts.

[47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 49 FR 31070, Aug. 3, 1984; 51 
FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 251.4  Adoption of Panama Canal Employment System by Department of Defense.

    (a) Subchapter II and the Panama Canal Employment System are hereby 
made applicable to all employees of all Department of Defense agencies 
and departments in Panama, except that the positions and incumbents 
specified by paragraphs (b) through (i) of this section are excluded, to 
the extent indicated, from Subchapter II and the regulations in this 
part and in Part 253.
    (b) The following positions, and the incumbents thereof, are 
excluded from all the provisions of Subchapter II, (except section 
1217(d)) and the regulations in this part and Part 253 of this chapter:
    (1) Consultants and experts when employed under the provisions of 5 
U.S.C. 3109 or other statutory authority.
    (2) Any employee excluded by 5 U.S.C. 2105(c) from coverage under 
laws administered by the Office of Personnel Management, except that 
Subpart B of this part shall apply to such employees.
    (3)-(4) [Reserved]
    (5) Positions in the Department of Defense designated as sensitive, 
key positions, for which off-Isthmus recruitment is necessary, except 
that the incumbents of these positions are eligible to receive any 
differential authorized by Subchapter II and the regulations in 
Secs. 251.31 and 251.32 of this part.
    (6) Positions of mess attendant which are designated by the 
commander of the employing military command for occupancy of San Blas 
(Cuna) Indians pursuant to agreements with the San Blas Tribal 
Chieftain.
    (c) The following positions, and the incumbents thereof, are 
excluded from the provisions of section 1212 of the Panama Canal Act 
which provide for merit selection for employment, section 1213 of the 
said Act and Subparts B and C of the regulations in Part 253 of this 
chapter:
    (1) Attorneys.
    (2) Intelligence related positions in the Departments of Defense and 
Army that are excepted from the competitive service by 5 CFR 
213.3106(d)(1), 213.3106(d)(2), and 213.3107(a)(5).
    (3) Visiting physicians and nurses of the Health Services Command, 
U.S. Army Medical Activity, Panama assigned to the home visit program 
under the Cash Relief Act of July 8, 1937, as amended (50 Stat. 478; 68 
Stat. 17), for beneficiaries who reside in the Republic of Panama.
    (4) Hospital residents and interns and other student hospital 
employees.
    (5) Positions designated by competent authority as fee-rate 
positions

[[Page 161]]

within the Special Category established by the regulations in this part.
    (6) Positions requiring part-time or intermittent services in which 
the individual appointee will receive during his service year 
compensation that aggregates not more than 40 percent of the annual 
salary rate for the first step of grade 3 in the applicable Non-Manual 
schedule.
    (7) Positions designated by the agency as appropriate for use as 
Student Trainee positions and which are filled under a cooperative work-
study agreement between an agency and a college or university approved 
for participation in such a program by the agency.
    (8) [Reserved]
    (9) Student assistant positions.
    (10) Positions that are filled by mentally retarded or severely 
physically handicapped persons pursuant to regulations issued by the 
PAPB. Such regulations shall conform, in substance, to those utilized to 
authorize appointment of the aforesaid classes of persons in Federal 
employment in the United States.
    (d) Heads of services in hospitals operated by the United States in 
the Republic of Panama, and the incumbents thereof, are excluded from 
the provisions of sections 1212 of the Panama Canal Act which provide 
for merit selection for employment, sections 1212 and 1215 through 1217 
of the said Act, Subpart B of the regulations in this part, and Subparts 
B and C of the regulation in Part 253, except that such positions and 
incumbents are not excluded from the provisions of section 1217(d) of 
the Act.
    (e) Positions of student assistant, apprentice and learner, and the 
incumbents thereof, are excluded from the provisions of section 
1225(b)(2) of the Panama Canal Act.
    (f) Professional educators employed by the Department of Defense 
Dependent Schools are excluded from all the provisions of Subchapter II 
and the regulations in this part and Part 253 of this chapter, except 
that the incumbents of these positions are eligible to receive any 
differential authorized by Subchapter II and the regulations in 
Secs. 251.31 and 251.32 of this part.
    (g) Officers and employees of the National Security Agency appointed 
and compensated pursuant to the National Security Act of 1959, as 
amended, 50 U.S.C. 3402, note, are excluded from all provisions of 
subchapter II and the regulations contained in this part and part 253 of 
this chapter, except that such positions are not excluded from the 
provisions of sections 1217, 1217a and 1218 of subchapter II or the 
regulations in Secs. 251.25, 251.31 and 251.32.
    (h) Positions at or above GS-6 and equivalent subject to the 
Civilian Intelligence Personnel Management System (CIPMS) are excluded 
from all the provisions of subchapter II and the regulations contained 
in this part and part 253, except that such positions are not excluded 
from the provisions of sections 1217, 1217a, and 1218 of subchapter II 
or the regulations in Secs. 251.25, 251.31 and 251.32.
    (i) Officers and employees of non-Department of Defense (DOD) 
agencies attached to DOD agencies in Panama are excluded from all the 
provisions of subchapter II and the regulations contained in this part 
and part 253 of this chapter, except that such employees may be covered 
by the provisions of sections 1217, 1217a, and 1218 of subchapter II and 
the regulations in Secs. 251.25, 251.31 and 251.32 of this chapter, if 
coverage by said provisions is agreed to by the employee's agency and 
DOD and such coverage does not result in a benefit greater than that 
provided to DOD employees.

[47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986; 
56 FR 1923, Jan. 18, 1991; 56 FR 40555, Aug. 15, 1991; 58 FR 5616, Jan. 
22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 251.5  Compliance with regulations.

    Inspection or program evaluation facilities within the higher 
headquarters of the employing agencies will be utilized for periodic 
evaluation of operations under the regulations in this part and Part 253 
of this chapter. When an evaluation indicates failure on the part of any 
activity to adhere to the regulations in this part, the Secretary of the 
Army will bring such deviations to the attention of the head of the 
agency concerned who will be responsible for taking necessary corrective 
action. When an evaluation reveals an improper or erroneous action by 
the

[[Page 162]]

PAPB, the Chairman of the PAPB will direct corrective action be taken.


<R05>
Sec. 251.6  Deviations.

    Whenever strict compliance with the letter of the regulations in 
this part would create practical difficulties or undue hardships, the 
Panama Area Personnel Board may permit a deviation from these 
regulations. Such authority may be exercised only if the deviation is 
within the spirit of the regulations and the efficiency of the U.S. 
Government and the integrity of the Panama Canal Employment System are 
protected and promoted. Any deviation authorized, and the reasons 
therefor, shall be made a matter of record.

[51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R04>
Subpart B--Compensation and Allowances Under the Panama Canal Employment 
                                 System


<R05>
Sec. 251.11  Uniformity of job classification standards.

    In order to assure uniform application of rates of basic 
compensation, job classification standards shall be uniform within and 
among all agencies. Any problems arising in achieving such uniformity 
which cannot be resolved between or among the agencies shall be referred 
to the PAPB for resolution. If resolution is not achieved the matter 
shall then be forwarded to the Office of the Secretary of the Army for 
decision.


<R05>
Sec. 251.12  Uniformity of compensation.

    (a) The rates of basic compensation for positions and employees and 
the additional compensation authorized by Secs. 251.31 and 251.32 shall 
be uniform within and among all agencies. Any problems arising in 
achieving such uniformity shall be referred to the PAPB for resolution. 
If resolution is not achieved the matter shall then be forwarded to the 
Office of the Secretary of the Army for decision.
    (b) This section shall not preclude the adoption by agencies, under 
regulations issued by the PAPB, of special rate ranges or other special 
rates of basic pay for positions for which employees must be recruited 
from outside the Republic of Panama or in other appropriate 
circumstances. This section shall not preclude the establishment of 
rates of pay for employees described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
that are different than the rates established for employees described in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section:
    (1) A person who was employed by a department on September 30, 1979 
and continued in employment with an agency without a break in service of 
more than three days or a person who was separated from the service of 
the Panama Canal Company or Canal Zone Government by reason of a 
reduction in force on September 30, 1979, and was appointed to a 
position in the Panama Canal Commission before April 1, 1980; a person 
who was employed on September 30, 1979, by an agency of the United 
States Government (other than an agency subject to this part) which 
since that date has had responsibility for carrying out the rights and 
responsibilities of the United States under the Panama Canal Treaty of 
1977 if the person is appointed to a position under Part 253 within 90 
days of terminating employment with such agency; and
    (2) Anyone other than a person described in paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section.

[47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 251.13  Establishment of basic wages.

    Agencies that participate in the Panama Canal Employment System 
shall consult with each other concerning basic pay for employees and 
shall refer their recommendations for basic pay to the Panama Area 
Personnel Board. Upon approval by the Secretary of the Army or his 
designee of basic wage rates, the rates shall be adopted by the 
agencies.


<R05>
Sec. 251.21  Use of categories.

    Positions in the agencies shall be grouped into the categories set 
forth in Secs. 251.22 to 251.24.


<R05>
Sec. 251.22  Non-manual category.

    Those occupational groupings which embrace administrative, clerical, 
technical, professional, and related occupations. This includes 
positions covered by Chapter 51 of Title 5, United States

[[Page 163]]

Code, except for those which are specifically excepted and covered in 
the Special Category.


<R05>
Sec. 251.23  Manual category.

    (a) Those manual-type occupational groupings that elsewhere in the 
Federal government are usually covered by the Federal Wage System, i.e., 
those that encompass the unskilled, semi-skilled, and skilled manual-
labor occupations in the trades, crafts, and related employment. This 
category does not include those positions that are specifically excepted 
and placed in the special category.
    (b) The PAPB shall prescribe standards for grading manual category 
jobs. Whenever a job-grading standard under the Federal Wage System is 
utilized, the PAPB shall modify it if necessary to take into account any 
significant differences in knowledge, skill, or responsibility 
requirements that are found between the job covered by the Federal Wage 
System standard and the Canal Area position to which it is applied.


<R05>
Sec. 251.24  Special category.

    Those occupational groupings which are excepted from the Non-Manual 
and Manual categories, and whose bases have been traditionally or by 
statute evaluated, classified, and titled by reference to applicable 
Government or industry standards for the same or similar work.


<R05>
Sec. 251.25  Basic compensation.

    (a) For employees not entitled to the differential prescribed by 
Sec. 251.31 or the additional remuneration prescribed by Sec. 251.32, 
the rates of pay shall be the base salary or wage rates prescribed by 
Sec. 251.13. For employees who are entitled to the differential 
prescribed by Sec. 251.31 or the additional remuneration prescribed by 
Sec. 251.32, the rates of pay shall be the base salary or wage rate plus 
the applicable differential or additional remuneration. The aggregate 
pay thus derived shall be considered basic compensation.
    (b) An employee shall not be paid, except as provided in paragraph 
(c) of this section, basic compensation as defined in paragraph (a) of 
this section at a rate in excess of the rate of basic pay payable for 
Level V of the Executive Schedule.
    (c) The Deputy Administrator and the Chief Engineer of the Panama 
Canal Commission shall not be paid basic compensation as defined in 
paragraph (a) of this section at a rate in excess of the rate of basic 
pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule.

[56 FR 40555, Aug. 15, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 251.31  Tropical differential.

    (a) An overseas tropical differential for an employee in the 
category established by Sec. 251.12(b)(1) who is a United States citizen 
employee and who qualifies under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this 
section, shall be fixed by the head of each agency in an amount equal to 
15 percent of the applicable base wage or salary established under 
Sec. 251.13.
    (b) The tropical differential prescribed by paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be paid to each United States citizen employee who 
qualifies under the following rules:
    (1) To be eligible, the employee must have continuously occupied a 
position, other than a position the rates of pay for which are fixed in 
accordance with rates of pay for the same or similar work performed 
outside the continental United States, since: (i) Recruitment or 
transfer by a department from a place (other than the former Canal Zone) 
under the jurisdiction of the United States, or (ii) Separation from the 
Armed Forces of the United States or from employment with a United 
States firm, organization, or interest under conditions which provided 
by contract for return transportation to a place (other than the former 
Canal Zone) under the jurisdiction of the United States.
    (2) When the employee is married to another employee eligible for 
the differential prescribed by this section, the differential may be 
paid to one spouse only.
    (3) The employee whose spouse is a member of the U.S. military 
service stationed in the area may be paid the differential only to the 
extent that the amount of the differential otherwise payable exceeds the 
amount of the total housing allowance (BAQ plus the

[[Page 164]]

housing portion of the station allowance) established for Panama, 
Republic of Panama, for a military member having the same rank and 
family size as the employee's military spouse. The employee whose 
spouse, by reason of U.S. Government employment in the Republic of 
Panama, is eligible under the Department of State Standardized 
Regulations (Government Civilian, Foreign Areas) (DSSR) for a living 
quarters allowance (LQA) may be paid the differential only to the extent 
that the amount of the differential otherwise payable exceeds the amount 
of LQA established for Panama, Republic of Panama, by sections 920 and 
932.22 of the DSSR for one in the same quarter group and with the same 
family size as the employee's spouse.
    (4) Tropical differential may be paid only to an individual whose 
retention the head of the agency determines is essential.
    (c) The rule set forth in paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall not 
disqualify the employee who has been continuously employed since July 3, 
1976, and who on that date was: (1) Receiving a differential, (2) Not 
receiving a differential because the employee's spouse was receiving a 
differential or a housing or living quarters allowance, (3) Not 
receiving a differential because the employee was under 21, unmarried, 
and the child or stepchild of a resident of the former Canal Zone or the 
Republic of Panama, or (4) Not receiving a differential solely because 
such payment when combined with his or her aggregate compensation 
established under prior regulations in this subpart would have exceeded 
the then current rate of step 5, GS-17, of the General Schedule 
previously set out in 5 U.S.C. 5332(a).
    (d) The rules set forth in paragraph (b)(2) and (3) of this section 
shall not disqualify for the differential the employee who is living 
apart from his or her spouse while party to a pending action for divorce 
or separate maintenance filed in a court of competent jurisdiction.
    (e) The rules set forth in paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall 
not disqualify an employee who has been continuously employed as a 
medical doctor since August 15, 1991 and who on that date was receiving 
the tropical differential.

[47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 56 FR 40556, Aug. 15, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 251.32  Additional remuneration under Panama Canal Treaty.

    (a)(1) An overseas Panama Area differential for an employee in the 
category established by Sec. 251.12(b)(2) and who qualifies under the 
provisions of paragraph (b) of this section shall be fixed by the head 
of each agency for each position in an amount equal to (i) the rate of 
basic pay for the same or similar work performed in the continental 
United States by employees of the Government of the United States plus 
(ii) an amount equal to 15 percent of that rate, less (iii) the base 
rate of pay established for the position pursuant to Sec. 251.13. The 
amount of the differential shall not exceed 25 percent of the rate of 
pay for the same or similar work performed in the United States by 
employees of the Government of the United States.
    (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section, the Panama Area differential for pilots in the category 
established by Sec. 251.12(b)(2), employed in the navigation of vessels 
in the waters of the Panama Canal, who qualify under the provisions of 
paragraph (b) of this section, shall be an amount equal to 15 percent of 
the base salary established under Sec. 251.13.
    (b) The Panama Area differential prescribed by paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be paid to each employee who qualifies under the following 
rules:
    (1) An employee is eligible if recruited from outside the Republic 
of Panama for placement in Panama.
    (2) The Panama Area differential may be paid only to an individual 
whose recruitment or retention the agency head determined to be 
essential.
    (c) The rates of the Panama Area differential prescribed by this 
section shall be adjusted by heads of agencies with reference to changes 
in rates of pay for United States Government employees in the 
continental United States.

[[Page 165]]

    (d) The rules set forth in paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall 
not disqualify an employee who has been continuously employed as a 
medical doctor since August 15, 1991, and who on that date was receiving 
the Panama Area differential.

[47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 56 FR 40556, Aug. 15, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 251.41  Salary protection upon conversion of pay base.

    (a) In the case of any employee whose rate of basic pay is 
determined in relation to rates of basic pay for the same or similar 
work in the United States and which is converted to a rate of basic pay 
which is determined in relation to rates in areas other than the United 
States, the employee shall continue to receive a rate of basic pay (but 
not including environmental differentials authorized under Sec. 251.71 
or Sec. 251.72 of this chapter) not less than that to which the employee 
was entitled immediately before the conversion.
    (b) This section shall cease to apply with respect to any employee 
if the employee is placed in a position:
    (1) For which the rate of basic pay is determined in relation to 
rates of basic pay in the United States; or
    (2) Which is of a lower grade.


<R05>
Sec. 251.42  Individual pay determinations.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, pay 
determinations in connection with personnel actions such as promotions, 
demotions, transfers, and conversions to new schedules shall be made in 
accordance with regulations generally in effect for employees in the 
Federal service as follows:
    (1) Non-manual category. Salary changes for employees in this 
category shall be in general conformity with Subparts B and C of 5 CFR 
Part 531.
    (2) Manual category. Wage determinations for employees in this 
category shall be made in accordance with regulations published by the 
PAPB. Such regulations shall generally conform to regulations published 
in 5 CFR Part 532.
    (3) Special category. Salary and wage changes for employees in this 
category shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the 
employing agency. In those cases where more than one agency employs 
persons in positions in this category, the regulations will be developed 
jointly by the interested agencies.
    (b) The pay and grade retention regulations in effect for employees 
to whom Chapter 51 of Title 5, United States Code, applies, which are 
set forth in 5 CFR Part 536, shall, in general, apply to reductions in 
the pay or grade of employees to whom this section applies, except that 
the provisions of 5 CFR Part 536 pertaining to retroactivity and to 
appeals shall not apply, and except that the PAPB may make other 
exceptions.


<R05>
Sec. 251.43  Within-grade increases.

    (a) Non-manual category. Employees in positions in this category 
shall be advanced to higher steps within the grade of their positions 
generally in accordance with 5 CFR Part 531, Subpart D.
    (b) Manual category. Employees in positions in this category shall 
be advanced successively to the next higher step in their grade level 
generally in accordance with FPM Supplement 532-1.
    (c) Special category. Employees in positions in this category shall 
be advanced successively to the next higher step within their grade in 
accordance with regulations to be prescribed by the head of the agency 
concerned.

[47 FR 12952, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 251.71  Environmental and night shift differentials for manual-type positions.

    The head of each agency, in coordination with the heads of other 
agencies, may authorize payment of environmental differentials for 
manual-type positions to compensate for exposure to hazards, physical 
hardships, and working conditions of an unusually severe nature which 
have not been considered in determining the base rate of pay for the 
position in question. Differentials for night work may also be 
established for manual-type positions. Any differential prescribed under 
this section shall conform with like differentials established under the 
Federal Wage System to the extent that it

[[Page 166]]

is practicable under local conditions. Such differential shall be 
treated as part of the basic compensation for the position to the extent 
it is so treated in the Federal Wage System.


<R05>
Sec. 251.72  Physical hardship or hazard differentials for non-manual positions.

    The head of each agency, in coordination with the heads of other 
agencies, may authorize payment of differentials for positions, other 
than positions subject to Sec. 251.71 of this chapter, to compensate for 
irregular or intermittent duty involving unusual physical hardship or 
hazard. Differential prescribed under this section shall generally 
conform to regulations published in 5 CFR Part 550.


<R05>
Sec. 251.73  Premium pay.

    (a) Premium pay for Manual-type positions shall be established in 
accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 5544 and Supplement 532-1 of 
the Federal Personnel Manual; Provided, However, That any rule 
concerning premium pay established prior to the effective date of these 
regulations may be continued for the type of position to which the rule 
applied before the said effective date.
    (b) Premium pay and compensatory time for positions, other than 
positions subject to paragraph (a) of this section, shall be established 
in accordance with the provisions of Subchapter V of Chapter 55 of Title 
5, United States Code; Provided, however, That any rule concerning 
premium pay or compensatory time established prior to the effective date 
of these regulations may be continued for the type of position to which 
the rule applied before the said effective date.


<R03>
PART 253--REGULATIONS OF THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY (PANAMA CANAL EMPLOYMENT SYSTEM)--EMPLOYMENT POLICY--Table of Contents

<R05>


                     Panama Canal Employment System

                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
253.1  Purpose.
253.2  Definitions.
253.3  Establishment of Panama Canal Employment System; scope and 
          requirements.
253.4  Coverage and exclusions.
253.5  Central Examining Office.
253.6  Review by the Office of Personnel Management.
253.7  Deviations.
253.8  Exclusions.

                      Panama Canal Board of Appeals

253.11  Establishment; composition; appointment of members; alternates; 
          employees.
253.12  Decisions of the Board.
253.13  Classification appeals.
253.14  Terms of members.
253.15  Appeals procedures.
253.16  Effective date of decisions.

                      Subpart B--Filling Positions

253.31  Authority of appointing officers; methods of filling vacancies.
253.32  [Reserved]
253.33  Positions restricted to Veterans of United States Armed Forces.
253.34  Disqualification of applicants.
253.35  Appointments subject to investigation.
253.36  Prohibited practices.
253.37  Examinations.
253.38  Rating competitors.
253.39  Establishment of registers of eligibles.
253.40  Certificate for appointment.
253.41  Selection from certificates.
253.42  Appointments from registers.
253.43  Temporary and term appointments.
253.44  Noncompetitive appointments.
253.45  Tenure following noncompetitive appointment.
253.46  Promotion, demotion, reassignment, and transfer.
253.47  Rotation of personnel.

    Subpart C--Conversion To Canal Area Career or Career-Conditional 
                              Appointments

253.71  Eligibility.
253.72  Procedure.
253.73  Tenure.
253.74  Acquisition of merit status.
253.75  Employees not recommended for conversion.

Subpart D--Conversion From Excluded and Temporary Appointments to Canal 
             Area Career or Career-Conditional Appointments

253.76  Eligibility.
253.77  Procedure.

                      Subpart E--Performance Rating

253.181  Rating system.

[[Page 167]]

                           Subpart F--Training

253.201  Training programs.

                       Subpart G--Military Service

253.221  Rights of employees.

       Subpart H--Adverse Personnel and Reduction-in-Force Actions

253.241  Applicability of existing law and civil service regulations.
253.242  Probationary employees.

                    Subpart I--Grievances and Appeals

253.261  Grievance procedures.
253.262  Adverse actions and appeals.
253.263  Appeals from applicants or eligibles.

                     Subpart J--Records and Reports

253.291  Applicability of Federal Personnel Manual.

                  Subpart K--Labor-Management Relations

253.311  Labor-management and employee relations.

                 Subpart L--Equal Employment Opportunity

253.331  Policy concerning equal employment opportunity.

    Authority: 22 U.S.C. 3641-3701, E.O. 12173, 12215.

    Source: 47 FR 12956, Mar. 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.

                     Panama Canal Employment System


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 253.1  Purpose.

    The regulations in this part are prescribed for the purpose of 
establishing the Panama Canal Employment System governing employment in 
the Panama Canal Commission and any other Executive Agency, or the 
Smithsonian Institution, electing to participate in the system.


<R05>
Sec. 253.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Administrator is the Administrator of the Panama Canal 
Commission.
    (b) Agency means: (1) The Panama Canal Commission, and (2) an 
executive agency or the Smithsonian Institution, to the extent of any 
election in effect under section 1212(b)(2) of the Panama Canal Act; 
except that in paragraph (r) of this section agency shall mean an 
Executive agency, as that term is defined in 5 U.S.C. 105.
    (c) Competitive service has the meaning given that term in 5 U.S.C. 
2102.
    (d) Employee means an individual serving in a position.
    (e) The Panama Canal Act means the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (Pub. L. 
96-70, 93 Stat. 463).
    (f) The Panama Canal Treaty means the Panama Canal Treaty between 
the United States of America and the Republic of Panama, signed 
September 7, 1977, and related agreements.
    (g) Position means a civilian position in an agency, if a 
substantial portion of the duties and responsibilities of the position 
are performed in the Republic of Panama. In the case of the Commission, 
position means a civilian position in the Commission.
    (h) Subchapter II means Subchapter II of Chapter 2 of Title I of the 
Panama Canal Act.
    (i) PAPB means the Panama Area Personnel Board.
    (j) CEO means the Central Examining Office.
    (k) Competitive status has the meaning ascribed to that term in 5 
CFR 1.3(c).
    (l) Continental United States means the forty-eight contiguous 
states of the United States of America and the District of Columbia.
    (m) Federal Wage System means the system for fixing and adjusting 
the rates of pay for prevailing rate employees of the U.S. Government 
that was established by Pub. L. 92-392 and as set forth in FPM 
Supplement 532-1 and related issuances.
    (n) Isthmus means all territory of the Republic of Panama.
    (o) Merit Status means basic eligibility to be noncompetitively 
selected to fill a vacant position under the Panama Canal Employment 
System.
    (p) OPM means the Office of Personnel Management.
    (q) Veteran means a person entitled to preference as a preference 
eligible as defined by 5 U.S.C. 2108(3).
    (r) Department means a department, agency or independent 
establishment in the executive branch of the Government of the United 
States (including a corporation wholly owned or controlled

[[Page 168]]

by the United States) which conducted operations in the Canal Zone.


<R05>
Sec. 253.3  Establishment of Panama Canal Employment System; scope and requirements.

    (a) There is hereby established a Panama Canal Employment System. 
The employment system is a system of:
    (1) Selection for appointment, reappointment, reinstatement, 
reemployment and retention with respect to positions, employees, and 
individuals under consideration for appointment; and
    (2) Regulations concerning other matters related to employment in an 
agency, as prescribed in this chapter.
    (b) The Panama Canal Employment System shall:
    (1) Be based on the consideration of the merit of each employee or 
candidate for employment and the qualifications and fitness of the 
employee or candidate to hold the position concerned;
    (2) Be subject to the provisions of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 
and related agreements and any other applicable provision of law;
    (3) Apply uniformly within and among all agencies, positions, 
employees and individuals concerned;
    (4) Conform, to the extent practicable and consistent with the 
provisions of law, to the policies, principles, and standards applicable 
to the competitive service;
    (5) In the case of employees who are citizens of the United States, 
provide for the appropriate interchange of those employees between 
positions under this system and positions in the competitive service; 
and
    (6) In the case of non-Panamanian employees hired on or after 
October 1, 1979, include a policy for their periodic rotation in 
accordance with the Panama Canal Treaty or the Agreement in 
Implementation of Article IV thereof.
    (c) The Panama Canal Commission and, to the extent of any election 
pursuant to law and paragraph (d) of this section, any other agency 
shall conduct their employment practices in accordance with this system 
and the regulations in this part and in part 251 of this chapter.
    (d) The head of any Executive Agency and the Smithsonian Institution 
may elect to have the Panama Canal Employment System made applicable in 
whole or in part to personnel of that agency in the Republic of Panama.
    (e) Provisions for interchange between this system and the 
competitive service which involve movement from this system to the 
competitive service shall be subject to the concurrence of the Office of 
Personnel Management.


<R05>
Sec. 253.4  Coverage and exclusions.

    (a) Applicability. Except as otherwise provided by an agency head in 
adopting this employment system for application to an agency, the 
regulations in this part apply to all applicants for employment and 
employees, irrespective of citizenship, and to all positions except the 
employees and positions excluded pursuant to Sec. 253.8.
    (b) Exclusions. The Assistant Secretary of Army may exclude 
employees or positions from any or all provisions of this part and may 
revoke such exclusions.


<R05>
Sec. 253.5  Central Examining Office.

    (a) There is established the Central Examining Office.
    (b) The purpose of the Central Examining Office is to assist in 
implementing the Panama Canal Treaty and related agreements with respect 
to recruitment, examination, determination of qualification standards, 
and similar matters.
    (c) Authority of the Central Examining Office. The CEO may, subject 
to policy direction of the PAPB:
    (1) Develop examination rating guides.
    (2) Conduct, or arrange for, such recruitment and examining programs 
as may be required to insure an adequate supply of qualified eligibles.
    (d) The Central Examining Office shall serve all agencies equally, 
and shall not give preference to any agency.


<R05>
Sec. 253.6  Review by the Office of Personnel Management.

    The Office of Personnel Management shall make periodic reviews of 
the operations of the Panama Canal Employment System for conformity with 
the

[[Page 169]]

requirements of applicable portions of Title 5, United States Code, this 
part, and part 251, and shall report its findings to the Panama Area 
Personnel Board.


<R05>
Sec. 253.7  Deviations.

    Whenever strict compliance with the letter of the regulations in 
this part would create practical difficulties or undue hardships, the 
Panama Area Personnel Board may permit a deviation from these 
regulations. Such authority may be exercised only if the deviation is 
within the spirit of the regulations, and the efficiency of the U.S. 
Government and the integrity of the Panama Canal Employment System are 
protected and promoted. Any deviation authorized, and the reasons 
therefor, shall be made a matter of record.


<R05>
Sec. 253.8  Exclusions.

    (a) Pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 253.4(b), the positions 
specified by paragraphs (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section, and 
incumbents thereof, are excluded, to the extent indicated, from the 
provisions of Subchapter II and the regulations in this part, with the 
exception of Sec. 253.47, and in part 251 of this chapter.
    (b) The following positions are excluded from all the provisions of 
subchapter II (except sections 1217 and 1218) and from the regulations 
in this part and in part 251 of this chapter (except for Secs. 251.25, 
251.31 and 251.32 of this chapter):
    (1) The Administrator, Deputy Administrator, Chief Engineer, Chief 
Financial Officer, Inspector General, Assistant to the Chairman and 
Secretary, and Assistant to the Secretary for Congressional Affairs of 
the Panama Canal Commission.
    (2) Persons in the active military, naval, or public health service 
of the United States appointed to the Panama Canal Commission.
    (3) Consultants and experts when employed under the provisions of 5 
U.S.C. 3109 or other statutory authority.
    (4) Any employee excluded by 5 U.S.C. 2105(c) from coverage under 
laws administered by the Office of Personnel Management.
    (5) The Ombudsman.
    (6) Positions in the Panama Canal Commission and the incumbents 
thereof, if a substantial portion of the duties and responsibilities are 
performed in the United States. All of the rights and privileges which 
are provided by applicable laws and regulations for citizens of the 
United States employed in the competitive service, except Title 5 U.S. 
Code, Chapter 43 pertaining to performance appraisal, are extended to 
the incumbents of such positions, other than the Secretary and the 
Assistant to the Secretary for Congressional Affairs of the Panama Canal 
Commission.
    (c) The following positions, and the incumbents thereof, are 
excluded from the provisions of section 1212 of the Panama Canal Act 
which provide for merit selection for employment, section 1213 of the 
said Act and Subparts B and C of the regulations in this part:
    (1) Attorneys.
    (2) Positions designated as fee-rate positions within the Special 
Category established by Sec. 251.24.
    (3) Positions requiring part-time or intermittent services in which 
the individual appointee will receive during his service year 
compensation that aggregates not more than 40 percent of the annual 
salary rate for the first step of grade 3 in the applicable Non-Manual 
schedule.
    (4) Positions designated by the agency as appropriate for use as 
Student Trainee positions and which are filled under a cooperative work-
study agreement between an agency and a college or university approved 
for participation in such a program by the agency.
    (5) Positions that are filled by mentally retarded or severely 
physically handicapped persons pursuant to regulations issued by the 
agency. Such regulations shall conform, in substance, to those utilized 
to authorize appointment of the aforesaid classes of persons in Federal 
employment in the United States.
    (6) The positions in the Panama Canal Commission of Deputy Chief 
Engineer and Associate Ombudsman.
    (7) Student assistant positions.
    (8) Any service employee assigned to the residence of the 
Administrator of the Panama Canal Commission when so designated by the 
Administrator.

[[Page 170]]

    (9) Liaison Services Specialists of the General Services Bureau of 
the Panama Canal Commission.
    (10) Positions at non-manual grade 5 and grade 7 level (not to 
exceed 35 in number) designated for use by the Panama Canal Commission 
for filling positions in the Professional and Administrative Career 
Intern Program with high-potential Panamanian citizens.
    (d) All Bureau Directors and Heads of Independent Units of the 
Panama Canal Commission are excluded from the provisions of sections 
1212, 1213, 1215 and 1216 of subchapter II, subparts B and C of this 
part and subpart B of part 251, except for Secs. 251.25, 251.31 and 
251.32 of this chapter.
    (e) Positions of student assistant, apprentice and learner, and the 
incumbents thereof, are excluded from the provisions of section 
1225(b)(2) of the Panama Canal Act.

(5 U.S.C. 5102, E.O. 12173, 12215)

[47 FR 12956, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 49 FR 41025, Oct. 19, 1984; 
51 FR 25693, July 16, 1986; 51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986; 51 FR 37182, 
Oct. 20, 1986; 54 FR 4019, Jan. 27, 1989; 56 FR 1924, Jan. 18, 1991; 56 
FR 40556, Aug. 15, 1991]

                      Panama Canal Board of Appeals


<R05>
Sec. 253.11  Establishment; composition; appointment of members; alternates; employees.

    (a) There is established a Panama Canal Board of Appeals to review 
and determine the classification appeals of employees.
    (b) The Board shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be 
civilians employed by the Federal Government and appointed by the 
Assistant Secretary of the Army as follows:
    (1) One member shall be nominated by the Office of Personnel 
Management.
    (2) Two members shall be selected from among employees of U.S. 
Government agencies in the Republic of Panama (one from a Department of 
Defense agency and the other from the Panama Canal Commission) and shall 
be appointed only after appropriate consultation with the advice from 
organizations representing such employees.
    (3) The remaining members (one from Department of Defense and one 
from Panama Canal Commission) will be selected by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Army.
    (c) The Assistant Secretary of the Army shall appoint one of the 
members as Chairman of the Board.
    (d) For each member of the Board, two alternate members shall be 
appointed, following the same criteria as for appointment of members. An 
alternate shall serve on the Board whenever the member for whom he is 
the alternate is unable to serve for any reason.
    (e) The Panama Area Personnel Board will provide administrative and 
logistical support necessary to accomplish Board functions.


<R05>
Sec. 253.12  Decisions of the Board.

    (a) Decisions of the Board on any question or other matter relating 
to an appeal shall be made by majority vote of its members.
    (b) Decisions of the Board are final and conclusive and the agency 
concerned shall take action in accordance with the decision.


<R05>
Sec. 253.13  Classification appeals.

    (a) Any employee may request at any time that his employing agency 
review and revise or adjust the classification, grade, and pay level of 
his position, or any of them, as the case may be. Such requests for 
review and revision or adjustment shall be submitted and adjudicated in 
accordance with the regularly established procedures of the employing 
agency.
    (b) In the event of adverse classification decision by the employing 
agency, an employee shall have the right to appeal, in writing, to the 
Panama Canal Board of Appeals.


<R05>
Sec. 253.14  Terms of members.

    The term of service for each member or alternate member of the 
Panama Canal Board of Appeals shall be for 2 years, provided that the 
Assistant Secretary of the Army may, in his discretion, terminate or 
extend the term of service of any member or alternate member at any 
time. Individuals who are designated as members or alternate members 
shall be detailed to the Panama Canal Board of Appeals for such periods 
as their services are required.

[[Page 171]]

Any hearings on employee appeals will be heard in the Republic of 
Panama.


<R05>
Sec. 253.15  Appeals procedures.

    The Panama Canal Board of Appeals shall formulate the procedures 
necessary to the performance of the functions prescribed by section 1222 
of the Panama Canal Act. Those portions of the procedures establishing 
time limits for filing appeals, the form in which appeals are to be 
submitted, and the circumstances under which the personal appearance of 
an employee or his representative will be authorized, shall be published 
for the information of all employees.


<R05>
Sec. 253.16  Effective date of decisions.

    (a) Decisions of the Panama Canal Board of Appeals shall be binding 
upon all employing agencies, and shall be effective not later than the 
beginning of the fourth pay period following the receipt of the decision 
in the employing agency unless a specific date is stated in the decision 
in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) When the appeal to the Panama Canal Board of Appeals is made 
within 30 calendar days from the date of an employee's receipt of an 
adverse decision from his employing agency on a classification appeal 
provided by Sec. 253.13, if it is from an action lowering the grade or 
pay level of the employee's position, and the decision of the Panama 
Canal Board of Appeals raises the grade or pay level of the position, 
the effective date shall be retroactive to the date of the action which 
lowered the grade or pay level. However, when the decision of the Panama 
Canal Board of Appeals raises the grade or pay level of the position 
above the grade or pay level in effect immediately preceding the 
lowering thereof, retroactivity will apply only to the extent of 
restoration to the grade or pay level in effect immediately preceding 
the lowering thereof. Retroactivity may be based only on duties and 
responsibilities existing at the time of the lowering of the grade or 
pay level and not on the basis of duties and responsibilities later 
assigned.
    (c) The right to a retroactive effective date under paragraph (b) of 
this section may be preserved in the discretion of the Panama Canal 
Board of Appeals upon a showing by the employee that reasons beyond his 
control prevented him from appealing within the 30-day period referred 
to in that subparagraph and that he did appeal as promptly as 
circumstances permitted.


<R04>
                      Subpart B--Filling Positions


<R05>
Sec. 253.31  Authority of appointing officers; methods of filling vacancies.

    (a) Appointing officers of an agency shall effect personnel actions 
in accordance with the regulations in this part.
    (b) In his discretion an appointing officer may fill any position 
either by competitive appointment from a Panama Canal Employment System 
register, by appointment or position change of a present or former 
Federal employee through noncompetitive action in accordance with the 
regulations in this part, or, when authorized under Sec. 253.43, by 
temporary appointment. Except as otherwise provided in the regulations 
in this part, the appointing officer shall exercise his discretion in 
all personnel actions solely on the basis of merit and fitness. In 
determining merit and fitness of any person, there shall be no 
discrimination on the basis of nationality or citizenship, religious or 
political affiliations, marital status, physical handicap, race, color, 
sex, age, or national origin.
Sec. 253.32  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 253.33  Positions restricted to veterans of United States Armed Forces.

    The provisions of 5 CFR 330.401, 330.402 and 330.403 apply in their 
entirety.


<R05>
Sec. 253.34  Disqualification of applicants.

    An applicant may be denied examination and an eligible may be denied 
appointment for any of the reasons set forth below. A person 
disqualified for any of the listed reasons may, in the discretion of the 
PAPB, be denied examination, or denied appointment to any position, for 
such period as it may determine.
    (a) Dismissal from employment for delinquency or misconduct.

[[Page 172]]

    (b) Physical or mental unfitness for the position for which applied.
    (c) Criminal, infamous, dishonest, immoral, or notoriously 
disgraceful conduct.
    (d) Intentional false statements or deception or fraud in 
examination or appointment.
    (e) Habitual use of narcotics or habitual use of intoxicating 
beverages to excess.
    (f) In the case of citizens of the United States, reasonable doubt 
as to the loyalty of the person involved to the Government of the United 
States.
    (g) In the case of non-United States citizens, reasonable doubt that 
the person involved would refrain from committing acts inimical to the 
interests of the Government of the United States.
    (h) Refusal to furnish testimony in regard to matters inquired of 
arising under the regulations in this chapter, or refusal to furnish 
testimony in connection with investigations conducted pursuant to 
Executive Order 10450 of April 1953. (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 936.)
    (i) Any legal or other disqualification which makes the applicant 
unfit for the service.


<R05>
Sec. 253.35  Appointments subject to investigation.

    (a) All initial appointments or reappointments made under this part 
shall be subject to such investigation as may be required to establish 
the appointee's qualifications and suitability for employment.
    (b) Except in cases involving intentional false statements, or 
deception or fraud in examination or appointment, the condition 
``subject to investigation'' automatically expires at the end of 1 year 
after the effective date of the appointment.
    (c) For a period of 1 year after the effective date of any 
appointment subject to investigation, the head of the agency may remove 
the employee if investigation discloses that he is disqualified for any 
of the reasons listed in Sec. 253.34. Thereafter removal may be required 
only on the basis of intentional false statements or deception or fraud 
in examination or appointment.


<R05>
Sec. 253.36  Prohibited practices.

    (a) Coercion in competition. An applicant for competitive 
examination, eligible on any register, or officer or employee in the 
executive branch of the Government may not directly or indirectly 
persuade, induce, or coerce, or attempt to persuade, induce, or coerce 
any prospective applicant to withhold filing application, or any 
applicant or eligible to withdraw from competition or eligibility for 
the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects of any 
applicant or eligible for appointment. The penalty for violation of this 
section by applicants or eligibles shall be cancellation of application 
or eligibility, as the case may be. The penalty for violation of this 
section by an employee shall be as determined by the head of the agency.
    (b) Instruction of applicants. Employees are forbidden to instruct, 
either directly or indirectly, or to be concerned in any manner with the 
instruction of any person or classes of persons with a view to their 
special preparation for examinations conducted pursuant to the 
regulations in this part, except as a part of a government authorized or 
sponsored program. Violations of this restriction shall be considered 
sufficient cause for removal from the service.


<R05>
Sec. 253.37  Examinations.

    The Manager, CEO shall be responsible for conducting open 
competitive examinations for entrance into the service which will fairly 
test the relative capacity and fitness of the persons examined for the 
position to be filled. When sufficient competent persons are not 
available to provide competition, the Manager, CEO may, with the consent 
of the employing agency, examine and certify for competitive appointment 
fewer than three individuals.


<R05>
Sec. 253.38  Rating competitors.

    (a) The subjects in examinations shall be given such relative weight 
as the Central Examining Office may prescribe and the same rating scale 
shall be applied to all persons competing in the same examination. 
Earned ratings will be augmented for eligible veterans in accordance 
with the provisions of 5

[[Page 173]]

CFR 337.101(b), (c). Eleven points will be added to the earned ratings 
of eligible Panamanians.
    (b) In rating competitors, CEO shall, in the case of veteran's 
preference eligibles, provide for waiver of the physical standards and 
requirements in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 3312.


<R05>
Sec. 253.39  Establishment of registers of eligibles.

    The names of eligibles (those competitors who meet minimum 
requirements and are rated as attaining the minimum required rating) 
shall be entered on appropriate registers in the order outlined below. 
In the judgment of CEO, eligibility on registers may be established on 
the basis of earned eligible ratings attained in appropriate 
examinations for positions in the competitive service.
    (a) According to their ratings (including veteran preference and 
Panamanian preference).
    (b) An individual entitled to veteran preference shall be entered 
ahead of all others having the same rating.
    (c) All veterans who have a compensable service-connected disability 
of 10 percent or more shall be entered at the top of the register in the 
order of their ratings, except for professional and scientific positions 
comparable in pay level to positions in grades Non-Manual 9 and above.
    (d) When establishing registers, or making certifications therefrom, 
CEO will provide for priority consideration for career and career-
conditional employees of agencies operating in the Republic of Panama 
who have been separated by reduction in force. However, such priority 
consideration shall not extend to any position which is in a pay level 
higher than that from which the employee was separated. Any benefits 
conferred pursuant to this section are in addition to those conferred by 
entry of the employee's name on the employing activity's reemployment 
priority list.
    (e) CEO will take appropriate action to insure that veterans of, or 
persons serving in, the Armed Forces of the United States, receive the 
same consideration in examinations and entry upon registers as are 
provided for the competitive service by 5 CFR 332.311, 332.312, 332.313, 
332.321, 332.322.
    (f) CEO will establish appropriate time periods and procedures for 
terminating the eligibility of individuals on a register.


<R05>
Sec. 253.40  Certificate for appointment.

    (a) Upon receipt of a request for certification of eligibles, a 
sufficient number of names to permit the appointing officer to consider 
three eligibles in connection with each vacancy shall be certified from 
the top of the appropriate register. Certificates may contain fewer than 
three names, if fewer than three eligibles are available and the 
requesting agency consents to issuance of such a certificate.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) If the number of eligibles on the register is insufficient, CEO, 
in consultation with the employing agency, will determine whether 
selective certification is to be made from another register, whether a 
recruiting campaign to attract applicants for examination should be 
initiated, or whether examining action is to be taken in accordance with 
Sec. 253.37 or a temporary appointment authorized in accordance with 
Sec. 253.43.
    (d) When there is no register appropriate as a whole for 
certification for filling a particular position, there may be certified 
selectively from the most nearly appropriate existing register the names 
of eligibles who are qualified for the particular position. Such 
eligibles shall be certified in the order of their ranking. Eligibles on 
the register may, when appropriate, be rerated on the basis of the 
particular requirements of the position.
    (e) Certification shall be made without regard to sex, unless the 
appointing officer requests and justifies referral of eligibles of a 
specified sex.
    (f) Certification must be limited to eligibles residing in the 
Republic of Panama except when persons possessing the requisite skills 
and qualifications are not found in the Republic of Panama.


<R05>
Sec. 253.41  Selection from certificates.

    Selections from certificates are made by application of either the 
rule of three or the rule of ten.

[[Page 174]]

    (a) Rule of three. When selecting from a certificate of eligibles, 
an appointing official shall, with sole reference to merit and fitness, 
make the selection for the first vacancy from the highest three 
eligibles available for appointment on the certificate. For the second 
vacancy, the selecting official must make selection from the three 
highest eligibles remaining on the certificate. Each succeeding vacancy 
must be filled in like manner subject to the rules in Sec. 253.40. The 
rule of three applies to selections involving:
    (1) All United States Wage Base positions except those of 
apprentice, floating equipment trainees at the grade FE-5 and FE-7 
levels and marine engineer trainees at the grade ME-7 level; and
    (2) United States citizens.
    (b) Rule of ten. When selecting from a certificate of eligibles, an 
appointing official shall, with sole reference to merit and fitness, 
make the selection for the first vacancy from the highest ten eligibles 
available for appointment on the certificate. For the second vacancy, 
the selecting official must make selection from the ten highest 
eligibles remaining on the certificate. Each succeeding vacancy must be 
filled in like manner subject to the rules in Sec. 253.40. The rule of 
ten applies to selections involving:
    (1) All Canal Area Wage Base positions filled from pre-rated 
inventories which includes the positions of firefighter and firefighter 
trainee, and
    (2) United States Wage Base positions of apprentice, floating 
equipment trainees at the grade FE-5 and FE-7 levels and marine engineer 
trainees at the grade ME-7 level.
    The rule of ten shall not be applied in any situation where a United 
States applicant is among the top three candidates available.
    (c) An appointing officer is not required to consider any eligible:
    (1) Who has been considered for three or ten separate appointments, 
as applicable, from the same or different certificates for the same 
position, or
    (2) To whose certification for the particular position the officer 
makes an objection that is sustained by the CEO for any of the reasons 
stated in Sec. 253.34 or for other reasons considered by the CEO to be 
disqualifying for the particular position. The length of a non-
Panamanian candidate's previous service or residence in foreign areas 
may be a valid qualification and selection factor in filling positions 
in an agency having an established policy for periodic rotation of non-
Panamanian citizens.
    (d) When an appointing officer passes over a veteran-preference 
eligible and tentatively selects a non-preference eligible, the 
provisions of 5 CFR 332.406 apply except that the CEO shall exercise the 
authority vested in the Office of Personnel Management.

[56 FR 1924, Jan. 18, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 253.42  Appointments from registers.

    (a) Except as provided by paragraph (d) of this section, a ``Canal 
Area Career-Conditional Appointment'' shall be given to an eligible 
selected from a register for other than temporary or term appointment.
    (b) Upon completion by the appointee of 3 years of creditable 
service, his career-conditional appointment shall be automatically 
converted to a ``Canal Area Career Appointment.'' As used in this 
paragraph, ``creditable service'' means all substantially continuous 
service with the Federal Government since initial non-temporary civilian 
appointment, including any service in the competitive or excepted 
service, or intervening service in the legislative or judicial branches 
or in the Armed Forces of the United States. A break in service of 30 
days or less shall be considered substantially continuous service. 
Breaks in service of more than 30 days shall not be considered 
substantially continuous service unless the head of the agency excepts 
particular types of cases from this requirement. In making such 
exceptions, the agency will be guided by the instructions published for 
the competitive service in the Federal Personnel Manual.
    (c) An eligible given a Canal Area Career-Conditional Appointment 
shall be required to serve a probationary period of 1 year. Prior 
Federal service may be counted toward completion of the probationary 
period as provided in the Federal Personnel Manual. The employing agency 
shall utilize the probationary period as fully as possible to determine 
the fitness of the employee

[[Page 175]]

and shall terminate his services during such period if he fails to 
demonstrate fully his qualifications for continued employment. The 
employee shall automatically acquire a merit status upon satisfactory 
completion of probation.
    (d) An eligible selected from a register for other than a temporary 
or term appointment shall be given a Canal Area Career Appointment if:
    (1) He is a Federal employee serving under a career appointment in 
the competitive service, a permanent appointment in the excepted 
service, or a Canal Area Career Appointment;
    (2) He is a former Federal employee who once met the service 
requirement for a career appointment in the competitive service, a 
permanent appointment in the excepted service, a Canal Zone Career 
Appointment, or a Canal Area Career Appointment.
    (e) An eligible selected from a register for career appointment 
shall be required to serve a probationary period, subject to the same 
conditions as apply to a career-conditional appointment.


<R05>
Sec. 253.43  Temporary and term appointments.

    (a) An agency may make temporary limited appointments for periods 
not in excess of 1 year, and term appointments for periods of more than 
1, but not in excess of 4 years. In making such appointments, the agency 
will be guided by the instructions published for the competitive service 
in the Federal Personnel Manual. A person so appointed shall not acquire 
merit status by reason of such appointment.
    (b) Term employees are required to serve a 1-year trial period, 
during which they shall be entitled to the same limited protection as is 
accorded probationers under the Panama Canal Employment System. In 
adverse actions, term employees are entitled to the rights accorded 
career and career-conditional employees under the Panama Canal 
Employment System except while they are serving the 1-year trial period 
and when the term appointment has expired.


<R05>
Sec. 253.44  Noncompetitive appointments.

    (a) Appointing officers may noncompetitively appoint a current 
Federal employee who has a merit status, a competitive status, or who is 
serving probation at the time of appointment. Appointing officers may 
noncompetitively reappoint a former Federal employee who has a merit 
status, a competitive status, or who was serving probation at the time 
of separation. Eligibility for such reappointment will be subject to the 
following conditions:
    (1) Former Federal employees who have never completed the service 
requirement for Canal Zone or Canal Area career appointment or for 
career appointment in the competitive service may be reappointed only 
within 3 years following the date of their separation, except that 
periods of temporary employment shall serve to extend the three-year 
period. This time limit does not apply to former employees entitled to 
veteran preference.
    (2) Former employees who have once completed the service requirement 
for Canal Zone or Canal Area career appointment or for career 
appointment in the competitive service may be reappointed without time 
limitation.
    (b) Appointing officers may noncompetitively appoint an individual 
who is certified by the Director of ACTION as having served 
satisfactorily as a Volunteer or Volunteer Leader under the Peace Corps 
Act, or as a VISTA volunteer under the Economic Opportunity Act. Such 
appointments shall be made in accordance with the procedures and 
regulations in effect for the appointment of such persons to positions 
in the competitive service.
    (c) A Student Trainee who has successfully completed his cooperative 
work-study program may be appointed noncompetitively to a position at 
grade 5 or grade 7 in the applicable Non-Manual schedule for which he 
meets the qualification requirements, with the exception of any written 
test requirements, in the field of work in which he received his 
training, provided:
    (1) He has successfully completed all the requirements for a 
bachelor's degree, including any specialized courses required for the 
particular position for which he has been in training;
    (2) He has completed at least 6 months work experience (i.e., 6 
months in a pay status) as a Student Trainee

[[Page 176]]

in the agency that recommends his appointment; and
    (3) His employing agency recommends him for noncompetitive 
appointment within 90 days after completion of his work-study program.
    (d) Employees appointed to positions excluded from this subpart 
pursuant to Sec. 253.8(c)(5) may have their appointments converted to 
career or career-conditional appointments in accordance with regulations 
prescribed by the PAPB. Such regulations shall generally conform to the 
regulations of the Office of Personnel Management for conversion of 
excepted service appointments of physically or mentally handicapped 
persons to career or career-conditional appointments.
    (e) A Professional and Administrative Career Intern Program 
participant who has successfully completed at least one year of the 
prescribed training may be noncompetitively appointed to a position at 
non-manual grades 7 and above for which he/she meets the qualification 
requirements.

(5 U.S.C. 5102, E.O. 12173, 12215)

[47 FR 12956, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 253.45  Tenure following noncompetitive appointment.

    (a) The noncompetitive appointment of a current or former Federal 
employee who has not completed the service requirement for Canal Area or 
Canal Zone career appointment or career appointment in the competitive 
service shall be made as a Canal Area Career-Conditional Appointment. 
The appointment shall be automatically converted to a Canal Area Career 
Appointment upon completion of the service requirement. A merit status 
shall be acquired upon satisfactory completion of any required 
probationary period.
    (b) The noncompetitive appointment of a former or current Federal 
employee who has once completed the service requirement for Canal Zone 
or Canal Area Career Appointment or for career appointment in the 
competitive service shall be made as Canal Area Career Appointment.
    (c) Former or current Federal employees who did not complete any 
required probationary periods prior to noncompetitive appointment shall 
be required to serve a probationary period of one year following 
appointment.
    (d) The noncompetitive appointment of Volunteer or Volunteer Leader 
under the Peace Corps Act or VISTA volunteer under the Economic 
Opportunity Act shall be made as Canal Area Career-Conditional 
Appointment; shall be subject to satisfactory completion of a 
probationary period of one year; and shall be automatically converted to 
a Canal Area Career Appointment upon completion of the service 
requirement. A merit status shall be acquired upon satisfactory 
completion of probation.
    (e) The noncompetitive appointment of a person who successfully 
completed a cooperative work-study program or a Professional and 
Administrative Career Intern Program under paragraph (c) or (e), 
respectively, of Sec. 253.44 shall be made as a Canal Area Career-
Conditional Appointment or Canal Area Career Appointment and may be 
subject to the satisfactory completion of a probationary period of one 
year. Canal Area Career-Conditional Appointments shall be automatically 
converted to Canal Area Career Appointments upon completion of the 
Service requirements.

(5 U.S.C. 5102, E.O. 12173, 12215)

[47 FR 12956, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 49 FR 41025, Oct. 19, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 253.46  Promotion, demotion, reassignment, and transfer.

    (a) Appointing officers may, in their discretion, promote, demote, 
reassign, or transfer employees who are serving under Canal Area Career 
or Career-Conditional Appointments, subject to the provisions of this 
section and in accordance with the appropriate qualification standards 
established by the PAPB for the position. Such actions will be based 
solely on the merit of the employee and upon his qualifications and 
fitness to hold the positions concerned. Such actions for employees 
serving under temporary or term appointments will be subject to such 
regulations as the agency may prescribe. In preparing such regulations 
the agency will be guided by the instructions published for the 
competitive service in the Federal Personnel Manual.

[[Page 177]]

    (b) Employing agencies shall establish a promotion plan for all 
employees which is consistent with the Panama Canal Treaty and insofar 
as practicable, with the provisions of the merit promotion plan 
developed by the Office of Personnel Management for the competitive 
service.


<R05>
Sec. 253.47  Rotation of personnel.

    (a) United States citizen employees and other non-Panamanian 
employees appointed to a position subject to this part after September 
30, 1979 shall be subject to a policy of periodic rotation in accordance 
with the Panama Canal Treaty and related agreements, except that the 
following individuals shall not be subject to such policy:
    (1) An individual who was a permanent employee of the Panama Canal 
Company or Canal Zone Government on September 30, 1979 and was 
transferred to a position in the Panama Canal Commission or another 
agency in the Republic of Panama on October 1, 1979 without a break in 
service.
    (2) An individual who was separated from the Panama Canal Company or 
Canal Zone Government by reason of a reduction in force on September 30, 
1979 and was appointed to a position in the Panama Canal Commission 
before April 1, 1980, or
    (3) An individual who was employed by a department on September 30, 
1979 and continues in employment with an agency, other than the Panama 
Canal Commission, without a break in service.
    (b) The head of each agency shall establish a policy of periodic 
rotation in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section and other 
applicable law. Such policy may except positions from rotation for sound 
administrative reasons. This section shall not preclude an agency other 
than the Commission from adopting a policy of periodic rotation of 
employees pursuant to other authority.
    (c) Notwithstanding any Canal Area Career or Career-Conditional 
Appointment or acquisition of merit status, an employee may, in 
accordance with an agency's rotation policy, be removed from service 
after completion of the service period under the rotation policy 
established under this section.

[47 FR 12956, Mar. 26, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R04>
    Subpart C--Conversion to Canal Area Career or Career-Conditional 
                              Appointments


<R05>
Sec. 253.71  Eligibility.

    Incumbents of positions made subject to Subpart B of this part by 
revocation of an exclusion in Sec. 253.8 or by other action, may be 
retained in their positions. Each retained incumbent without a personal 
or competitive status who is serving in a continuing position under a 
non-temporary appointment will become eligible for conversion to a Canal 
Area Career or Career-Conditional Appointment provided:
    (a) He rendered 6 months satisfactory service in the position 
immediately prior to its inclusion under Subpart B of this part. Periods 
to be counted toward the 6-month period as an exception to the 
requirement for actual service shall be determined in accordance with 
the instructions applying to the competitive service as published in 
Chapter 315 of the Federal Personnel Manual.
    (b) He meets the applicable qualification and suitability standards.
    (c) His employing agency submits a timely recommendation which is 
approved by the PAPB.


<R05>
Sec. 253.72  Procedure.

    The employing agency shall recommend to the PAPB that the 
appointment of an eligible employee be converted. The recommendation 
shall be submitted not later than one year after the date that the 
position is brought within the coverage of Subpart B of this part. Upon 
approval by the PAPB, the conversion is effective as of the date of the 
employing agency's recommendation. Notice of the PAPB's decision 
together with the reasons therefor shall be given in writing to the 
agency and employee concerned and be made a part of the employee's 
official personnel folder.

[[Page 178]]


<R05>
Sec. 253.73  Tenure.

    (a) Preservation of tenure. Neither a conversion action, nor a 
recommendation for conversion, shall serve to reduce an employee's 
retention standing for reduction-in-force purposes.
    (b) Tenure following recommendation. Upon submission of a 
recommendation for conversion, the nominee's retention standing for 
reduction in force is in Retention Group I if he is already in that 
group or if he meets the service requirement for a Canal Area Career 
Appointment; otherwise, his retention standing is in Tenure Group II.
    (1) An employee reverts to his previous tenure group if the 
recommendation is returned without final action, and remains in this 
group until such time as the recommendation is resubmitted.
    (2) Irrespective of his previous retention standing, an employee is 
placed in Tenure Group III if the PAPB disapproves the recommendation 
for conversion.
    (c) Tenure following conversion. Conversion will be to Canal Area 
Career Appointment if the employee meets the service requirement for 
such appointment; otherwise, conversion will be to Canal Area Career-
Conditional Appointment. However, retention standing for reduction-in-
force purposes will be governed by paragraph (a) of this section. All 
conversions will be subject to satisfactory completion of a one-year 
probationary period if such probation has not been completed prior to 
the time of conversion.


<R05>
Sec. 253.74  Acquisition of merit status.

    An employee who is converted under this subpart acquires a merit 
status upon completion of any required probationary period.


<R05>
Sec. 253.75  Employees not recommended for conversion.

    (a) Employees who are not recommended for conversion, or whose 
conversion is disapproved, will be retained in status quo and placed in 
Tenure Group III until separated or until they receive a competitive 
appointment.
    (b) Employees retained in status quo may be noncompetitively changed 
to other positions upon meeting the requirements established pursuant to 
Sec. 253.46(a) for the noncompetitive movement of employees serving 
under temporary appointments.
    (c) Employees retained in status quo are subject to displacement by 
eligibles on registers.
    (d) Employees serving under temporary appointments on the date their 
positions are made subject to Subpart B of this part will be considered 
as having been converted to a temporary appointment under Sec. 253.43 
and may be retained until expiration of their current appointments.


<R04>
Subpart D--Conversion From Excluded and Temporary Appointments to Canal 
             Area Career or Career-Conditional Appointments


<R05>
Sec. 253.76  Eligibility.

    A temporary employee may be converted to a Canal Area Career or 
Career-Conditional Appointment provided:
    (a) He rendered at least one year of satisfactory continuous service 
with the agency in which he is to be converted and the service 
immediately preceded the conversion;
    (b) The conversion is to a position in the same wage category as 
that held by the employee prior to the conversion;
    (c) The conversion is to either:
    (1) A manual category position at any grade from MG-1 to MG-9 and 
the employee to be converted ranks among the top 50% of the register of 
eligibles or;
    (2) A non-manual category position filled from a pre-rated inventory 
at any grade from NM-1 to NM-5 provided the employee to be converted 
ranks among the top 25% of the register of eligibles;
    (d) There is no United States citizen within reach in accordance 
with the rule of three, and no preference eligible would be passed over; 
and
    (e) The employee is not a United States citizen.

[56 FR 1924, Jan. 18, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 253.77  Procedure.

    The employing agency shall obtain approval from the Central 
Examining Office prior to converting temporary

[[Page 179]]

employees to Canal Area Career or Career-Conditional Appointments. 
Employees converted under this subpart will be treated as if they had 
been appointed from a register as provided in Sec. 253.42.

[56 FR 1924, Jan. 18, 1991]


<R04>
                      Subpart E--Performance Rating


<R05>
Sec. 253.181  Rating system.

    Employing agencies shall establish a performance rating system for 
employees generally patterned after the Office of Personnel Management 
guidelines.


<R04>
                           Subpart F--Training


<R05>
Sec. 253.201  Training programs.

    Agencies shall, in accordance with any obligation established by the 
Panama Canal Treaty or the agreements in implementation thereof, 
establish training programs for Panamanian employees and apprentices in 
order to increase the number of Panamanian nationals qualified to assume 
positions as positions become available. Except as provided in the said 
treaty and agreement, there shall be no discrimination on the basis of 
citizenship with regard to training.


<R04>
                       Subpart G--Military Service


<R05>
Sec. 253.221  Rights of employees.

    The rights of employees called to active military duty in the Armed 
Forces of the United States will be determined in accordance with 5 CFR 
Part 353.


<R04>
       Subpart H--Adverse Personnel and Reduction-in-Force Actions


<R05>
Sec. 253.241  Applicability of existing law and civil service regulations.

    (a) The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 7501 are applicable to the removal or 
suspension of those employees to whom such provisions were applicable 
immediately prior to January 19, 1959.
    (b) The provisions of 5 CFR Part 752, and Title 5, United States 
Code, pertaining to adverse actions, are applicable to preference 
eligibles to the extent and in the manner specified therein.
    (c) The provisions of 5 CFR Part 351 and Title 5, United States 
Code, pertaining to reductions in force, are applicable to all 
reduction-in-force actions.
    (d) The provisions of 5 U.S. Code, section 5596 shall be applicable 
to any person whose removal or suspension under an agency's system 
established by Sec. 253.262 is determined to have been unjustified or 
unwarranted after review in accordance with procedures of the employing 
agency.


<R05>
Sec. 253.242  Probationary employees.

    Any employee serving a probationary period shall be given a full and 
fair trial in the duties of the position in which appointed. If the 
performance of his duties or his conduct during the probationary period 
is not satisfactory to the employing agency, his services may be 
terminated by notifying him in writing of the reasons for his separation 
and of its effective date. An employee's services may also be terminated 
during the probationary period for reasons based in whole or in part on 
conditions arising prior to his appointment. The employing agency shall 
notify him in writing of the reasons for his separation and its 
effective date.


<R04>
                    Subpart I--Grievances and Appeals


<R05>
Sec. 253.261  Grievance procedures.

    Each employing agency shall make available to employees a grievance 
procedure established by the agency, except as may be otherwise provided 
by a negotiated grievance procedure.


<R05>
Sec. 253.262  Adverse actions and appeals.

    Each agency shall establish an adverse action and appeals system 
under which the provisions of 5 CFR Part 752, are administratively 
extended to employees in categories corresponding to those in the U.S. 
competitive service to which that part applies. Appeals to the Merit 
Systems Protection Board shall not, however, be so extended by such 
administrative action.


<R05>
Sec. 253.263  Appeals from applicants or eligibles.

    Applicants and eligibles who have reason to believe that the 
regulations

[[Page 180]]

in this part were not followed in rating their examinations or in making 
selections for appointment may appeal to CEO. In the event they are not 
satisfied with CEO's decision, and they can show reason to believe that 
CEO's action was arbitrary, capricious, or in violation of these 
regulations, they may request a review of the decision by the PAPB.


<R04>
                     Subpart J--Records and Reports


<R05>
Sec. 253.291  Applicability of Federal Personnel Manual.

    (a) The provisions of Chapter 296 of the Federal Personnel Manual 
will, except as indicated below, apply to the preparation of 
notifications of personnel action taken under the regulations in this 
chapter.
    (1) All appointment and conversion actions will be prefaced by the 
term ``Canal Area'' or ``CA'' and will be identified as taken under the 
authority of the regulations in this chapter.
    (2) The noncompetitive appointment of a former Federal employee 
under the provisions of Sec. 253.44 will be termed a reappointment 
rather than a reinstatement.
    (b) The provisions of Chapters 293 and 298 of the Federal Personnel 
Manual will apply, respectively, to the maintenance of employment 
records and the reporting of employment, except that the Official 
Personnel Folders of non-U.S. citizen employees who separate from 
service may be retained by the employing agency for not to exceed two 
years following separation. Upon expiration of this period, the Official 
Personnel Folders will be transferred to the National Personnel Records 
Center for permanent storage.

[51 FR 33262, Sept. 19, 1986]


<R04>
                  Subpart K--Labor Management Relations


<R05>
Sec. 253.311  Labor-management and employee relations.

    Labor-management and employee relations of agencies, their employees 
and the exclusive representative of employees in an appropriate unit in 
an agency shall be governed and regulated solely by Chapter 71 of title 
5, United States Code and other applicable laws, rules and regulations 
of the United States.


<R04>
                 Subpart L--Equal Employment Opportunity


<R05>
Sec. 253.331  Policy concerning equal employment opportunity.

    (a) All Personnel actions affecting employees or applicants for 
employment shall be made free from any discrimination based on race, 
color, religion, sex, age, national origin, handicapping condition or 
marital status.
    (b) Agencies may adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of 
this subpart and may provide for appeals of personnel actions alleged to 
be based upon discrimination prohibited by this subpart.

(Secs. 1211 through 1225 of the Panama Canal Act of 1979; 93 Stat. 463; 
Executive Order 12215)


<R03>
PART 255--[RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
PART 256--SALARY OFFSET FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES WHO ARE INDEBTED TO THE UNITED STATES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
256.1  Collection of debts by offset; scope of regulations.
256.2  Definitions.
256.3  Pay subject to offset.
256.4  Advance notice of debt; request for records; submission of 
          information.
256.5  Formal notice to employee.
256.6  Request for a hearing; prehearing submissions.
256.7  Hearings; time, date, and location.
256.8  Consequence of employee's failure to meet deadline dates.
256.9  Hearing procedures.
256.10  Representation.
256.11  Applicable legal principles.
256.12  Standards for determining extreme financial hardship.
256.13  Collection of debts on behalf of other agencies by offsetting 
          the pay of a Commission employee.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5514, as amended by section 5 of Public Law 97-
365, 96 Stat. 1751-1752.

    Source: 50 FR 34123, Aug. 23, 1985, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 181]]


<R05>
Sec. 256.1  Collection of debts by offset; scope of regulations.

    (a) If it is determined that an employee of the United States is 
indebted to the Panama Canal Commission, the employee's pay may be 
offset to satisfy that indebtedeness under the procedures set forth in 
this part.
    (b) Debts owed by Commission employees to other agencies of the 
United States may be recovered by offset against the employee's pay in 
accordance with Sec. 256.13. Similar provision in the regulations of 
other agencies permit the Commission to recover by offset debts owed to 
the Commission by the employee of another agency, if the Commission 
first complies with the provisions of Secs. 256.1 through 256.12 of this 
part.
    (c) An offset against pay shall be carried out in accordance with 
the standards established under the Federal Claims Collection Act of 
1966, as amended (31 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.).
    (d) The regulations in this part do not apply to, and do not impair 
the United States' authority with regard to, the collection of a debt, 
by offset or by other means, if the debt is owed to the United States by 
a Federal employee and the debt arose under the Internal Revenue Code of 
1954 as amended (26 U.S.C. 1 et seq.), or in any other circumstances in 
which collection of a debt by salary offset is explicitly provided by 
Federal statute, such as the collection authority granted the Commission 
pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 3645.
    (e) These regulations do not preclude an employee from questioning 
the amount or validity of a debt by submitting a claim to the General 
Accounting Office, but the Commission need not suspend the collection of 
the debt because of the filing of such a claim.
    (f) These regulations do not preclude the compromise, suspension or 
termination of collection actions where appropriate under the standards 
set forth at 4 CFR 101.1 et seq.
    (g) An employee's involuntary payment of all or any portion of an 
alleged debt being collected pursuant to this part shall not be 
construed as a waiver of any rights which the employee may have under 
this subpart or any other provision of law, except as otherwise provided 
by law.
    (h) Amounts paid or deducted pursuant to this subpart shall be 
promptly refunded to an employee if the debt is waived or otherwise 
found not owing to the United States or if the Commission is directed by 
a competent judicial or administrative authority to refund amounts 
deducted from an employee's current pay.
    (i) The procedures in this part and the collection of debts by the 
Panama Canal Commission shall be carried out by the Chief Financial 
Officer.
    (j) The Commission will not initiate salary offset to collect a debt 
under this subpart more than ten years after the Government's right to 
collect the debt first accrued, unless facts material to the 
Government's right to collect the debt were not known and could not 
reasonably have been known by the official or officials of the 
Government who are charged with discovering and collecting the debt in 
question.


<R05>
Sec. 256.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Agency shall have the same meaning as prescribed in 5 CFR 550.1103.
    Creditor agency means the Federal agency to which the debt is owed.
    Day, unless specified otherwise, means a calendar day, and time 
limits are to be computed by counting calendar days, rather than only 
those days on which Commission offices are open for business.
    Debt means an amount owed to the United States from any source, 
except as provided in this part. Such debts include, but are not limited 
to, those arising from loans insured or guaranteed by the United States, 
fees, leases, rents, royalties, services, sales of real or personal 
property, overpayments, fines penalties, damages, interest forfeitures, 
etc. Interest, penalties, and administrative costs may be assessed on 
debts collected pursuant to this part. These charges shall be assessed 
or waived in accordance with the provisions of 4 CFR 102.13.
    Delinquent debt means (a) a debt which has not been paid, or for 
which arrangements for payment have not been agreed to by the creditor 
agency and the employee, by the date specified in the creditor agency's 
initial written notification or (b) a debt for which the

[[Page 182]]

employee fails to comply with the terms of payment arrangements agreed 
to with the creditor agency.
    Disposable pay shall have the same meaning as prescribed in 5 CFR 
550.1103.
    Employee means a current--
    (a) Civilian employee, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 2105;
    (b) Member of the Armed Forces or Reserves of the United States;
    (c) Employee of the United States Postal Service; or
    (d) Employee of the Postal Rate Commission.
    Pay means basic pay, premium pay, special pay, incentive pay, 
retired pay, retainer pay, or, in case of an employee not entitled to 
basic pay, other authorized pay.
    Paying agency means the Federal agency or branch of the Armed Forces 
or Reserves employing the individual or disbursing his or her current 
pay.
    Salary offset means an administrative offset to collect a debt under 
5 U.S.C. 5514 by deduction at one or more officially established pay 
intervals from the current pay of an employee without his consent.
    Waiver means the cancellation, remission, forgiveness or nonrecovery 
of a debt allegedly owed by an employee to an agency as permitted or 
required by 5 U.S.C. 5584, 5 U.S.C. 8346(b), 10 U.S.C. 2774, or 32 
U.S.C. 716, or any other law.


<R05>
Sec. 256.3  Pay subject to offset.

    (a) An offset from an employee's pay from the Commission may not 
exceed 15 percent of the employee's disposable pay, unless the employee 
agree in writing to a larger offset.
    (b) If collection in one lump-sum payment would exceed 15 percent of 
the employee's disposable pay, an offset shall be made biweekly or at 
officially established pay intervals from the employee's current pay 
account. Whenever possible, the installment payments shall be sufficient 
in size to liquidate the debt during a period not greater than the 
anticipated period of active duty or employment of the debtor employee.
    (c) If an employee retires, resigns, or is discharged, or if his 
employment period or period of active duty otherwise ends before 
collection of the debt is completed, an offset may be made from 
subsequent payments of any nature (e.g., final salary payment, lump-sum 
leave, etc.) due the individual from the employing agency, to the extent 
necessary to liquidate the debt. If the final payment due the employee 
is insufficient to satisfy the debt, the creditor agency shall take 
steps necessary to provide for payment of the debt by administrative 
offset from payments of any kind due the former employee from the United 
States pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3716. (See 4 CFR 102.4)


<R05>
Sec. 256.4  Advance notice of debt; request for records; submission of information.

    (a) Before initiating an offset proceeding, the Chief Financial 
Officer of the Panama Canal Commission will establish an individual 
administrative case file for each employee to be covered by the offset 
proceeding and notify the employee--
    (1) That he has determined that the employee is indebted to the 
United States in a specific amount as the result of a debt due and owing 
to the Panama Canal Commission;
    (2) That he intends to satisfy that indebtedness by offsetting 15 
percent of the employee's disposable pay unless the employee can 
demonstrate that he is not indebted to the United States or that the 
proposed offset schedule would produce an extreme financial hardship, as 
defined in Sec. 256.12 of this part;
    (3) If the applicable law includes a provision requiring waiver of 
debts in certain circumstances, notice of the waiver provision, 
including a description of the conditions under which a waiver must be 
granted, notice that the employee has an opportunity to request such a 
waiver, and instructions on how to apply for a waiver; and
    (4) The options available to him and time limits within which 
submission of additional information or documents must be made.
    (b)(1) An employee who has been notified of the Chief Financial 
Officer's determination of the existence and amount of the debt and the 
proposed offset schedule, may submit to him a request--

[[Page 183]]

    (i) Not later than 10 days from the date the employee receives the 
notice, for a copy of the records in the possession of the agency 
relating to the debt,
    (ii) Within the time specified in paragraph (c) of this section, 
that he reconsider his determination of the existence or amount of the 
debt,
    (iii) Within the time set forth in paragraph (c) fo this section, 
that he reconsider the proposed offset schedule, on the basis that it 
would produce an extreme financial hardship for the employee, and
    (iv) Within the time set forth in paragraph (c) of this section, 
that he consider a request for waiver of the debt, if a waiver provision 
is applicable to the debt.
    (2) If the employee requests a reconsideration of the determination 
of the existence or amount of the debt, the employee shall submit a 
statement, with supporting documents, indicating why the employee 
believes he is not so indebted.
    (3) If the employee requests a reconsideration of the proposed 
offset schedule, the employee shall file an alternative proposed offset 
schedule and a statement, with supporting documents, showing why the 
schedule proposed by the agency would produce an extreme financial 
hardship for the employee. The supporting documents must show, for the 
employee and his spouse and legal dependents, for the one-year period 
preceding the receipt of the notice and for the repayment period 
proposed by the employee in his or her offset schedule, the--
    (i) Income from all sources,
    (ii) Assets,
    (iii) Liabilities,
    (iv) Number of legal dependents,
    (v) Expenses for food, housing, clothing, and transportation,
    (vi) Medical expenses, and
    (vii) Exceptional expenses, if any.
    (c) An employee who requests a reconsideration of the existence or 
amount of the debt, or the proposed offset schedule, shall submit his 
statement, with supporting documents, to the Chief Financial Officer no 
later than--
    (1) Forty-five days from the date the employee receives the notice 
of the debt, if he does not make a timely request for records under 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section; or
    (2) Forty-five days from the date the employee receives the records, 
if a timely request for records was made.
    (d) If the employee submits a timely request for reconsideration 
under paragraph (b) of this section, together with the required 
documents, the Chief Financial Officer will reconsider whether the 
employee is indebted to the United States, the amount that the employee 
owes, or whether the proposed offset schedule is appropriate.
    (e) If the employee files a timely request for waiver of the debt, 
the Chief Financial Officer will consider that request. If the employee 
files a request for waiver that is not timely, the request will be 
considered if he establishes that his failure to file within the time 
prescribed was because of circumstances beyond his control or because he 
did not receive the notice of the time limit and was not otherwise aware 
of it.
    (f) The Chief Financial Officer's decision on the employee's request 
for reconsideration will be based on agency records and the material 
submitted by the employee. He shall promptly notify the employee of his 
decision concerning the existence and amount of the debt and the 
appropriateness of the employee's proposed alternative offset schedule.
    (g) If the Chief Financial Officer determines that the employee is 
indebted to the United States, he will include in the notice to the 
employee the following matters:
    (1) A statement of the reasons for the decision regarding the 
indebtedness, including, if applicable, the reasons for any reduction of 
the amount of the indebtedness; and
    (2) The notice described in Sec. 256.5.
    (h) If the Chief Financial Officer determines that his original 
offset schedule, or a modified schedule (other than the one proposed by 
the employee) will not impose an extreme financial hardship on the 
employee, he will include in the notice to the employee--
    (1) A statement of the reasons for his conclusion that his original 
or modified offset schedule will not impose an extreme financial 
hardship, and
    (2) The notice described in Sec. 256.6.

[[Page 184]]


<R05>
Sec. 256.5  Formal notice to employee.

    (a) At least 30 days before requesting an agency to offset the pay 
of an employee or commencing the offset of the pay of an employee of the 
Commission, the Chief Financial Officer will send the employee a notice 
stating--
    (1) The nature and amount of the debt he has determined that the 
employee owes the United States;
    (2) His intention to collect the debt by offset;
    (3) The amount that the agency determines will be offset from the 
employee's disposable pay, including the proposed schedule for the 
deductions;
    (4) Unless such payments are excused in accordance with 4 CFR 
102.13, an explanation of the creditor agency's requirements concerning 
interest, penalties, and administrative costs;
    (5) The employee's right to inspect and copy Government records 
relating to the debt or, if the employee or his representative cannot 
personally inspect the records, to request and receive a copy of such 
records.
    (6) If not previously provided, the opportunity (under terms 
agreeable to the Commission) to establish a schedule for the voluntary 
repayment of the debt or to enter into a written agreement to establish 
a schedule for repayment of the debt in lieu of offset. The agreement 
must be in writing, signed by both the employee and the Commission, and 
documented in the Commission's files (4 CFR 102.2(e));
    (7) If the applicable law includes a provision requiring waiver of 
debts in certain circumstances, notice of the waiver provision, 
including notice of the period within which such a waiver must be 
requested and an explanation of the conditions under which waiver may be 
granted;
    (8) That amounts paid or deducted for the alleged debt which are 
later waived or found not owed to the United States will be promptly 
refunded to the employee;
    (9) The employee's right to a hearing on the Chief Financial 
Officer's determination concerning the existence and amount of the debt 
and the proposed offset schedule. This notice shall include a 
description of the applicable hearing procedures and requirements;
    (10) That the timely filing of a petition for hearing on the 
existence or amount of a debt or the offset schedule will stay the 
commencement of collection proceedings; but that a request for a waiver 
or a hearing on the employee's credibility of veracity in connection 
with a request for a permissive waiver will not stay the collection 
proceedings;
    (11) That a final decision on the hearing (if one is requested) will 
be issued at the earliest practical date, but not later than 60 days 
after the filing of the petition requesting the hearing unless the 
employee requests and the hearing official grants a delay in the 
proceedings;
    (12) The method and time period for requesting a hearing; and
    (13) That any knowingly false or frivolous statements, 
representations, or evidence may subject the employee to:
    (i) Disciplinary or adverse action;
    (ii) Penalties under the False Claims Act, sections 3729-3731 of 
Title 31, United States Code, or any other applicable statutory 
authority; or
    (iii) Criminal penalties under sections 286, 287, 1001, and 1002 of 
title 18, United States Code or any other applicable statutory 
authority.
    (b) The formal notice prescribed by paragraph (a) of this section, 
is not applicable to any pay adjustment arising out of an employee's 
election of coverage or a change in coverage under a Federal benefits 
program requiring periodic deductions from pay, if the amount to be 
recovered was accumulated over four pay periods or less.


<R05>
Sec. 256.6  Request for a hearing; prehearing submissions.

    (a) An employee's request for a hearing or waiver under Sec. 256.5 
must be filed not later than 15 days from the date of receipt of the 
formal notice.
    (b) Not later than three days prior to a scheduled hearing date, the 
employee may notify the Chief Financial Officer of his election to have 
the matter determined by the hearing official solely on the basis of 
written submissions. If no such election is filed by the employee, the 
hearing shall be conducted as an oral proceeding.

[[Page 185]]

    (c) If an employee files a timely petition for a hearing, the Chief 
Financial Officer will--
    (1) Notify the employee of the time, date, and location of the 
hearing, if a determination solely on the basis of written submissions 
has not been requested; and
    (2) Provide copies of the records in the possession of the agency 
relating to the employee's debt to the hearing official and, if he has 
not previously received the records, to the employee.
    (d) If the employee files a request for a hearing that is not 
timely, he will be granted a hearing if he establishes that his failure 
to file within the time prescribed was because of circumstances beyond 
his control or because he did not receive the notice of the time limit 
and was not otherwise aware of it.
    (e) If the employee contests the Commission determination of the 
existence or amount of the debt, he shall, not later than 10 days prior 
to the scheduled hearing date, file the following documents:
    (1) A statement of the reasons why the employee believes that the 
Commission determination of the existence or amount of the debt was 
clearly erroneous. The statement shall include a recitation of the facts 
on which the employee relies to support his belief and any legal 
arguments supporting his position;
    (2) A list of witnesses the employee intends to call at the hearing 
and a statement of why their testimony is desired; and
    (3) A copy of the records that the employee intends to introduce at 
the hearing, if they differ from those provided by the Commission.
    (f) If the employee contests the Commission's proposed offset 
schedule, he shall, not later than 10 days prior to the scheduled 
hearing date, file the following:
    (1) A proposed alternative offset schedule;
    (2) A statement of the reasons why the proposed offset against 
disposable pay will produce an extreme financial hardship;
    (3) The information required in Sec. 256.4(b)(3) of this part;
    (4) A list of witnesses the employee intends to call at the hearing 
and a statement of why their testimony is desired; and
    (5) A copy of the records that the employee intends to introduce at 
the hearing, if they differ from those provided by the Commission.
    (g) The Chief Financial Officer shall file, not later than 10 days 
prior to the scheduled hearing date, a list of witnesses that the 
Commission intends to call at the hearing.
    (h) Material submitted by an employee in connection with a request 
for reconsideration or for a waiver under Sec. 256.4 need not be 
resubmitted in connection with the proceeding under this section.
    (i) Material required to be filed under paragraphs (e), (f), and (g) 
of this section shall be filed with the hearing official and copies 
shall be provided to the opposing party.


<R05>
Sec. 256.7  Hearings; time, date, and location.

    (a) If an employee files a timely request for a hearing under 
Sec. 256.6, the Commission will select the time, date, and location for 
the hearing. A hearing will be granted on a request for a waiver only if 
such waiver is provided for by law and if the request, in the judgment 
of the Chief Financial Officer, raises issues of veracity or credibility 
of the employee. To the extent feasible, the Commission will select a 
date and location that is convenient for the employee.
    (b) For an employee who resides on the Isthmus of Panama, the 
hearing will be held in Panama. Hearings may be scheduled in New Orleans 
or Washington, D.C. for persons not residing in Panama.


<R05>
Sec. 256.8  Consequence of employee's failure to meet deadline dates.

    (a) An employee shall be considered to have waived his right to a 
hearing, and will have his disposable pay offset in accordance with the 
offset schedule proposed by the Commission, if the employee fails to 
appear at the time fixed for a hearing, or fails to file the required 
submissions under Sec. 256.6 within five days after the filing date 
established under that section.
    (b) The hearing official may excuse the employee's failure to meet 
any of

[[Page 186]]

the foregoing requirements if the employee shows that he exercised due 
diligence and that there is good cause for his failure to meet the 
requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 256.9  Hearing procedures.

    (a) The hearing will be conducted by a hearing official who is not 
an employee of the Commission or otherwise under its supervision or 
control, except that hearings on waivers may be conducted by an employee 
of the Commission.
    (b) The hearing official shall prepare a summary record of the 
hearing, which will be maintained by the Commission as a part of the 
record of the offset procedures; however, no transcript of the hearing 
shall be made.
    (c) The hearing shall not be conducted in accordance with formal 
rules of evidence with regard to the admissibility or use of evidence, 
except that the hearing official shall limit the evidence to testimony 
and documents which are relevant to the issues being considered.
    (d) At the hearing, the employee and the Commission may introduce 
evidence and may call witnesses, consistent with the provisions of 
paragraph (c) of this section. Witnesses shall testify under oath and 
are subject to cross-examination.
    (e) If the matter being contested is the existence or amount of a 
debt, the hearing official shall issue a decision upholding the 
Commission determination, unless the hearing official finds that the 
Commission determination was clearly erroneous.
    (f) If the hearing official finds that the Commission's 
determination of the amount of the debt was clearly erroneous, he shall 
determine the amount owed by the employee, if any.
    (g) If the matter being contested is the Commission's proposed 
offset schedule, the hearing official shall uphold that schedule unless 
the employee has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the 
payments called for under that schedule would result in an extreme 
financial hardship for the employee.
    (h) If the matter being contested is the credibility or veracity of 
the employee in connection with his request for a waiver, the hearing 
official shall make a determination as to the employee's credibility or 
veracity.
    (i) If the hearing official finds that the payments called for under 
the Chief Financial Officer's proposed offset schedule will produce an 
extreme financial hardship for the employee, the hearing official shall 
establish an offset schedule that will result in the repayment of the 
debt in the shortest period of time which will not result in an extreme 
financial hardship for the employee.
    (j) The hearing official shall issue a written opinion setting forth 
his decision and a statement of the reasons supporting it as soon as 
practicable, but not more than 60 days after the filing of the petition 
requesting the hearing, unless the hearing official has granted a delay 
in the proceedings at the request of the employee. The opinion shall 
contain his determinations as to the existence and amount of the debt, 
the origin of the debt, and, if a request for a waiver has been made, 
the employee's veracity or credibility.
    (k) If the employee files a petition for a hearing in connection 
with a request for a waiver under a statute requiring a waiver and meets 
the time limits for filing material prior to the hearing, no deductions 
to effect the offset will be made until the employee has been provided a 
hearing and a final written decision has been issued.


<R05>
Sec. 256.10  Representation.

    An employee may represent himself or may be represented by another 
person, including an attorney, during any proceedings under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 256.11  Applicable legal principles.

    (a) The hearing official may not find that the Commission's 
determination of the existence or amount of the employee's debt was 
erroneous--
    (1) On the basis of State or local statutes of limitations;
    (2) On the basis that the employee is owed monies by the United 
States (other than regular salary) and that payment of that debt by the 
United States would eliminate or reduce the debt, unless the employee 
has, not later than 45 days after receipt of advance notice of the debt 
under Sec. 256.4, submitted written confirmation by the

[[Page 187]]

agency which is indebted to the employee that such money is owed and has 
assigned the payment of that money to the Commission; or
    (3) On the basis of any factual or legal argument that was decided 
on the merits adversely to the employee in a court of competent 
jurisdiction.
    (b) In determining whether the Chief Financial Officer's decision 
concerning the existence or amount of the employee's debt is clearly 
erroneous, the hearing official shall be bound by the relevant Federal 
statutes and regulations governing the program which gave rise to the 
debt, and general principles of the law of the United States, if 
relevant.


<R05>
Sec. 256.12  Standards for determining extreme financial hardship.

    (a) An offset will be considered to produce an extreme financial 
hardship for an employee if the offset prevents the employee from 
meeting the costs necessarily incurred for essential subsistence 
expenses of the employee and his spouse and dependents. Essential 
subsistence expenses consist of the costs incurred for medical care, 
food, housing, clothing, and transportation only.
    (b) In determining whether an offset would prevent the employee from 
meeting the essential subsistence costs described in paragraph (a) of 
this section, the following matters shall be considered--
    (1) The income from all sources of the employee and his spouse and 
dependents;
    (2) The extent to which the assets of the employee and his spouse 
and dependents are available to pay the debt or the essential 
subsistence expenses;
    (3) Whether the essential subsistence costs have been minimized to 
the greatest extent possible;
    (4) The extent to which the employee and his spouse and dependents 
can borrow money to pay the debt or the essential subsistence expenses; 
and
    (5) The extent to which the employee and his spouse and dependents 
have other exceptional expenses that should be taken into account, and 
whether these expenses have been minimized.


<R05>
Sec. 256.13  Collection of debts on behalf of other agencies by offsetting the pay of a Commission employee.

    (a) Upon completion of the procedures established by the creditor 
agency under 5 U.S.C. 5514, the creditor agency shall forward to the 
Commission a certified statement of the existence of the debt. This 
document shall include a statement that the employee owes the debt, the 
amount and basis of the debt, the date on which payment is due, the date 
on which the claim against the debtor accrued, if different from the 
payment due date, and a statement that agency regulations implementing 5 
U.S.C. 5514 have been approved by the Office of Personnel Management.
    (b) Unless the employee has consented to the salary offset in 
writing or signed a statement acknowledging receipt of the required 
procedures and the writing or statement is attached to the debt claim 
form, the creditor agency must also indicate the actions taken under 
section 5514(b) and give the dates the actions were taken.
    (c) If, after the debt claim has been submitted by the creditor 
agency, the employee transfers to a position in another agency, the 
Commission will certify the total amount of the collection made on the 
debt. One copy of the certification will be furnished to the employee, 
and one copy will be furnished to the creditor agency, together with 
notice of the employee's transfer. The original of the debt claim form 
shall be inserted in the employee's official personnel folder, together 
with the certification of the amount which has been collected. Upon 
receiving the official personnel folder, it will be the responsibility 
of the new paying agency to resume the collection from the individual's 
current pay and notify the employee and the creditor agency of the 
resumption. In cases in which an employee transfers to the Commission 
while a debt is being collected from him by another Federal agency by 
offset, the Commission will resume the collection and notify the 
employee that it is doing so.
    (d) For collections of debts by offset under this section, the 
Commission

[[Page 188]]

will not repeat the procedures prescribed by 5 U.S.C. 5514 and agency 
regulations under section 5514.
    (e) If the Commission receives an incomplete or improperly certified 
debt claim, it will return the claim to the creditor agency with a 
notice that procedures under 5 U.S.C. 5514 must be complied with and a 
complete debt claim must be submitted before any action will be taken to 
collect the debt by offset from the employee's current pay.
    (f) If the Commission receives a complete debt claim, deductions 
shall be scheduled to begin on the next officially established pay 
interval, if possible. A copy of the debt claim form shall be given to 
the debtor, together with notice of the date deductions will commence.
    (g) The Commission will not review the merits of the creditor 
agency's determination with respect to the amount or validity of the 
debt.


<R03>
PART 257--ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY PANAMA CANAL COMMISSION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
257.101  Purpose.
257.102  Application.
257.103  Definitions.
257.104--257.109  [Reserved]
257.110  Self-evaluation.
257.111  Notice.
257.112--257.129  [Reserved]
257.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.
257.131--257.139  [Reserved]
257.140  Employment.
257.141--257.148  [Reserved]
257.149  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.
257.150  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.
257.151  Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.
257.152--257.159  [Reserved]
257.160  Communications.
257.161--257.169  [Reserved]
257.170  Compliance procedures.
257.171--257.999  [Reserved]

    Authority: 29 U.S.C. 794.

    Source: 52 FR 26007, July 10, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 257.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 119 of the 
Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities 
Amendments of 1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973 to prohibit discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs 
or activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United States 
Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 257.102  Application.

    This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the 
agency except for programs or activities conducted outside the United 
States which do not involve individuals with handicaps in the United 
States.


<R05>
Sec. 257.103  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part, the term--
    Agency means the Panama Canal Commission.
    Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney General, 
Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.
    Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with 
impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal 
opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or 
activities conducted by the agency. For example, auxiliary aids useful 
for persons with impaired vision include readers, materials in Braille, 
audio recordings, and other similar services and devices. Auxiliary aids 
useful for persons with impaired hearing include telephone handset 
amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, telecommunication 
devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, notetakers, written 
materials, and other similar services and devices.
    Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the 
complainant's name and address and describes the agency's alleged 
discriminatory actions in sufficient detail to inform the agency of the 
nature and date of the alleged violation of section 504. It shall be 
signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or 
her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall 
describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of 
discrimination.

[[Page 189]]

    Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, 
equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, rolling stock or other 
conveyances, or other real or personal property.
    Individual with handicaps means any person who has a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life 
activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having 
such an impairment. As used in this definition, the phrase:
    (1) Physical or mental impairment includes--
    (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, 
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; 
genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
    (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment 
includes but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as 
orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, 
epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, 
diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, and drug addiction and 
alcoholism.
    (2) Major life activities includes functions such as caring for 
oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning, and working.
    (3) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or 
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
    (4) Is regarded as having an impairment means--
    (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit major life activities but is treated by the agency as constituting 
such a limitation;
    (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward 
such impairment; or
    (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (1) of this 
definition but is treated by the agency as having such an impairment.
    Qualified individual with handicaps means--
    (1) With respect to any covered agency program or activity under 
which a person is required to perform services or to achieve a level of 
accomplishment, an individual with handicaps who meets the essential 
eligibility requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program 
or activity without modifications in the program or activity that the 
agency can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its 
nature;
    (2) With respect to employment, an individual with handicaps who 
meets the definition of qualified handicapped person set forth in 29 CFR 
1613.702(f), which is made applicable to this part by Sec. 257.140; and
    (3) With respect to any other covered program or activity, an 
individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility 
requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that 
program or activity.
    Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
(Pub. L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (29 U.S.C. 794)), as amended by the 
Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-516, 88 Stat. 1617); 
the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental 
Disabilities Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955); and the 
Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-506, 100 Stat. 1810). 
As used in this part, section 504 applies only to programs or activities 
conducted by Executive agencies and not to federally assisted programs.
Secs. 257.104--257.109  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 257.110  Self-evaluation.

    (a) The agency shall, by July 11, 1988, evaluate its current 
policies and practices, and the effects thereof, that do not or may not 
meet the requirements of this part, and, to the extent modification of 
any such policies and practices is required, the agency shall proceed to 
make the necessary modifications.

[[Page 190]]

    (b) The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, 
including individuals with handicaps, or organizations representing 
individuals with handicaps, to participate in the self-evaluation 
process by submitting comments (both oral and written).
    (c) The agency shall, for at least three years following completion 
of the evaluation required under paragraph (a) of this section, maintain 
on file and make available for public inspection--
    (1) A description of areas examined and any problems identified; and
    (2) A description of any modifications made.


<R05>
Sec. 257.111  Notice.

    The agency shall make available to employees, applicants, 
participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such 
information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability 
to the programs or activities conducted by the agency, and make such 
information available to them in such manner as the agency head finds 
necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against 
discrimination assured them by section 504 and this regulation.
Secs. 257.112--257.129  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 257.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.

    (a) No qualified individual with handicaps shall, on the basis of 
handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, 
or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or 
activity conducted by the offices of the agency located in the United 
States.
    (b)(1) The agency, in providing any aid, benefit, or service may 
not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, 
on the basis of handicap--
    (i) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit or service;
    (ii) Afford a qualified individual with handicaps an opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not 
equal to that afforded others;
    (iii) Provide a qualified individual with handicaps with an aid, 
benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording equal 
opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to 
reach the same level of achievement as that provided to others;
    (iv) Provide different or separate aid, benefits, or services to 
individuals with handicaps or to any class of individuals with handicaps 
than is provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide 
qualified individuals with handicaps with aid, benefits, or services 
that are as effective as those provided to others; or
    (v) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with handicaps in the 
enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by 
others receiving the aid, benefit, or service.
    (2) The agency may not deny a qualified individual with handicaps 
the opportunity to participate in programs or activities that are not 
separate or different, despite the existence of permissible separate or 
different programs or activities.
    (3) The agency may not, directly or through contractual or other 
arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose 
or effect of which would--
    (i) Subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination 
on the basis of handicap; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair accomplishment of the objectives 
of a program or activity with respect to individuals with handicaps.
    (4) The agency may not, in determining the site or location of a 
facility, make selections the purpose or effect of which would--
    (i) Exclude individuals with handicaps from, deny them the benefits 
of, or otherwise subject them to discrimination under any program or 
activity conducted by the agency; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the 
objectives of a program or activity with respect to individuals with 
handicaps.
    (5) The agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not 
use criteria that subject qualified individuals with handicaps to 
discrimination on the basis of handicap.

[[Page 191]]

    (c) The exclusion of nonhandicapped persons from the benefits of a 
program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to individuals 
with handicaps or the exclusion of a specific class of individuals with 
handicaps from a program limited by Federal statute or Executive order 
to a different class of individuals with handicaps is not prohibited by 
this part.
    (d) The agency shall administer programs and activities in the most 
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals 
with handicaps.
Secs. 257.131--257.139  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 257.140  Employment.

    No qualified individual with handicaps shall, on the basis of 
handicap, be subjected to discrimination in employment under any program 
or activity conducted by the agency. The definitions, requirements, and 
procedures of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 
791), as established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 
29 CFR Part 1613, shall apply to employment in federally conducted 
programs or activities.
Secs. 257.141--257.148  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 257.149  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.

    Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 257.150 no qualified individual 
with handicaps shall, because the agency's facilities are inaccessible 
to or unusable by individuals with handicaps, be denied the benefits of, 
be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be subjected to 
discrimination under any program or activity conducted by the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 257.150  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.

    (a) General. The agency shall operate each program or activity so 
that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily 
accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. This paragraph 
does not--
    (1) Necessarily require the agency to make each of its existing 
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps; or
    (2) Require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or 
activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those 
circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action 
would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in 
undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of 
proving that compliance with Sec. 257.150(a) would result in such 
alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such 
alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his designee 
after considering all agency resources available for use in the funding 
and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must be 
accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that 
conclusion. If an action would result in such an alteration or such 
burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in 
such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that 
individuals with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the 
program or activity.
    (b) Methods--(1) General. The agency may comply with the 
requirements of this section through such means as redesign of 
equipment, reassignment of services to accessible buildings, assignments 
of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of services at 
alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and 
construction of new facilities, use of accessible rolling stock, or any 
other methods that result in making its programs or activities readily 
accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. The agency is 
not required to make structural changes in existing facilities where 
other methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section. 
The agency, in making alterations to existing buildings, shall meet 
accessibility requirements to the extent compelled by the Architectural 
Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), and any 
regulations implementing it. In choosing among available methods for 
meeting the requirements of this section, the agency shall give priority 
to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified 
individuals with handicaps in the most integrated setting appropriate.

[[Page 192]]

    (c) Time period for compliance. The agency shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section by October 8, 1987, except 
that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes 
shall be made by July 10, 1990, but in any event as expeditiously as 
possible.
    (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to 
facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, the 
agency shall develop, by January 11, 1988, a transition plan setting 
forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The agency shall 
provide an opportunity to interested persons, including individuals with 
handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps, to 
participate in the development of the transition plan by submitting 
comments (both oral and written). A copy of the transition plan shall be 
made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum--
    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the agency's facilities that 
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals 
with handicaps;
    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible;
    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section, and if the time period of the transition 
plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during 
each year of the transition period;
    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan.


<R05>
Sec. 257.151  Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.

    Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered 
by, on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, 
constructed, or altered so as to be readily accessible to and usable by 
individuals with handicaps. The definitions, requirements, and standards 
of the Architectural Barriers Act (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), as 
established in 41 CFR 101-19.600 to 101-19.607, apply to buildings 
covered by this section.
Secs. 257.152--257.159  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 257.160  Communications.

    (a) The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective 
communication with applicants, participants, personnel of other Federal 
entities, and members of the public.
    (1) The agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where 
necessary to afford an individual with handicaps an equal opportunity to 
participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity 
conducted by the agency.
    (i) In determining what type of auxiliary aid is necessary, the 
agency shall give primary consideration to the requests of the 
individual with handicaps.
    (ii) The agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, 
readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal 
nature.
    (2) Where the agency communicates with applicants and beneficiaries 
by telephone, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's) or 
equally effective telecommunication systems shall be used.
    (b) The agency shall ensure that interested persons, including 
persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to 
the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and 
facilities.
    (c) The agency shall provide signs at a primary entrance to each of 
its inaccessible facilities, directing users to a location at which they 
can obtain information about accessible facilities. The international 
symbol for accessibility shall be used at each primary entrance of an 
accessible facility.
    (d) This section does not require the agency to take any action that 
it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the 
nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative 
burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the 
proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or 
would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency 
has the burden of proving that compliance with Sec. 257.160 would result 
in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result 
in such alteration or burdens must be

[[Page 193]]

made by the agency head or his designee after considering all agency 
resources available for use in the funding and operation of the 
conducted program or activity, and must be accompanied by a written 
statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action 
required to comply with this section would result in such an alteration 
or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not 
result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless 
ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals with handicaps 
receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
Secs. 257.161--257.169  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 257.170  Compliance procedures.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this 
section applies to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of 
handicap in programs or activities conducted by the agency.
    (b) The agency shall process complaints alleging violations of 
section 504 with respect to employment according to the procedures 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR 
Part 1613 pursuant to section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
U.S.C. 791).
    (c) Responsibility for implementation and operation of this section 
shall be vested in the Director of Equal Opportunity.
    (d) The agency shall accept and investigate all complete complaints 
for which it has jurisdiction. All complete complaints must be filed 
within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination. The agency may 
extend this time period for good cause.
    (e) If the agency receives a complaint over which it does not have 
jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make 
reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate government 
entity.
    (f) The agency shall notify the Architectural and Transportation 
Barriers Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a 
building or facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act 
of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), is not readily 
accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.
    (g) Within 180 days of the receipt of a complete complaint for which 
it has jurisdiction, the agency shall notify the complainant of the 
results of the investigation in a letter containing--
    (1) Findings of fact and conclusions of law;
    (2) A description of a remedy for each violation found; and
    (3) A notice of the right to appeal.
    (h) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or 
remedies must be filed by the complainant within 90 days of receipt by 
the complainant of decision required by Sec. 257.170(g). The agency may 
extend this time for good cause.
    (i) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by Administrator 
of the Panama Canal Commission.
    (j) The Administrator shall notify the complainant of the results of 
the appeal within 60 days of the receipt of the request. If the 
Administrator determines that it needs additional information from the 
complainant, he shall have 60 days from the date it receives the 
additional information to make its determination on the appeal.
    (k) The time limits cited in paragraphs (g) and (j) of this section 
may be extended with the permission of the Assistant Attorney General.
    (l) The agency may delegate its authority for conducting complaint 
investigations to other Federal agencies, except that the authority for 
making the final determination may not be delegated.
Secs. 257.171--257.999  [Reserved]
[[Page 195]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts, and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Redesignation Tables
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 197]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of July 1, 1997)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


35 CFR Chapter I

PANAMA CANAL
                                                                  35 CFR


International Maritime Organization

  Publications Section, 4 Albert Embankment, 
  London, SEI 75R, England
Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships                  113.25
  Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk (1980).
Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships                  113.25
  Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk (1983).
Code for Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases                  113.25
  in Bulk (1976).
Code of Safe Practices for Solid Bulk Cargoes                     113.25
  (1983).
International Code for the Construction and                       113.25
  Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals 
  in Bulk (1983).
International Code for the Construction and                       113.25
  Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in 
  Bulk (1978).
International Convention for the Prevention of                    113.25
  Pollution from Ships 1973, and Protocol of 1978, 
  relating thereto.
International Convention for the Safety of Life at                113.25
  Sea, 1974 and Protocol of 1978, relating 
  thereto.
International Convention on Standards of Training,                107.01
  Certification and Watchstanding for Seafarers, 
  1978.
International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code (1983)                113.25



[[Page 199]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 20, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 200]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)

[[Page 201]]

       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)

[[Page 202]]

      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)

[[Page 203]]

         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)

[[Page 204]]

        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)

[[Page 205]]

        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 206]]

       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)

[[Page 207]]

         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)

[[Page 208]]

     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)

[[Page 209]]

      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 210]]

      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)

[[Page 211]]

            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 212]]

        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)

[[Page 213]]

         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

[[Page 214]]

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 215]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 20, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII

[[Page 216]]

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51

[[Page 217]]

  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I

[[Page 218]]

  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302

[[Page 219]]

  Travel Allowances                               41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III

[[Page 220]]

  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV

[[Page 221]]

Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Dairy Compact Commission                7, XIII
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
   Fellowships
[[Page 222]]

Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I

[[Page 223]]

  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 225]]

                          REDESIGNATION TABLES

  Editorial Note: Title 35 was revised at 31 FR 12202, Sept. 16, 1966. 
The following tables show where sections of Title 5, CFR, and Title 35, 
CFR, 1960, including the supplements thereto, have been carried into 35 
CFR.
                                                                    Page
Derivation Table:


    Table 1. Derivation of Sections..................................225
Distribution Tables:


    Table 2. Code of Federal Regulations.............................245
    Table 3. Executive Orders........................................256
    Table 4. Proclamations...........................................257
    Table 5. Canal Zone Orders.......................................258
    Table 6. Navigation Regulations..................................258
    Table 7. Executive Regulations...................................261
    Table 8. Canal Zone Official Postal Guide........................262
    Table 9. Canal Zone Postal Savings System Booklet................268
    Table 10. Canal Zone Postal Money Order System Booklet...........269
    Table 11. Miscellaneous Regulations..............................271
Miscellaneous Tables:


    Table 12. Omitted 35 CFR (1960) Sections.........................272
    Table 13. Orders Omitted as Executed, Superseded, or Obsolete....272
    Table 14. Executive Orders Omitted but not Repealed..............291
    Table 15. Orders and Proclamations Repealed Prior to Revision....292
    Table 16. Executive Orders to Canal Zone Code....................295
                     Table 1--DERIVATION OF SECTIONS
  Showing the derivation or source of sections of this revision of 35 
CFR. In the derivation or right hand column, ``E.O.'' means Executive 
Order of the President of the United States; ``C.Z.O.'' means Canal Zone 
Order of the Secretary of War or Secretary of the Army; ``E.R.'' means 
Executive Regulations of the Governor of the Canal Zone; ``Nav. Reg.'' 
means Rules and Regulations Governing Navigation of the Panama Canal and 
Adjacent Waters, 1952 ed., as amended and supplemented, and as expanded 
in 1957 (chapter 10); and ``Gov. Reg.'' means Regulations of the 
Governor of the Canal Zone. citations in that column to 35 CFR (1960 
comp.) and 5 CFR (1964 comp.) include the pocket supplements thereto.
________________________________________________________________________

                             Revised Derivation
________________________________________________________________________

    Sec.
1.1.........35 CFR (1960) 1.1...........................................
1.2.........E.O. 2208, June 8, 1915.....................................
1.3.........E.O. 7676, July 26, 1937, Secs. 2, 3........................
1.4.........E.O. 7676, July 26, 1937, Sec. 4............................
3.1.........E.O. 9746, July 1, 1946, Secs. 3, 4; E.O. 10595, Feb. 7, ...
            1955.

[[Page 226]]

3.2.........E.O. 9746, July 1, 1946, Sec. 1; E.O. 10595, Feb. 7, 1955; .
            Letter of Pres. Harry S. Truman, May 30, 1952.
3.3.........E.O. 9746, July 1, 1946, Sec. 6.............................
3.3.........E.O. 10595, Feb. 7, 1955....................................
3.4.........New.........................................................
3.21........E.O. 9746, July 1, 1946, Sec. 2.............................
3.21........E.O. 10595, Feb. 7, 1955....................................
3.22........35 CFR (1960) 1.3...........................................
3.23........E.R. 31, Rev. No. 2, Aug. 1, 1962...........................
5.1.........35 CFR (1960) 21.1..........................................
5.2.........E.O. 8515, Aug. 13, 1940....................................
5.21........E.O. 3130, July 25, 1919....................................
5.22........E.O. 7979, Sept. 26, 1938...................................
5.23........C.Z.O. 7, Mar. 31, 1947.....................................
5.24........C.Z.O. 23, May 18, 1951; C.Z.O. 29, Sept. 26, 1952; C.Z.O. .
            56, Aug. 24, 1961.
5.25........C.Z.O. 29, Sept. 26, 1952; C.Z.O. 33, Apr. 16, 1954; C.Z.O. 
            56, Aug. 24, 1961.
5.26........C.Z.O. 29, Sept. 26, 1952; C.Z.O. 53, Jan. 20, 1960.........
5.27........C.Z.O. 18, Sept. 14, 1949; C.Z.O. 48, Dec. 4, 1957..........
5.28........C.Z.O. 54, Aug. 22, 1960....................................
5.29........C.Z.O. 28, Aug. 11, 1952....................................
5.30........C.Z.O. 54, Aug. 22, 1960....................................
5.31........E.O. 2825, Mar. 25, 1918; E.O. 3352, Nov. 6, 1920...........
5.41........C.Z.O. 13, Apr. 21, 1948....................................
5.42........C.Z.O. 54, Aug. 22, 1960....................................
5.43........E.O. 5185, Sept. 6, 1929....................................
5.44........C.Z.O. 9, June 6, 1947......................................
5.45........C.Z.O. 14, July 15, 1948....................................
5.46........E.O. 9434, Apr. 8, 1944.....................................
5.47........C.Z.O. 44, Sept. 7, 1956....................................
5.48........C.Z.O. 34, Sept. 18, 1954; C.Z.O. 47, July 9, 1957..........
5.49........C.Z.O. 12, Mar. 9, 1948; C.Z.O. 34, Sept. 18, 1954..........
5.61........C.Z.O. 29, Sept. 26, 1952; C.Z.O. 53, Jan. 20, 1960; C.Z.O. 
            56, Aug. 24, 1961.
5.62........C.Z.O. 28, Aug. 11, 1952....................................
5.71........C.Z.O. 65, June 18, 1963....................................
5.81........C.Z.O. 29, Sept. 26, 1952; C.Z.O. 53, Jan. 20, 1960; C.Z.O. 
            56, Aug. 24, 1961.
5.82........Various E.O.s and C.Z.O.s establishing military ............
            reservations. See 35 CFR (1960) 21.3, 21.4.
5.83........New.........................................................
51.1........35 CFR (1960) 5.1...........................................
51.2........35 CFR (1960) 5.2...........................................
51.3........35 CFR (1960) 5.3...........................................
51.21.......35 CFR (1960) 5.11..........................................
51.22.......35 CFR (1960) 5.12..........................................
51.31.......35 CFR (1960) 5.21..........................................
51.32.......35 CFR (1960) 5.22..........................................
51.33.......35 CFR (1960) 5.23..........................................
51.41.......35 CFR (1960) 5.31..........................................
51.42.......35 CFR (1960) 5.32..........................................
51.43.......35 CFR (1960) 5.33..........................................
51.44.......35 CFR (1960) 5.34..........................................
51.45.......35 CFR (1960) 5.35..........................................
51.46.......35 CFR (1960) 5.36..........................................
51.47.......35 CFR (1960) 5.37..........................................
51.61.......35 CFR (1960) 5.41..........................................
51.62.......35 CFR (1960) 5.42..........................................
51.71.......35 CFR (1960) 5.51..........................................
51.81.......35 CFR (1960) 5.61..........................................
51.121......35 CFR (1960) 5.101.........................................
51.122......35 CFR (1960) 5.102.........................................

[[Page 227]]

51.123......35 CFR (1960) 5.103.........................................
51.124......35 CFR (1960) 5.104.........................................
51.181......New.........................................................
53.1........35 CFR (1960) 6.1...........................................
53.2........35 CFR (1960) 6.2...........................................
53.3........35 CFR (1960) 6.3...........................................
53.4........35 CFR (1960) 6.4...........................................
53.5........35 CFR (1960) 6.5...........................................
53.6........35 CFR (1960) 6.6...........................................
53.7........35 CFR (1960) 6.7...........................................
53.8........35 CFR (1960) 6.8...........................................
53.9........35 CFR (1960) 6.9...........................................
53.10.......35 CFR (1960) 6.10..........................................
53.11.......35 CFR (1960) 6.11..........................................
57.1........35 CFR (1960) 9.1...........................................
57.2........35 CFR (1960) 9.2...........................................
57.3........35 CFR (1960) 9.3...........................................
57.4........35 CFR (1960) 9.4; Gov. Reg., Aug. 1, 1931..................
57.5........Nav. Reg. 16.5..............................................
57.6........Nav. Reg. 16.6..............................................
57.7........35 CFR (1960) 9.11..........................................
57.8........35 CFR (1960) 9.7...........................................
57.9........New.........................................................
57.10.......35 CFR (1960) 9.14..........................................
57.11.......35 CFR (1960) 9.15..........................................
57.12.......35 CFR (1960) 9.16..........................................
57.13.......35 CFR (1960) 9.17..........................................
57.14.......35 CFR (1960) 9.8...........................................
57.15.......35 CFR (1960) 9.12..........................................
57.16.......New.........................................................
57.17.......New.........................................................
57.18.......35 CFR (1960) 9.18; Gov. Reg. 17 FR 2389, Mar. 20, 1952.....
59.1........35 CFR (1960) 10.1..........................................
59.2........35 CFR (1960) 10.2..........................................
59.3........35 CFR (1960) 10.39.........................................
59.4........35 CFR (1960) 10.38.........................................
59.21.......35 CFR (1960) 10.3, 10.4....................................
59.22.......35 CFR (1960) 10.3..........................................
59.23.......35 CFR (1960) 10.3..........................................
59.24.......35 CFR (1960) 10.4..........................................
59.25.......35 CFR (1960) 10.4..........................................
59.26.......35 CFR (1960) 10.5..........................................
59.27.......35 CFR (1960) 10.6..........................................
59.28.......35 CFR (1960) 10.3..........................................
59.29.......New.........................................................
59.51.......35 CFR (1960) 10.7, 10.12...................................
59.52.......35 CFR (1960) 10.8, 10.13...................................
59.53.......35 CFR (1960) 10.9..........................................
59.54.......35 CFR (1960) 10.9, 10.15...................................
59.55.......35 CFR (1960) 10.17.........................................
59.56.......35 CFR (1960) 10.10.........................................
59.57.......35 CFR (1960) 10.11.........................................
59.58.......35 CFR (1960) 10.25.........................................
59.59.......35 CFR (1960) 10.18.........................................
59.60.......35 CFR (1960) 10.19.........................................
59.61.......35 CFR (1960) 10.20.........................................
59.62.......35 CFR (1960) 10.21.........................................
59.81.......35 CFR (1960) 10.22.........................................
59.82.......35 CFR (1960) 10.23.........................................
59.83.......35 CFR (1960) 4.30a.........................................
59.84.......35 CFR (1960) 4.30a.........................................
59.85.......35 CFR (1960) 4.30b.........................................
59.86.......35 CFR (1960) 4.21a.........................................

[[Page 228]]

59.87.......35 CFR (1960) 10.24.........................................
59.88.......35 CFR (1960) 10.26.........................................
59.111......35 CFR (1960) 10.34, 10.35..................................
59.112......35 CFR (1960) 10.35a........................................
59.113......35 CFR (1960) 10.36.........................................
59.114......35 CFR (1960) 10.37.........................................
59.131......35 CFR (1960) 10.27, 10.28..................................
59.132......35 CFR (1960) 10.29, 10.30..................................
59.133......35 CFR (1960) 10.31.........................................
59.134......35 CFR (1960) 10.32, 10.33..................................
59.135......35 CFR (1960) 10.40.........................................
61.1........35 CFR (1960) 24.150........................................
61.2........35 CFR (1960) 24.150........................................
61.3........35 CFR (1960) 24.150........................................
61.4........35 CFR (1960) 24.150........................................
61.5........35 CFR (1960) 24.150........................................
61.31.......New.........................................................
61.32.......New.........................................................
61.33.......New.........................................................
61.34.......New.........................................................
61.35.......New.........................................................
61.36.......New.........................................................
61.37.......New.........................................................
61.38.......New.........................................................
61.39.......New.........................................................
61.61.......35 CFR (1960) 24.170........................................
61.62.......35 CFR (1960) 24.171........................................
61.63.......35 CFR (1960) 24.172........................................
61.64.......35 CFR (1960) 24.173........................................
61.65.......35 CFR (1960) 24.174........................................
61.66.......35 CFR (1960) 24.175........................................
61.67.......35 CFR (1960) 24.176........................................
61.68.......35 CFR (1960) 24.177........................................
61.69.......35 CFR (1960) 24.178........................................
61.70.......35 CFR (1960) 24.179........................................
61.91.......35 CFR (1960) 24.190........................................
61.92.......35 CFR (1960) 24.191........................................
61.93.......35 CFR (1960) 24.192........................................
61.94.......35 CFR (1960) 24.193........................................
61.95.......35 CFR (1960) 24.194........................................
61.96.......35 CFR (1960) 24.195........................................
61.121......35 CFR (1960) 24.37.........................................
61.122......35 CFR (1960) 24.38.........................................
61.123......35 CFR (1960) 24.39.........................................
61.124......35 CFR (1960) 24.40.........................................
61.125......35 CFR (1960) 24.41.........................................
61.126......35 CFR (1960) 24.42.........................................
61.127......35 CFR (1960) 24.43.........................................
61.128......35 CFR (1960) 24.44.........................................
61.129......35 CFR (1960) 24.45.........................................
61.130......35 CFR (1960) 24.46.........................................
61.131......35 CFR (1960) 24.47.........................................
61.141......35 CFR (1960) 24.48.........................................
61.142......35 CFR (1960) 24.49.........................................
61.151......35 CFR (1960) 24.50.........................................
61.152......35 CFR (1960) 24.51.........................................
61.153......35 CFR (1960) 24.52.........................................
61.154......35 CFR (1960) 24.53.........................................
61.155......35 CFR (1960) 24.54.........................................
61.156......35 CFR (1960) 24.54a........................................
61.157......35 CFR (1960) 24.55.........................................
61.158......35 CFR (1960) 24.55a........................................
61.171......35 CFR (1960) 24.56.........................................
61.172......35 CFR (1960) 24.57.........................................

[[Page 229]]

61.173......35 CFR (1960) 24.58.........................................
61.174......35 CFR (1960) 24.59.........................................
61.191......35 CFR (1960) 24.60.........................................
61.192......35 CFR (1960) 24.61.........................................
61.193......35 CFR (1960) 24.62.........................................
61.194......35 CFR (1960) 24.63.........................................
61.195......35 CFR (1960) 24.64.........................................
61.196......35 CFR (1960) 24.65.........................................
61.197......35 CFR (1960) 24.66.........................................
61.198......35 CFR (1960) 24.67.........................................
61.199......35 CFR (1960) 24.68.........................................
61.200......35 CFR (1960) 24.69.........................................
61.201......35 CFR (1960) 24.70.........................................
61.202......35 CFR (1960) 24.71.........................................
61.203......35 CFR (1960) 24.72.........................................
61.204......35 CFR (1960) 24.73.........................................
61.205......35 CFR (1960) 24.74.........................................
61.206......35 CFR (1960) 24.75.........................................
61.221......35 CFR (1960) 24.76.........................................
61.222......35 CFR (1960) 24.77.........................................
61.223......35 CFR (1960) 24.78.........................................
61.224......35 CFR (1960) 24.79.........................................
61.225......35 CFR (1960) 24.80.........................................
61.226......35 CFR (1960) 24.81.........................................
61.227......35 CFR (1960) 24.82.........................................
61.228......35 CFR (1960) 24.83.........................................
61.229......35 CFR (1960) 24.84.........................................
61.230......35 CFR (1960) 24.85.........................................
61.231......35 CFR (1960) 24.86.........................................
61.241......35 CFR (1960) 24.87.........................................
61.242......35 CFR (1960) 24.88.........................................
61.243......35 CFR (1960) 24.89.........................................
61.244......35 CFR (1960) 24.90.........................................
61.245......35 CFR (1960) 24.91.........................................
61.246......35 CFR (1960) 24.92.........................................
61.247......35 CFR (1960) 24.96.........................................
61.248......35 CFR (1960) 24.93a........................................
61.261......35 CFR (1960) 24.94.........................................
61.262......35 CFR (1960) 24.95.........................................
61.263......35 CFR (1960) 24.96.........................................
61.264......35 CFR (1960) 24.97.........................................
61.265......35 CFR (1960) 24.98.........................................
61.266......35 CFR (1960) 24.99.........................................
61.281......35 CFR (1960) 24.100........................................
61.282......35 CFR (1960) 24.100a.......................................
61.283......35 CFR (1960) 24.100b.......................................
61.284......35 CFR (1960) 24.100c.......................................
61.285......35 CFR (1960) 24.100d.......................................
61.286......35 CFR (1960) 24.100e.......................................
61.287......35 CFR (1960) 24.100f.......................................
61.288......35 CFR (1960) 24.101........................................
61.289......35 CFR (1960) 24.101a.......................................
61.290......35 CFR (1960) 24.010b.......................................
61.291......35 CFR (1960) 24.101c.......................................
61.292......35 CFR (1960) 24.101d.......................................
61.293......35 CFR (1960) 24.101e.......................................
61.294......35 CFR (1960) 24.101f.......................................
61.295......35 CFR (1960) 24.101g.......................................
61.296......35 CFR (1960) 24.101h.......................................
61.297......35 CFR (1960) 24.101i.......................................
61.298......35 CFR (1960) 24.101j.......................................
61.299......35 CFR (1960) 24.101k.......................................
61.300......35 CFR (1960) 24.101l.......................................
61.301......35 CFR (1960) 24.102........................................

[[Page 230]]

61.302......35 CFR (1960) 24.103........................................
61.311......35 CFR (1960) 24.200........................................
61.312......35 CFR (1960) 24.201........................................
61.313......35 CFR (1960) 24.202........................................
61.314......35 CFR (1960) 24.203........................................
61.315......35 CFR (1960) 24.204........................................
61.316......35 CFR (1960) 24.205........................................
61.317......35 CFR (1960) 24.206........................................
61.318......35 CFR (1960) 24.207........................................
61.319......35 CFR (1960) 24.208........................................
61.331......New.........................................................
61.332......New.........................................................
61.333......New.........................................................
61.334......New.........................................................
61.335......New.........................................................
61.351......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 1.............................
61.352......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 2.............................
61.353......E.R. 11, July 1, 1951, Sec. 2; C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950......
61.354......E.R. 11, July 1, 1951, Sec. 3; C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, ....
            Sec. 4.
61.355......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 5.............................
61.356......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 6.............................
61.357......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 7.............................
61.358......E.R. 11, July 1, 1951, Sec. 4; C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 8, 1950, ....
            Sec. 8.
61.359......E.R. 11, July 1, 1951, Sec. 7; C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, ....
            Sec. 9.
61.360......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 10............................
61.361......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 11............................
61.362......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 12............................
61.363......E.R. 11, Sec. 8; C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 13...........
61.364......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 4.............................
61.365......C.Z.O. 21, Aug. 7, 1950, Sec. 16............................
61.381......New.........................................................
63.1........35 CFR (1960) 26.1..........................................
63.2........35 CFR (1960) 26.2..........................................
63.3........35 CFR (1960) 26.3..........................................
63.4........35 CFR (1960) 26.4..........................................
63.5........35 CFR (1960) 26.5..........................................
63.6........35 CFR (1960) 26.6..........................................
63.7........35 CFR (1960) 26.7..........................................
63.8........35 CFR (1960) 26.8..........................................
63.9........35 CFR (1960) 26.9..........................................
63.10.......35 CFR (1960) 26.10, 26.11..................................
63.11.......35 CFR (1960) 26.12.........................................
63.12.......35 CFR (1960) 26.13.........................................
63.13.......35 CFR (1960) 26.14.........................................
65.1........35 CFR (1960) 16.1..........................................
65.2........35 CFR (1960) 16.2..........................................
65.3........35 CFR (1960) 16.3..........................................
65.4........35 CFR (1960) 16.4..........................................
65.5........35 CFR (1960) 16.5..........................................
65.6........35 CFR (1960) 16.6..........................................
65.7........35 CFR (1960) 16.7..........................................
65.51.......35 CFR (1960) 16.11.........................................
65.61.......35 CFR (1960) 16.12.........................................
65.62.......35 CFR (1960) 16.13.........................................
65.63.......35 CFR (1960) 16.14.........................................
65.71.......35 CFR (1960) 16.15.........................................
65.72.......35 CFR (1960) 16.16.........................................
65.73.......Panama Canal Co. Comptroller's Circ. No. 44, Oct. 27, 1961, 
            Sec. 6.
65.81.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 1; 35 CFR (1960 comp.) 16.17.
65.82.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 2;35 CFR (1960 comp.) 16.17.

[[Page 231]]

65.83.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 3.
65.84.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 4.
65.85.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 5.
65.86.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 6.
65.87.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 7.
65.88.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 8.
65.89.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 9.
65.90.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 10.
65.91.......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 11.
65.101......35 CFR (1960) 16.18.........................................
65.102......35 CFR (1960) 16.19.........................................
65.111......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 12.
65.112......C.Z. Health Director's Policy Memo. HL-2, May 4, 1964, .....
            Sec. 14.
65.113......35 CFR (1960) 16.20.........................................
67.1........C.Z. Post. Guide 1.11.......................................
67.2........C.Z. Post. Guide 1.31.......................................
67.3........C.Z. Post. Guide 53.11......................................
67.4........C.Z. Post. Guide 5.21, 5.22, 5.221..........................
67.5........C.Z. Post. Guide 5.231......................................
67.6........C.Z. Post. Guide 15.211, 15.222.............................
67.7........C.Z. Post. Guide 1.41.......................................
67.8........C.Z. Post. Guide 1.42.......................................
67.9........C.Z. Post. Guide 67.41......................................
67.10.......C.Z. Post. Guide 2.211, 2.221, 2.231, 2.241, 2.51 to 2.53, .
            53.21.
67.11.......C.Z. Post. Guide 2.261......................................
67.12.......New.........................................................
67.13.......New.........................................................
67.14.......New.........................................................
67.31.......C.Z. Post. Guide 30.1, 30.2.................................
67.41.......C.Z. Post. Guide 30.31, 66.31...............................
67.42.......C.Z. Post. Guide 30.32......................................
67.43.......C.Z. Post. Guide 30.341.....................................
67.44.......C.Z. Post. Guide 30.342.....................................
67.45.......C.Z. Post. Guide 30.33, 30.331 to 30.334....................
67.46.......C.Z. Post. Guide 67.21, 67.22...............................
67.71.......C.Z. Post. Guide 39.11, 39.12...............................
67.72.......C.Z. Post. Guide 39.211.....................................
67.73.......C.Z. Post. Guide 39.212.....................................
67.91.......C.Z. Post. Guide 54.1.......................................
67.92.......C.Z. Post. Guide 54.2.......................................
67.93.......C.Z. Post. Guide 54.51, 54.52...............................
67.94.......C.Z. Post. Guide 54.61......................................
67.95.......C.Z. Post. Guide 54.62......................................
67.96.......C.Z. Post. Guide 54.71......................................
67.111......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.11, 55.111, 55.112......................
67.112......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.12......................................
67.113......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.13......................................
67.114......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.14......................................
67.115......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.15......................................
67.116......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.161.....................................

[[Page 232]]

67.117......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.17......................................
67.118......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.21......................................
67.119......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.31, to 55.35............................
67.120......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.41......................................
67.121......C.Z. Post. Guide 55.51......................................
67.131......C.Z. Post. Guide 56.11, 56.12, 56.21, 56.22, 56.32, 56.33, .
            56.41, 56.42, 56.421, 56.51 to 56.53, 56.61, 56.71, 56.81.
67.132......C.Z. Post. Guide 56.91......................................
67.141......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.11 to 57.15.............................
67.142......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.21 to 57.23.............................
67.143......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.3, 57.31, 57.32.........................
67.144......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.41......................................
67.145......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.51, 57.61...............................
67.146......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.71......................................
67.147......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.81, 57.82...............................
67.148......C.Z. Post. Guide 57.91......................................
67.161......C.Z. Post. Guide 58.12 to 58.16, 58.111, 58.112, 58.121, ...
            58.122, 58.161, 58.162.
67.162......C.Z. Post. Guide 58.163.....................................
67.163......C.Z. Post. Guide 58.21, 58.221 to 58.225, 58.231, 58.232, ..
            58.241, 58.251, 58.253.
67.181......C.Z. Post. Guide 59.11, 59.17...............................
67.182......C.Z. Post. Guide 59.21, 59.23 to 59.25, 59.241, 59.261, ....
            59.262.
67.183......C.Z. Post. Guide 59.31......................................
67.184......C.Z. Post. Guide 59.41 to 59.44.............................
67.201......C.Z. Post. Guide 60.11 to 60.15, 60.21......................
67.211......C.Z. Post. Guide 61.1 to 61.5...............................
67.221......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.11......................................
67.222......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.12......................................
67.223......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.21 to 63.23.............................
67.224......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.31 to 63.33.............................
67.225......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.41......................................
67.226......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.51......................................
67.227......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.52......................................
67.228......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.53......................................
67.229......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.61......................................
67.230......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.71......................................
67.241......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.151.....................................
67.242......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.152.....................................
67.243......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.153.....................................
67.244......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.154.....................................
67.245......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.155.....................................
67.261......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.141.....................................
67.262......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.142, 64.143.............................
67.263......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.144.....................................
67.272......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.131, 64.132.............................
67.273......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.133.....................................
67.274......C.Z. Post. Guide 64.134.....................................
67.281......C.Z. Post. Guide 65.11, 65.12, 65.121 to 65.124.............
67.282......C.Z. Post. Guide 65.21, 65.24...............................
67.311......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.81......................................
67.312......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.82......................................
67.313......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.83......................................
67.314......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.84......................................
67.315......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.85......................................
67.316......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.86......................................
67.317......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.87......................................
67.318......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.88......................................
67.331......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.91......................................
67.332......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.92......................................
67.333......C.Z. Post. Guide 63.93......................................
67.351......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.11, 12.12...............................

[[Page 233]]

67.352......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.21......................................
67.353......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.31......................................
67.354......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.41......................................
67.355......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.42......................................
67.356......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.431, 12.432.............................
67.357......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.51 to 12.56.............................
67.358......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.61 to 12.67.............................
67.359......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.71 to 12.73.............................
67.360......C.Z. Post. Guide 12.81, 12.82...............................
67.371......C.Z. Post. Guide 32.11......................................
67.372......C.Z. Post. Guide 32.21, 32.22...............................
67.373......C.Z. Post. Guide 32.31, 32.32, 32.35........................
67.381......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.11 to 35.18, 35.21......................
67.382......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.21 to 35.24.............................
67.383......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.31, 35.32...............................
67.384......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.41......................................
67.385......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.51......................................
67.386......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.52, 35.53...............................
67.387......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.54......................................
67.388......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.61......................................
67.389......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.71 to 35.73.............................
67.390......C.Z. Post. Guide 35.81......................................
67.401......C.Z. Post. Guide 42.11, 42.111 to 42.114....................
67.411......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.11, 66.21 to 66.23, 66.41...............
67.412......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.24......................................
67.413......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.25......................................
67.414......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.26......................................
67.415......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.27......................................
67.416......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.28......................................
67.417......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.511 to 66.516, 66.521, 66.522, 66.531, .
            66.541.
67.418......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.61......................................
67.419......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.71, 66.72...............................
67.420......C.Z. Post. Guide 66.81 to 66.84.............................
67.441......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.11, 69.112, 69.113......................
67.442......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.121 to 69.125...........................
67.443......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.13, 69.131 to 69.137....................
67.444......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.141 to 69.145...........................
67.451......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.21, 69.211, 69.212......................
67.452......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.212.....................................
67.461......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.31......................................
67.471......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.41, 69.411 to 69.414....................
67.472......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.51......................................
67.481......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.61......................................
67.491......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.11......................................
67.492......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.11......................................
67.493......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.121 to 72.122...........................
67.494......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.131 to 72.135...........................
67.495......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.141, 72.142.............................
67.496......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.151, 72.152.............................
67.497......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.16......................................
67.498......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.171 to 72.173...........................
67.499......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.18......................................
67.511......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.21......................................
67.512......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.21......................................
67.521......C.Z. Post. Guide 72.31......................................
67.531......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.31......................................
67.532......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.32......................................
67.533......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.33......................................
67.541......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.11......................................
67.542......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.12......................................
67.543......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.13......................................
67.551......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.21 to 73.24.............................
67.552......C.Z. Post. Guide 73.23......................................

[[Page 234]]

67.561......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.11, 71.21, 71.31, 71.33, 71.44..........
67.562......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.11......................................
67.563......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.41......................................
67.564......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.42......................................
67.565......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.43......................................
67.566......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.51......................................
67.567......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.52......................................
67.568......C.Z. Post. Guide 71.53......................................
67.591......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.1, 62.11, 62.12, 69.121.................
67.592......C.Z. Post. Guide 69.21, 69.22...............................
67.593......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.311.....................................
67.594......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.411, 62.421, 62.431, 62.441, 62.451.....
67.595......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.51 to 62.56.............................
67.596......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.61......................................
67.597......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.71......................................
67.598......C.Z. Post. Guide 62.81......................................
67.621......C.Z. Post. Guide 36.11......................................
67.622......C.Z. Post. Guide 36.12......................................
67.623......C.Z. Post. Guide 36.121.....................................
67.651......C.Z. Post. Guide 4.51.......................................
67.652......C.Z. Post. Guide 4.53.......................................
67.653......C.Z. Post. Guide 4.52.......................................
67.671......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 1.1....................................
67.672......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 1.2....................................
67.673......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 8.1....................................
67.681......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 2.25...................................
67.682......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 2.3, 2.31, 2.32........................
67.683......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 2.4, 2.41..............................
67.684......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 2.5, 2.51, 2.53........................
67.701......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 3.1, 3.11 to 3.15, 3.151, 3.16, 3.161, 
            3.2, 3.21, 3.3, 3.31, 3.312, 3.32, 3.321 to 3.323.
67.702......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 3.14, 3.4, 3.411.......................
67.703......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 3.5, 3.511, 3.521 to 3.523.............
67.704......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 3.6, 3.61, 3.62, 3.621.................
67.721......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 4.1, 4.111, 4.12, 4.121 to 4.125.......
67.722......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 4.2 to 4.294...........................
67.723......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 4.31, 4.311, 4.312, 4.32, 4.321, 4.322.
67.741......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 6.11...................................
67.742......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 6.21...................................
67.761......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 7.1, 7.11, 7.12, 7.121.................
67.762......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 7.21 to 7.24...........................
67.763......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 7.3, 7.31, 7.32........................
67.764......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 7.4, 7.41 to 7.43......................
67.765......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 7.5, 7.51, 7.52, 7.6, 7.61, 7.62.......
67.766......C.Z. M.O. Sys. Book. 7.71...................................
67.791......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 1.2..............................
67.792......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 1.3..............................
67.793......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 1.4..............................
67.794......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 1.5..............................
67.811......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 2.25.............................
67.812......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 2.31, 2.32.......................
67.813......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 2.41.............................
67.814......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 2.51, 2.52.......................
67.831......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.111 to 3.113, 3.121, 3.131, ...
            3.141.
67.832......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.211 to 3.213...................
67.833......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.31, 3.32, 3.331, 3.332.........
67.834......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.333............................
67.835......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.334............................
67.836......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.41 to 3.43, 3.421 to 3.423; 35 
            CFR (1960 Comp.) 17.1 to 17.3.
67.837......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.51, 3.511 to 3.518.............
67.838......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.521 to 3.527; C.Z. Post. Guide 
            75.13.

[[Page 235]]

67.839......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 3.6..............................
67.840......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 5; C.Z. Post. Guide 75.12........
67.841......C.Z. Post. Guide. 75.14.....................................
67.861......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 6.1..............................
67.852......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 6.2, 6.22, 6.23..................
67.863......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 6.24.............................
67.864......C.Z. Post. Sav. Sys. Book. 6.31.............................
69.1........E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 1...................
69.2........E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 2...................
69.3........E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 3...................
69.11.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 4...................
69.12.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 5...................
69.13.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 6...................
69.14.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.21.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.22.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.23.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.24.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.31.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.32.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.33.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.41.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.42.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.43.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.44.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.45.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.46.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.47.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.61.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.62.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.63.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 9...................
69.64.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.81.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.82.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.83.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.84.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.85.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.86.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 11..................
69.87.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 11..................
69.88.......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.111......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.112......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.113......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.114......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.115......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.116......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 12..................
69.117......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 9...................
69.141......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.142......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.143......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.144......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.161......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.162......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.163......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.171......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.172......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.173......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.174......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.175......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.176......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.177......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.178......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.179......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................
69.180......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 7...................

[[Page 236]]

69.181......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 8...................
69.182......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Secs. 7, 8...............
69.191......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 9...................
69.192......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 9...................
69.193......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 9...................
69.211......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 10..................
69.212......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 10..................
69.213......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 10..................
69.221......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 12..................
69.222......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 12..................
69.223......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 12..................
69.224......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 12..................
69.231......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 10..................
69.232......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 14..................
69.233......E.R. 53, Rev. No. 9, May 15, 1961, Sec. 13..................
69.301......35 CFR (1960) 24.1..........................................
69.302......35 CFR (1960) 24.2..........................................
69.303......35 CFR (1960) 24.3..........................................
69.304......35 CFR (1960) 24.4..........................................
69.305......35 CFR (1960) 24.5..........................................
69.306......35 CFR (1960) 24.6..........................................
69.307......35 CFR (1960) 24.7..........................................
69.308......35 CFR (1960) 24.8..........................................
69.309......35 CFR (1960) 24.9..........................................
69.310......35 CFR (1960) 24.10.........................................
69.311......35 CFR (1960) 24.11.........................................
69.312......35 CFR (1960) 24.12.........................................
69.313......35 CFR (1960) 24.13, 24.14..................................
69.314......35 CFR (1960) 24.14.........................................
101.1.......Nav. Reg. 19.4..............................................
101.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.12..........................................
101.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.13..........................................
101.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.14..........................................
101.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.15..........................................
101.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.16..........................................
101.7.......35 CFR (1960) 4.17..........................................
101.8.......35 CFR (1960) 4.18..........................................
101.9.......35 CFR (1960) 4.19..........................................
101.10......35 CFR (1960) 4.20..........................................
101.11......35 CFR (1960) 4.20a.........................................
101.12......35 CFR (1960) 4.20b.........................................
101.13......35 CFR (1960) 4.21..........................................
101.14......New.........................................................
103.1.......New.........................................................
103.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.2...........................................
103.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.302.........................................
103.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.3...........................................
103.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.4...........................................
103.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.5...........................................
103.7.......35 CFR (1960) 4.6...........................................
103.8.......35 CFR (1960) 4.7...........................................
103.9.......35 CFR (1960) 4.8...........................................
103.10......35 CFR (1960) 4.8a..........................................
103.11......35 CFR (1960) 4.8b..........................................
103.12......35 CFR (1960) 4.9...........................................
103.13......35 CFR (1960) 4.10..........................................
103.14......35 CFR (1960) 4.28..........................................
103.15......35 CFR (1960) 4.37..........................................
103.16......35 CFR (1960) 4.43b.........................................
103.17......35 CFR (1960) 4.44..........................................
103.18......35 CFR (1960) 4.44a.........................................
103.19......35 CFR (1960) 4.44b.........................................
103.20......35 CFR (1960) 4.45..........................................
103.21......35 CFR (1960) 4.139.........................................

[[Page 237]]

103.22......35 CFR (1960) 4.46..........................................
103.23......35 CFR (1960) 4.47..........................................
103.24......35 CFR (1960) 4.47a.........................................
103.25......35 CFR (1960) 4.156.........................................
103.26......35 CFR (1960) 4.10f.........................................
103.27......35 CFR (1960) 4.10a.........................................
103.28......35 CFR (1960) 4.10b.........................................
103.29......35 CFR (1960) 4.10c.........................................
103.30......35 CFR (1960) 4.10d.........................................
103.31......35 CFR (1960) 4.10e.........................................
103.32......New.........................................................
103.33......35 CFR (1960) 4.10g.........................................
103.34......35 CFR (1960) 4.10h.........................................
103.35......Nav. Reg. 19.4..............................................
103.36......Nav. Reg. 19.5..............................................
103.37......Nav. Reg. 19.6..............................................
103.38......Nav. Reg. 19.7..............................................
103.39......Nav. Reg. 19.12.............................................
103.40......Nav. Reg. 19.8..............................................
103.41......Nav. Reg. 19.10.............................................
103.42......New.........................................................
105.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.22..........................................
105.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.23..........................................
105.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.25..........................................
105.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.24..........................................
105.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.26..........................................
105.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.27..........................................
105.7.......New.........................................................
107.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.28..........................................
107.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.34..........................................
107.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.31..........................................
107.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.32..........................................
107.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.33..........................................
107.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.35..........................................
107.7.......New.........................................................
109.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.36..........................................
109.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.38..........................................
109.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.39..........................................
109.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.40..........................................
109.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.41..........................................
109.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.42..........................................
109.7.......35 CFR (1960) 4.43a.........................................
109.8.......New.........................................................
111.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.201.........................................
111.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.202.........................................
111.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.283.........................................
111.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.303.........................................
111.41......35 CFR (1960) 4.210.........................................
111.42......35 CFR (1960) 4.211.........................................
111.43......35 CFR (1960) 4.212.........................................
111.44......35 CFR (1960) 4.213.........................................
111.45......35 CFR (1960) 4.214.........................................
111.46......35 CFR (1960) 4.215.........................................
111.47......35 CFR (1960) 4.216.........................................
111.48......35 CFR (1960) 4.217.........................................
111.49......35 CFR (1960) 4.218.........................................
111.50......35 CFR (1960) 4.219.........................................
111.51......35 CFR (1960) 4.220.........................................
111.52......35 CFR (1960) 4.221.........................................
111.53......35 CFR (1960) 4.222.........................................
111.54......35 CFR (1960) 4.223.........................................
111.55......35 CFR (1960) 4.224.........................................
111.56......35 CFR (1960) 4.225.........................................
111.57......35 CFR (1960) 4.226.........................................

[[Page 238]]

111.58......35 CFR (1960) 4.227.........................................
111.59......35 CFR (1960) 4.228.........................................
111.60......35 CFR (1960) 4.229.........................................
111.61......35 CFR (1960) 4.230.........................................
111.62......35 CFR (1960) 4.231.........................................
111.63......35 CFR (1960) 4.232.........................................
111.64......35 CFR (1960) 4.233.........................................
111.65......35 CFR (1960) 4.234.........................................
111.101.....35 CFR (1960) 4.250.........................................
111.102.....35 CFR (1960) 4.251.........................................
111.103.....35 CFR (1960) 4.252.........................................
111.141.....35 CFR (1960) 4.260.........................................
111.142.....35 CFR (1960) 4.261.........................................
111.143.....35 CFR (1960) 4.262.........................................
111.144.....35 CFR (1960) 4.263.........................................
111.145.....35 CFR (1960) 4.264.........................................
111.146.....35 CFR (1960) 4.265.........................................
111.147.....35 CFR (1960) 4.266.........................................
111.148.....35 CFR (1960) 4.267.........................................
111.149.....35 CFR (1960) 4.268.........................................
111.150.....35 CFR (1960) 4.269.........................................
111.151.....35 CFR (1960) 4.270.........................................
111.152.....35 CFR (1960) 4.271.........................................
111.153.....35 CFR (1960) 4.272.........................................
111.154.....35 CFR (1960) 4.273.........................................
111.155.....35 CFR (1960) 4.274.........................................
111.156.....35 CFR (1960) 4.275.........................................
111.157.....35 CFR (1960) 4.276.........................................
111.158.....35 CFR (1960) 4.277.........................................
111.159.....35 CFR (1960) 4.278.........................................
111.160.....35 CFR (1960) 4.279.........................................
111.161.....35 CFR (1960) 4.280.........................................
111.162.....35 CFR (1960) 4.282.........................................
111.163.....35 CFR (1960) 4.306.........................................
111.201.....35 CFR (1960) 4.300.........................................
111.202.....35 CFR (1960) 4.301.........................................
111.203.....35 CFR (1960) 4.304.........................................
111.204.....35 CFR (1960) 4.305.........................................
111.205.....35 CFR (1960) 4.307.........................................
111.206.....35 CFR (1960) 4.308.........................................
111.221.....New.........................................................
113.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.106.........................................
113.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.107.........................................
113.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.108.........................................
113.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.109.........................................
113.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.110.........................................
113.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.111.........................................
113.7.......35 CFR (1960) 4.112.........................................
113.8.......35 CFR (1960) 4.113.........................................
113.9.......35 CFR (1960) 4.114.........................................
113.10......35 CFR (1960) 4.115.........................................
113.11......New.........................................................
113.41......35 CFR (1960) 4.115a........................................
113.42......35 CFR (1960) 4.115b........................................
113.43......35 CFR (1960) 4.115c........................................
113.44......35 CFR (1960) 4.115d........................................
113.45......35 CFR (1960) 4.115e........................................
113.46......35 CFR (1960) 4.115f........................................
113.47......35 CFR (1960) 4.115g........................................
113.48......35 CFR (1960) 4.115h........................................
113.49......35 CFR (1960) 4.115i........................................
113.50......35 CFR (1960) 4.115j........................................
113.51......35 CFR (1960) 4.115k........................................
113.52......35 CFR (1960) 4.115l........................................

[[Page 239]]

113.53......35 CFR (1960) 4.115m........................................
113.54......35 CFR (1960) 4.115n........................................
113.55......35 CFR (1960) 4.115o .......................................
113.91......35 CFR (1960) 4.116.........................................
113.92......35 CFR (1960) 4.116a........................................
113.93......35 CFR (1960) 4.116b........................................
113.94......35 CFR (1960) 4.116c........................................
113.95......35 CFR (1960) 4.116d........................................
113.96......35 CFR (1960) 4.117.........................................
113.97......35 CFR (1960) 4.117a........................................
113.98......35 CFR (1960) 4.117b........................................
113.99......35 CFR (1960) 4.117c........................................
113.100.....35 CFR (1960) 4.118.........................................
113.101.....35 CFR (1960) 4.118a........................................
113.102.....35 CFR (1960) 4.118b........................................
113.103.....35 CFR (1960) 4.118c........................................
113.104.....35 CFR (1960) 4.119.........................................
113.105.....35 CFR (1960) 4.119a........................................
113.106.....35 CFR (1960) 4.119b........................................
113.107.....35 CFR (1960) 4.119c........................................
113.108.....35 CFR (1960) 4.120.........................................
113.109.....35 CFR (1960) 4.120a........................................
113.110.....35 CFR (1960) 4.120b........................................
113.111.....35 CFR (1960) 4.120c........................................
113.112.....35 CFR (1960) 4.121.........................................
113.113.....35 CFR (1960) 4.121a........................................
113.114.....35 CFR (1960) 4.121b........................................
113.115.....35 CFR (1960) 4.121c........................................
113.116.....35 CFR (1960) 4.122.........................................
113.117.....35 CFR (1960) 4.122a........................................
113.118.....35 CFR (1960) 4.122b........................................
113.119.....35 CFR (1960) 4.123.........................................
113.120.....35 CFR (1960) 4.123a........................................
113.121.....35 CFR (1960) 4.123b........................................
113.122.....35 CFR (1960) 4.124.........................................
113.123.....35 CFR (1960) 4.124a........................................
113.124.....35 CFR (1960) 4.124b........................................
113.125.....35 CFR (1960) 4.125.........................................
113.126.....35 CFR (1960) 4.125a........................................
113.127.....35 CFR (1960) 4.126.........................................
113.161.....35 CFR (1960) 4.127.........................................
113.162.....35 CFR (1960) 4.128.........................................
113.163.....35 CFR (1960) 4.129.........................................
113.181.....New.........................................................
115.1.......35 CFR (1960) 12.1, 12.2a...................................
115.2.......35 CFR (1960) 12.2..........................................
115.3.......35 CFR (1960) 12.3..........................................
115.4.......35 CFR (1960) 12.4..........................................
115.5.......35 CFR (1960) 12.5..........................................
115.6.......Nav. Reg. 10.12 (E.O. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, rule 156).......
115.7.......35 CFR (1960) 12.10.........................................
117.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.133, 12.6...................................
117.2.......35 CFR (1960) 12.7..........................................
117.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.133, 12.8, 12.9.............................
117.4.......35 CFR (1960) 12.11.........................................
117.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.136.........................................
117.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.138.........................................
117.7.......New.........................................................
119.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.157.........................................
119.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.158.........................................
119.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.160.........................................
119.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.158.........................................
119.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.159.........................................
119.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.159.........................................

[[Page 240]]

119.7.......Nav. Reg. 10.17.............................................
119.8.......Nav. Reg. 10.19.............................................
119.9.......Nav. Reg. 10.20.............................................
119.10......Nav. Reg. 10.22.............................................
119.11......Nav. Reg. 10.23.............................................
119.12......Nav. Reg. 10.24.............................................
119.13......Nav. Reg. 10.21.............................................
119.14......Nav. Reg. 10.18.............................................
119.15......Nav. Reg. 10.24.............................................
119.16......Nav. Reg. 10.25.............................................
119.17......Nav. Reg. 10.26.............................................
119.18......Nav. Reg. 10.27.............................................
119.19......Nav. Reg. 10.70.............................................
119.20......Nav. Reg. 10.28.............................................
119.21......Nav. Reg. 10.29.............................................
119.22......Nav. Reg. 10.30.............................................
119.23......Nav. Reg. 10.31.............................................
119.24......Nav. Reg. 10.32.............................................
119.25......Nav. Reg. 10.33.............................................
119.26......Nav. Reg. 10.35.............................................
119.61......Nav. Reg. 10.39.............................................
119.62......Nav. Reg. 10.40.............................................
119.63......Nav. Reg. 10.41.............................................
119.64......Nav. Reg. 10.42.............................................
119.101.....Nav. Reg. 10.49.............................................
119.102.....Nav. Reg. 10.49a............................................
119.141.....Nav. Reg. 10.50.............................................
119.142.....Nav. Reg. 10.51.............................................
119.143.....Nav. Reg. 10.52.............................................
119.144.....Nav. Reg. 10.53.............................................
119.181.....Gov. Reg., June 30, 1960 (Nav. Reg. 10.53a).................
119.182.....Gov. Reg., June 30, 1960 (Nav. Reg. 1053b)..................
119.183.....Nav. Reg. 10.54.............................................
119.184.....Nav. Reg. 10.54a............................................
119.185.....Nav. Reg. 10.54b............................................
119.186.....Nav. Reg. 10.55.............................................
119.187.....New.........................................................
119.221.....Nav. Reg. 10.56.............................................
119.222.....Nav. Reg. 10.58.............................................
119.223.....Nav. Reg. 10.59.............................................
119.224.....Nav. Reg. 10.60.............................................
119.225.....Nav. Reg. 10.61.............................................
119.226.....Nav. Reg. 10.62.............................................
119.227.....Nav. Reg. 10.63.............................................
119.228.....Nav. Reg. 10.64.............................................
119.229.....Nav. Reg. 10.65.............................................
119.230.....Nav. Reg. 10.66.............................................
119.231.....Nav. Reg. 10.67.............................................
119.232.....Nav. Reg. 10.68.............................................
119.233.....Nav. Reg. 10.69.............................................
119.251.....New.........................................................
121.1.......Nav. Reg. 10.71.............................................
121.2.......Nav. Reg. 10.136............................................
121.3.......Nav. Reg. 10.146............................................
121.41......Nav. Reg. 10.142............................................
121.42......Nav. Reg. 10.143............................................
121.43......Nav. Reg. 10.144............................................
121.44......Nav. Reg. 10.72.............................................
121.45......Nav. Reg. 10.73.............................................
121.46......Nav. Reg. 10.72a............................................
121.47......Nav. Reg. 10.74.............................................
121.48......Nav. Reg. 10.75.............................................
121.49......Nav. Reg. 10.76.............................................
121.50......Nav. Reg. 10.77.............................................

[[Page 241]]

121.51......Nav. Reg. 10.78.............................................
121.52......Nav. Reg. 10.79.............................................
121.53......Nav. Reg. 10.80.............................................
121.54......Nav. Reg. 10.81.............................................
121.55......Nav. Reg. 10.82.............................................
121.56......Nav. Reg. 10.83.............................................
121.57......Nav. Reg. 10.84.............................................
121.58......Nav. Reg. 10.85.............................................
121.59......Nav. Reg. 10.86.............................................
121.60......Nav. Reg. 10.87.............................................
121.61......Nav. Reg. 10.88.............................................
121.62......Nav. Reg. 10.89.............................................
121.63......Nav. Reg. 10.90.............................................
121.64......Nav. Reg. 10.91, 10.92......................................
121.65......Nav. Reg. 10.93.............................................
121.66......Nav. Reg. 10.94.............................................
121.67......Nav. Reg. 10.95.............................................
121.68......Nav. Reg. 10.96.............................................
121.69......Nav. Reg. 10.97.............................................
121.70......Nav. Reg. 10.98.............................................
121.71......Nav. Reg. 10.99.............................................
121.72......Nav. Reg. 10.100............................................
121.73......Nav. Reg. 10.101............................................
121.74......Nav. Reg. 10.102............................................
121.75......Nav. Reg. 10.103............................................
121.76......Nav. Reg. 10.104............................................
121.77......Nav. Reg. 10.105............................................
121.78......Nav. Reg. 10.106............................................
121.79......Nav. Reg. 10.107............................................
121.80......Nav. Reg. 10.108............................................
121.81......Nav. Reg. 10.109............................................
121.82......Nav. Reg. 10.110............................................
121.83......Nav. Reg. 10.111............................................
121.84......Nav. Reg. 10.112............................................
121.85......Nav. Reg. 10.113............................................
121.86......Nav. Reg. 10.114............................................
121.87......Nav. Reg. 10.115............................................
121.88......Nav. Reg. 10.116............................................
121.89......Nav. Reg. 10.117............................................
121.90......Nav. Reg. 10.118............................................
121.91......Nav. Reg. 10.119............................................
121.92......Nav. Reg. 10.120............................................
121.93......Nav. Reg. 10.121............................................
121.94......Nav. Reg. 10.122............................................
121.95......Nav. Reg. 10.123............................................
121.96......Nav. Reg. 10.124............................................
121.97......Nav. Reg. 10.125............................................
121.98......Nav. Reg. 10.126............................................
121.99......Nav. Reg. 10.127............................................
121.100.....Nav. Reg. 10.128............................................
121.101.....Nav. Reg. 10.129............................................
121.102.....Nav. Reg. 10.130............................................
121.103.....Nav. Reg. 10.131............................................
121.104.....Nav. Reg. 10.132............................................
121.105.....Nav. Reg. 10.133............................................
121.106.....Nav. Reg. 10.134............................................
121.107.....Nav. Reg. 10.135............................................
121.108.....Nav. Reg. 10.145............................................
121.131.....Nav. Reg. 10.137............................................
121.132.....Nav. Reg. 10.138............................................
121.133.....Nav. Reg. 10.139............................................
121.134.....Nav. Reg. 10.140............................................
121.171.....New.........................................................
121.172.....Nav. Reg. 10.141............................................

[[Page 242]]

121.173.....New.........................................................
121.174.....New.........................................................
121.191.....New.........................................................
123.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.141a........................................
123.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.141h........................................
123.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.141c, 4.14.6................................
123.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.142.........................................
123.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.145.........................................
123.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.143, 4.144..................................
123.7.......New.........................................................
123.8.......35 CFR (1960) 4.149.........................................
123.9.......35 CFR (1960) 4.150.........................................
123.10......35 CFR (1960) 4.142a........................................
123.11......35 CFR (1960) 4.151.........................................
123.12......New.........................................................
125.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.152.........................................
125.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.153.........................................
125.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.154.........................................
125.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.155.........................................
125.5.......New.........................................................
127.1.......35 CFR (1960) 25.1..........................................
127.2.......35 CFR (1960) 25.3..........................................
127.3.......35 CFR (1960) 25.4..........................................
127.4.......35 CFR (1960) 25.5..........................................
127.5.......35 CFR (1960) 25.6..........................................
127.6.......35 CFR (1960) 25.7..........................................
127.7.......35 CFR (1960) 25.8..........................................
127.8.......35 CFR (1960) 25.9..........................................
127.9.......New.........................................................
129.1.......35 CFR (1960) 19.2..........................................
129.2.......35 CFR (1960) 19.5..........................................
129.3.......35 CFR (1960) 19.10.........................................
129.4.......35 CFR (1960) 19.12.........................................
129.5.......35 CFR (1960) 19.13.........................................
129.6.......35 CFR (1960) 19.16.........................................
129.41......35 CFR (1960) 19.20.........................................
129.42......35 CFR (1960) 19.22.........................................
129.43......35 CFR (1960) 19.24.........................................
129.81......35 CFR (1960) 19.26.........................................
129.82......35 CFR (1960) 19.28.........................................
129.121.....35 CFR (1960) 19.32.........................................
129.122.....35 CFR (1960) 19.34.........................................
129.161.....35 CFR (1960) 19.36.........................................
131.1.......35 CFR (1960) 4.162.........................................
131.2.......35 CFR (1960) 4.164.........................................
131.3.......35 CFR (1960) 4.165.........................................
131.4.......35 CFR (1960) 4.166.........................................
131.5.......35 CFR (1960) 4.167.........................................
131.6.......35 CFR (1960) 4.168.........................................
131.7.......35 CFR (1960) 4.169.........................................
131.8.......35 CFR (1960) 4.170.........................................
131.9.......35 CFR (1960) 4.171.........................................
131.10......35 CFR (1960) 4.172.........................................
131.11......35 CFR (1960) 4.173.........................................
131.12......35 CFR (1960) 4.174.........................................
131.13......35 CFR (1960) 4.176.........................................
133.1.......35 CFR (1960) 27.1..........................................
133.31......35 CFR (1960) 27.2; E.O. 4314, rule 14, Sept. 25, 1925......
133.32......35 CFR (1960) 27.3; E.O. 4314, rule 15, Sept. 25, 1925......
133.33......35 CFR (1960) 27.4..........................................
133.34......35 CFR (1960) 27.5; E.O. 4314, rule 16, Sept. 25, 1925......
133.35......35 CFR (1960) 27.6..........................................
133.36......35 CFR (1960) 27.7..........................................
133.37......35 CFR (1960) 27.8..........................................

[[Page 243]]

133.71......Nav. Reg. 11.10; Res. P.C. Co. Bd. of Dir., Oct. 9, 1954....
133.72......Nav. Reg. 11.11; Res. P.C. Co. Bd. of Dir., Oct. 9, 1954....
133.73......Nav. Reg. 11.12; Res. P.C. Co. Bd. of Dir., Oct. 9, 1954....
133.74......Nav. Reg. 11.13; Res. P.C. Co. Bd. of Dir., Oct. 9, 1954....
133.75......Nav. Reg. 11.14; Res. P.C. Co. Bd. of Dir., Oct. 9, 1954....
135.1.......35 CFR (1960) 27.17.........................................
135.2.......35 CFR (1960) 27.18.........................................
135.3.......35 CFR (1960) 27.19.........................................
135.41......35 CFR (1960) 27.20.........................................
135.42......35 CFR (1960) 27.21.........................................
135.61......35 CFR (1960) 27.22.........................................
135.62......35 CFR (1960) 27.23.........................................
135.63......35 CFR (1960) 27.24.........................................
135.81......35 CFR (1960) 27.25.........................................
135.82......35 CFR (1960) 27.26.........................................
135.83......35 CFR (1960) 27.27.........................................
135.84......35 CFR (1960) 27.28.........................................
135.85......35 CFR (1960) 27.29.........................................
135.86......35 CFR (1960) 27.30.........................................
135.87......35 CFR (1960) 27.31.........................................
135.88......35 CFR (1960) 27.32.........................................
135.111.....35 CFR (1960) 27.33.........................................
135.112.....35 CFR (1960) 27.34.........................................
135.141.....35 CFR (1960) 27.35.........................................
135.142.....35 CFR (1960) 27.36.........................................
135.171.....35 CFR (1960) 27.37.........................................
135.172.....35 CFR (1960) 27.38.........................................
135.173.....35 CFR (1960) 27.39.........................................
135.174.....35 CFR (1960) 27.40.........................................
135.175.....35 CFR (1960) 27.41.........................................
135.176.....35 CFR (1960) 27.42.........................................
135.177.....35 CFR (1960) 27.43.........................................
135.178.....35 CFR (1960) 27.44.........................................
135.179.....35 CFR (1960) 27.45.........................................
135.180.....35 CFR (1960) 27.46.........................................
135.181.....35 CFR (1960) 27.47.........................................
135.182.....35 CFR (1960) 27.48.........................................
135.211.....35 CFR (1960) 27.49.........................................
135.212.....35 CFR (1960) 27.50.........................................
135.213.....35 CFR (1960) 27.51.........................................
135.241.....35 CFR (1960) 27.52.........................................
135.271.....35 CFR (1960) 27.53.........................................
135.272.....35 CFR (1960) 27.54.........................................
135.273.....35 CFR (1960) 27.55.........................................
135.274.....35 CFR (1960) 27.56.........................................
135.275.....35 CFR (1960) 27.57.........................................
135.276.....35 CFR (1960) 27.58.........................................
135.277.....35 CFR (1960) 27.59.........................................
135.278.....35 CFR (1960) 27.60.........................................
135.279.....35 CFR (1960) 27.61.........................................
135.280.....35 CFR (1960) 27.62.........................................
135.281.....35 CFR (1960) 27.63.........................................
135.282.....35 CFR (1960) 27.64.........................................
135.283.....35 CFR (1960) 27.65.........................................
135.284.....35 CFR (1960) 27.66.........................................
135.285.....35 CFR (1960) 27.67.........................................
135.286.....35 CFR (1960) 27.68.........................................
135.287.....35 CFR (1960) 27.69.........................................

[[Page 244]]

135.321.....35 CFR (1960) 27.70.........................................
135.322.....35 CFR (1960) 27.71.........................................
135.323.....35 CFR (1960) 27.72.........................................
135.324.....35 CFR (1960) 27.73.........................................
135.325.....35 CFR (1960) 27.74.........................................
135.326.....35 CFR (1960) 27.75.........................................
135.327.....35 CFR (1960) 27.76.........................................
135.351.....35 CFR (1960) 27.77.........................................
135.352.....35 CFR (1960) 27.78.........................................
135.353.....35 CFR (1960) 27.79.........................................
135.354.....35 CFR (1960) 27.80.........................................
135.381.....35 CFR (1960) 27.81.........................................
135.382.....35 CFR (1960) 27.82.........................................
135.383.....35 CFR (1960) 27.83.........................................
135.411.....35 CFR (1960) 27.84.........................................
135.412.....35 CFR (1960) 27.85.........................................
135.441.....35 CFR (1960) 27.86.........................................
135.442.....35 CFR (1960) 27.87.........................................
135.443.....35 CFR (1960) 27.88.........................................
135.481.....35 CFR (1960) 27.89.........................................
135.482.....35 CFR (1960) 27.90.........................................
135.483.....35 CFR (1960) 27.91.........................................
135.484.....35 CFR (1960) 27.92.........................................
135.485.....35 CFR (1960) 27.93.........................................
135.486.....35 CFR (1960) 27.94.........................................
135.511.....35 CFR (1960) 27.95.........................................
201.1.......E.O. 7676, Sec. 1, Sept. 26, 1937...........................
201.2.......E.O. 7676, Secs. 2, 3, July 26, 1937........................
201.3.......E.O. 7676, Sec. 8, July 26, 1937............................
201.4.......E.O. 7676, Sec. 10, July 26, 1937...........................
201.5.......E.O. 7676, Secs. 11, 12, July 26, 1937......................
201.6.......E.O. 7676, Sec. 12a, as added E.O. 8962, Sec. 2, Dec. 6, ...
            1941.
251.1.......E.O.11171, Sec. 1, Aug. 18, 1964............................
251.2.......E.O.11171, Sec. 2, Aug. 18, 1964............................
251.21......E.O.11171, Sec. 3, Aug. 18, 1964............................
251.22......E.O.11171, Sec. 3, Aug. 18, 1964............................
251.23......E.O.11171, Sec. 3, Aug. 18, 1964............................
251.41......E.O.11171, Sec. 4, Aug. 18, 1964............................
251.42......E.O.11171, Sec. 4, Aug. 18, 1964............................
253.1.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.1.........................................
253.2.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.2.........................................
253.3.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.3.........................................
253.4.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.4.........................................
253.5.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.5.........................................
253.6.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.6.........................................
253.7.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.7.........................................
253.8.......5 CFR (1964) 1201.100.<SUP>1................................
</SUP>253.315 CFR (1964) 1202.1.........................................
253.32......5 CFR (1964) 1202.2.........................................
253.33......5 CFR (1964) 1202.3.........................................
253.34......5 CFR (1964) 1202.4.........................................
253.35......5 CFR (1964) 1202.5.........................................
253.36......5 CFR (1964) 1202.6.........................................
253.37......5 CFR (1964) 1202.7.........................................
253.38......5 CFR (1964) 1202.8.........................................
253.39......5 CFR (1964) 1202.9.........................................
253.40......5 CFR (1964) 1202.10........................................
253.41......5 CFR (1964) 1202.11........................................
253.42......5 CFR (1964) 1202.12........................................
253.43......5 CFR (1964) 1202.13........................................
253.44......5 CFR (1964) 1202.14.<SUP>2.................................
</SUP>253.455 CFR (1964) 1202.15.<SUP>3.................................
</SUP>253.465 CFR (1964) 1202.16........................................
253.71......5 CFR (1964) 1203.1.........................................

[[Page 245]]

253.72......New.........................................................
253.73......New.........................................................
253.74......5 CFR (1964) 1203.4.........................................
253.75......New.........................................................
253.101.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.1.........................................
253.102.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.2.........................................
253.111.....New.........................................................
253.112.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.4.........................................
253.113.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.5.........................................
253.114.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.7.........................................
253.131.....New.........................................................
253.132.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.9.........................................
253.133.....New.........................................................
253.134.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.11........................................
253.135.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.12.<SUP>4.................................
</SUP>253.155 CFR (1964) 1204.13........................................
253.152.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.14........................................
253.153.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.15........................................
253.154.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.16........................................
253.155.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.17........................................
253.156.....5 CFR (1964) 1204.18........................................
253.181.....New.........................................................
253.201.....5 CFR (1964) 1206.1.........................................
253.221.....5 CFR (1964) 1207.1.........................................
253.241.....5 CFR (1964) 1208.1.........................................
253.242.....5 CFR (1964) 1208.2.........................................
253.261.....5 CFR (1964) 1209.1.........................................
253.262.....New.........................................................
253.263.....5 CFR (1964) 1209.3.........................................
253.264.....5 CFR (1964) 1209.4.........................................
253.265.....5 CFR (1964) 1209.5.........................................
253.266.....5 CFR (1964) 1209.5.........................................
253.267.....5 CFR (1964) 1209.5.........................................
253.291.....5 CFR (1964) 1210.1.........................................
253.292.....5 CFR (1964) 1210.2.........................................
________________________________________________________________________

  <SUP>1</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14007, Nov. 5, 1965.
  <SUP>2</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14007, Nov. 5, 1965.
  <SUP>3</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14007, Nov. 5, 1965.
  <SUP>4</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14965, Dec. 3, 1965.
                  Table 2--CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS
  Showing where sections of Title 5, CFR, and Title 35, CFR, 1960, 
including the supplements thereto, have been carried into this revision 
of 35 CFR.
________________________________________________________________________

                              5 CFRRevised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

    Sec.    Sec.
1201.1......253.1.......................................................
1201.2......253.2.......................................................
1201.3......253.3.......................................................
1201.4......253.4.......................................................
1201.5......253.5.......................................................
1201.6......253.6.......................................................
1201.7......253.7.......................................................
1201.100 <SU</SUP>253.8.................................................
1202.1......253.31......................................................
1202.2......253.32......................................................

[[Page 246]]

1202.3......253.33......................................................
1202.4......253.34......................................................
1202.5......253.35......................................................
1202.6......253.36......................................................
1202.7......253.37......................................................
1202.8......253.38......................................................
1202.9......253.39......................................................
1202.10.....253.40......................................................
1202.11.....253.41......................................................
1202.12.....253.42......................................................
1202.13.....253.43......................................................
1202.14 <SUP</SUP>253.44................................................
1202.15 <SUP</SUP>253.45................................................
1202.16.....253.46......................................................
1203.1......253.71......................................................
1203.2......253.72......................................................
1203.3......253.73......................................................
1203.4......253.74......................................................
1203.5......253.75......................................................
1204.1......253.101.....................................................
1204.2......253.104.....................................................
1204.3......253.111.....................................................
1204.4......253.112.....................................................
1204.5......253.113.....................................................
1204.7......253.114.....................................................
1204.8......253.131.....................................................
1204.9......253.132.....................................................
1204.10.....253.133.....................................................
1204.11.....253.134.....................................................
1204.12 <SUP</SUP>253.135...............................................
1204.13.....253.151.....................................................
1204.14.....253.152.....................................................
1204.15.....253.153.....................................................
1204.16.....253.154.....................................................
1204.17.....253.155.....................................................
1204.18.....253.156.....................................................
1205.1......253.181.....................................................
1206.1......253.201.....................................................
1207.1......253.221.....................................................
1208.1......253.241.....................................................
1208.2......253.242.....................................................
1209.1......253.261.....................................................
1209.2......253.262.....................................................
1209.3......253.262.....................................................
1209.4......253.264.....................................................
1209.5......253.265 to 235.267..........................................
1210.1......253.291.....................................................
1210.2......253.292.....................................................
________________________________________________________________________

  <SUP>1</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14007, Nov. 5, 1965.
  <SUP>2</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14007, Nov. 5, 1965.
  <SUP>3</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14007, Nov. 5, 1965.
  <SUP>4</SUP> As last amended at 30 F.R. 14965, Dec. 3, 1965.
________________________________________________________________________

                              35 CFRevised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

    Sec.    Sec.
1.1.........1.1.........................................................
1.2.........1.2.........................................................
1.3.........3.22........................................................
1.4.........See Table 12................................................
4.1.........101.14, 103.42, 105.7, 107.7, 109.8, 113.181, 117.7, .......
            119.251, 123.12, 125.5.

[[Page 247]]

4.2.........103.2.......................................................
4.3.........103.4.......................................................
4.4.........103.5.......................................................
4.5.........103.6.......................................................
4.6.........103.7.......................................................
4.7.........103.8.......................................................
4.8.........103.9.......................................................
4.8a........103.10......................................................
4.8b........103.11......................................................
4.9.........103.12......................................................
4.10........103.13......................................................
4.10a.......103.27......................................................
4.10b.......103.28......................................................
4.10c.......103.29......................................................
4.10d.......103.30......................................................
4.10e.......103.31......................................................
4.10f.......103.26......................................................
4.10g.......103.33......................................................
4.10h.......103.34......................................................
4.11........See 3.1 et seq..............................................
4.12........101.2.......................................................
4.13........101.3.......................................................
4.14........101.4.......................................................
4.15........101.5.......................................................
4.16........101.6.......................................................
4.17........101.7.......................................................
4.18........101.8.......................................................
4.19........101.9.......................................................
4.20........101.10......................................................
4.20a.......101.11......................................................
4.20b.......101.12......................................................
4.21........101.13......................................................
4.21a.......59.86.......................................................
4.22........105.1.......................................................
4.23........105.2.......................................................
4.24........105.4.......................................................
4.25........105.3.......................................................
4.26........105.5.......................................................
4.27........105.6.......................................................
4.28........103.14, 107.1...............................................
4.30a.......59.83, 59.84................................................
4.30b.......59.85.......................................................
4.31........107.3.......................................................
4.32........107.4.......................................................
4.33........107.5.......................................................
4.34........107.2.......................................................
4.35........107.6.......................................................
4.36........109.1.......................................................
4.37........103.15......................................................
4.38........109.2.......................................................
4.39........109.3.......................................................
4.40........109.4.......................................................
4.41........109.5.......................................................
4.42........109.6.......................................................
4.43a.......109.7.......................................................
4.43b.......109.16......................................................
4.44........109.17......................................................
4.44a.......109.18......................................................
4.44b.......109.19......................................................
4.45........109.20......................................................
4.46........109.22......................................................
4.47........109.23......................................................
4.47a.......109.24......................................................
4.406.......113.1.......................................................

[[Page 248]]

4.107.......113.2.......................................................
4.108.......113.3.......................................................
4.109.......113.4.......................................................
4.110.......113.5.......................................................
4.111.......113.6.......................................................
4.112.......113.7.......................................................
4.113.......113.8.......................................................
4.114.......113.9.......................................................
4.115.......113.10......................................................
4.115a......113.41......................................................
4.115b......113.42......................................................
4.115c......113.43......................................................
4.115d......113.44......................................................
4.115e......113.45......................................................
4.115f......113.46......................................................
4.115g......113.47......................................................
4.115h......113.48......................................................
4.115i......113.49......................................................
4.115j......113.50......................................................
4.115k......113.51......................................................
4.115l......113.52......................................................
4.115m......113.53......................................................
4.115n......113.54......................................................
4.115o......113.55......................................................
4.116.......113.91......................................................
4.116a......113.92......................................................
4.116b......113.93......................................................
4.116c......113.94......................................................
4.116d......113.95......................................................
4.117.......113.96......................................................
4.117a......113.97......................................................
4.117b......113.98......................................................
4.117c......113.99......................................................
4.118.......113.100.....................................................
4.118a......113.101.....................................................
4.118b......113.102.....................................................
4.118c......113.103.....................................................
4.119.......113.104.....................................................
4.119a......113.105.....................................................
4.119b......113.106.....................................................
4.119c......113.107.....................................................
4.120.......113.108.....................................................
4.120a......113.109.....................................................
4.120b......113.110.....................................................
4.120c......113.111.....................................................
4.121.......113.112.....................................................
4.121a......113.113.....................................................
4.121b......113.114.....................................................
4.121c......113.115.....................................................
4.122.......113.116.....................................................
4.122a......113.117.....................................................
4.122b......113.118.....................................................
4.123.......113.119.....................................................
4.123a......113.120.....................................................
4.123b......113.121.....................................................
4.124.......113.122.....................................................
4.124a......113.123.....................................................
4.124b......113.124.....................................................
4.125.......113.125.....................................................
4.125a......113.126.....................................................
4.126.......113.127.....................................................
4.127.......113.161.....................................................
4.128.......113.162.....................................................
4.129.......113.163.....................................................

[[Page 249]]

4.133.......117., 117.3.................................................
4.136.......117.5.......................................................
4.136a......Omitted. See Sec. 113.104(c)................................
4.137.......Omitted. See 6 C.Z.C. Secs. 1184, 1591......................
4.138.......117.6.......................................................
4.139.......103.21......................................................
4.140.......Omitted.....................................................
4.141a......123.1.......................................................
4.141b......123.2.......................................................
4.141c......123.3.......................................................
4.142.......123.4.......................................................
4.142a......123.10......................................................
4.143.......123.6.......................................................
4.144.......123.6.......................................................
4.145.......123.5.......................................................
4.146.......123.3.......................................................
4.148.......123.7.......................................................
4.149.......123.8.......................................................
4.150.......123.9.......................................................
4.151.......123.11......................................................
4.152.......125.1.......................................................
4.153.......125.2.......................................................
4.154.......125.3.......................................................
4.155.......125.4.......................................................
4.156.......103.25......................................................
4.157.......119.1.......................................................
4.158.......119.2, 119.4................................................
4.159.......119.5, 119.6................................................
4.160.......119.3.......................................................
4.161.......Omitted.....................................................
4.162.......131.1.......................................................
4.163.......131.1.......................................................
4.164.......131.2.......................................................
4.165.......131.3.......................................................
4.166.......131.4.......................................................
4.167.......131.5.......................................................
4.168.......131.6.......................................................
4.169.......131.7.......................................................
4.170.......131.8.......................................................
4.171.......131.9.......................................................
4.172.......131.10......................................................
4.173.......131.11......................................................
4.174.......131.12......................................................
4.175.......See Table 12................................................
4.176.......131.13......................................................
4.201.......111.1.......................................................
4.202.......111.2.......................................................
4.210.......111.41......................................................
4.211.......111.42......................................................
4.212.......111.43......................................................
4.213.......111.44......................................................
4.214.......111.45......................................................
4.215.......111.46......................................................
4.216.......111.47......................................................
4.217.......111.48......................................................
4.218.......111.49......................................................
4.219.......111.50......................................................
4.220.......111.51......................................................
4.221.......111.52......................................................
4.222.......111.53......................................................
4.223.......111.54......................................................
4.224.......111.55......................................................
4.225.......111.56......................................................
4.226.......111.57......................................................

[[Page 250]]

4.227.......111.58......................................................
4.228.......111.59......................................................
4.229.......111.60......................................................
4.230.......111.61......................................................
4.231.......111.62......................................................
4.232.......111.63......................................................
4.233.......111.64......................................................
4.234.......111.65......................................................
4.250.......111.101.....................................................
4.251.......111.102.....................................................
4.252.......111.103.....................................................
4.260.......111.141.....................................................
4.261.......111.142.....................................................
4.262.......111.143.....................................................
4.263.......111.144.....................................................
4.264.......111.145.....................................................
4.265.......111.146.....................................................
4.266.......111.147.....................................................
4.267.......111.148.....................................................
4.268.......111.149.....................................................
4.269.......111.150.....................................................
4.270.......111.151.....................................................
4.271.......111.152.....................................................
4.272.......111.153.....................................................
4.273.......111.154.....................................................
4.274.......111.155.....................................................
4.275.......111.156.....................................................
4.276.......111.157.....................................................
4.277.......111.158.....................................................
4.278.......111.159.....................................................
4.279.......111.160.....................................................
4.280.......111.161.....................................................
4.281.......Omitted.....................................................
4.282.......111.162.....................................................
4.283.......111.3.......................................................
4.300.......111.201.....................................................
4.301.......111.202.....................................................
4.302.......103.3.......................................................
4.303.......111.4.......................................................
4.304.......111.203.....................................................
4.305.......111.204.....................................................
4.306.......111.163.....................................................
4.307.......111.205.....................................................
4.308.......111.206.....................................................
5.1.........51.1........................................................
5.2.........51.2........................................................
5.3.........51.3........................................................
5.11........51.21.......................................................
5.12........51.22.......................................................
5.21........51.31.......................................................
5.22........51.32.......................................................
5.23........51.33.......................................................
5.31........51.41.......................................................
5.32........51.42.......................................................
5.33........51.43.......................................................
5.34........51.44.......................................................
5.35........51.45.......................................................
5.36........51.46.......................................................
5.37........51.47.......................................................
5.41........51.61.......................................................
5.42........51.62.......................................................
5.51........51.71.......................................................
5.61........51.81.......................................................
5.101.......51.121......................................................

[[Page 251]]

5.102.......51.122......................................................
5.103.......51.123......................................................
5.104.......51.124......................................................
6.1.........53.1........................................................
6.2.........53.2........................................................
6.3.........53.3........................................................
6.4.........53.4........................................................
6.5.........53.5........................................................
6.6.........53.6........................................................
6.7.........53.7........................................................
6.8.........53.8........................................................
6.9.........53.9........................................................
6.10........53.10.......................................................
6.11........53.11.......................................................
9.1.........57.1........................................................
9.2.........57.2........................................................
9.3.........57.3........................................................
9.4.........57.4........................................................
9.5.........57.5........................................................
9.6.........57.6........................................................
9.7.........57.8........................................................
9.8.........57.14.......................................................
9.10........Omitted.....................................................
9.11........57.7........................................................
9.12........57.15.......................................................
9.14........57.10.......................................................
9.15........57.11.......................................................
9.16........57.12.......................................................
9.17........57.13.......................................................
9.18........57.18.......................................................
10.1........59.1........................................................
10.2........59.2........................................................
10.3........59.21 to 59.23, 59.28.......................................
10.4........59.21, 59.24, 59.25.........................................
10.5........59.26.......................................................
10.6........59.27.......................................................
10.7........59.51.......................................................
10.8........59.52.......................................................
10.9........59.53, 59.54................................................
10.10.......59.56.......................................................
10.11.......59.57.......................................................
10.12.......59.51.......................................................
10.13.......59.52.......................................................
10.14.......59.53.......................................................
10.15.......59.54.......................................................
10.16.......59.54.......................................................
10.17.......59.55.......................................................
10.18.......59.59.......................................................
10.19.......59.60.......................................................
10.20.......59.61.......................................................
10.21.......59.62.......................................................
10.22.......59.81.......................................................
10.23.......59.82.......................................................
10.24.......59.87.......................................................
10.25.......59.58.......................................................
10.26.......59.88.......................................................
10.27.......59.131......................................................
10.28.......59.131......................................................
10.29.......59.132......................................................
10.30.......59.132......................................................
10.31.......59.133......................................................
10.32.......59.134......................................................
10.33.......59.134......................................................
10.34.......59.111......................................................

[[Page 252]]

10.35.......59.111......................................................
10.35a......59.112......................................................
10.36.......59.113......................................................
10.37.......59.114......................................................
10.38.......59.4........................................................
10.39.......59.3........................................................
10.40.......59.135......................................................
12.1........115.1.......................................................
12.2........115.2.......................................................
12.2a.......115.1.......................................................
12.3........115.3.......................................................
12.4........115.4.......................................................
12.5........115.5.......................................................
12.6........117.1.......................................................
12.7........117.2.......................................................
12.8........117.3.......................................................
12.9........117.3.......................................................
12.10.......115.7.......................................................
12.11.......117.4.......................................................
16.1........65.1........................................................
16.2........65.2........................................................
16.3........65.3........................................................
16.4........65.4........................................................
16.5........65.5........................................................
16.6........65.6........................................................
16.7........65.7........................................................
16.11.......65.51.......................................................
16.12.......65.61.......................................................
16.13.......65.62.......................................................
16.14.......65.63.......................................................
16.15.......65.71.......................................................
16.16.......65.72.......................................................
16.17.......65.81, 65.82................................................
16.18.......65.101......................................................
16.19.......65.102......................................................
16.20.......65.113......................................................
16.21.......Omitted. See 65.7...........................................
17.1........67.836......................................................
17.2........67.836......................................................
17.3........67.836......................................................
17.4........Omitted as executed.........................................
19.1........Omitted. See 1.1............................................
19.2........129.1.......................................................
19.5........129.2.......................................................
19.10.......129.3.......................................................
19.12.......129.4.......................................................
19.13.......129.5.......................................................
19.16.......129.6.......................................................
19.20.......129.41......................................................
19.22.......129.42......................................................
19.24.......120.43......................................................
19.26.......129.81......................................................
19.28.......129.82......................................................
19.32.......129.121.....................................................
19.34.......129.122.....................................................
19.36.......129.161.....................................................
21.1........5.1.........................................................
21.3........5.21 to 5.31, 5.61, 5.62, 5.81 to 5.83......................
21.4........5.41 to 5.49, 5.81 to 5.83..................................
21.5........5.2.........................................................
24.1........69.301......................................................
24.2........69.302......................................................
24.3........69.303......................................................
24.4........69.304......................................................

[[Page 253]]

24.5........69.305......................................................
24.6........69.306......................................................
24.7........69.307......................................................
24.8........69.308......................................................
24.9........69.309......................................................
24.10.......69.310......................................................
24.11.......69.311......................................................
24.12.......69.312......................................................
24.13.......69.313......................................................
24.14.......69.313......................................................
24.37.......61.121......................................................
24.38.......61.122......................................................
24.39.......61.123......................................................
24.40.......61.124......................................................
24.41.......61.125......................................................
24.42.......61.126......................................................
24.43.......61.127......................................................
24.44.......61.128......................................................
24.45.......61.129......................................................
24.46.......61.130......................................................
24.47.......61.131......................................................
24.48.......61.141......................................................
24.49.......61.142......................................................
24.50.......61.151......................................................
24.51.......61.152......................................................
24.52.......61.153......................................................
24.53.......61.154......................................................
24.54.......61.155......................................................
24.54a......61.156......................................................
24.55.......61.157......................................................
24.55a......61.158......................................................
24.56.......61.171......................................................
24.57.......61.172......................................................
24.58.......61.173......................................................
24.59.......61.174......................................................
24.60.......61.191......................................................
24.61.......61.192......................................................
24.62.......61.193......................................................
24.63.......61.194......................................................
24.64.......61.195......................................................
24.65.......61.196......................................................
24.66.......61.197......................................................
24.67.......61.198......................................................
24.68.......61.199......................................................
24.69.......61.200......................................................
24.70.......61.201......................................................
24.71.......61.202......................................................
24.72.......61.203......................................................
24.73.......61.204......................................................
24.74.......61.205......................................................
24.75.......61.206......................................................
24.76.......61.221......................................................
24.77.......61.222......................................................
24.78.......61.223......................................................
24.79.......61.224......................................................
24.80.......61.225......................................................
24.81.......61.226......................................................
24.82.......61.227......................................................
24.83.......61.228......................................................
24.84.......61.229......................................................
24.85.......61.230......................................................
24.86.......61.231......................................................
24.87.......61.241......................................................
24.88.......61.242......................................................

[[Page 254]]

24.89.......61.243......................................................
24.90.......61.244......................................................
24.91.......61.245......................................................
24.92.......61.246......................................................
24.93.......61.247......................................................
24.93a......61.248......................................................
24.94.......61.261......................................................
24.95.......61.262......................................................
24.96.......61.263......................................................
24.97.......61.264......................................................
24.98.......61.265......................................................
24.99.......61.266......................................................
24.100......61.281......................................................
24.100a.....61.282......................................................
24.100b.....61.283......................................................
24.100c.....61.284......................................................
24.100d.....61.285......................................................
24.100e.....61.286......................................................
24.100f.....61.287......................................................
24.101......61.288......................................................
24.101a.....61.289......................................................
24.101b.....61.290......................................................
24.101c.....61.291......................................................
24.101d.....61.292......................................................
24.101e.....61.293......................................................
24.101f.....61.294......................................................
24.101g.....61.295......................................................
24.101h.....61.296......................................................
24.101i.....61.297......................................................
24.101j.....61.298......................................................
24.101k.....61.299......................................................
24.101l.....61.300......................................................
24.102......61.301......................................................
24.103......61.302......................................................
24.150......61.1 to 61.5................................................
24.160......61.31 to 61.33..............................................
24.161......61.34, 61.35................................................
24.162......61.37.......................................................
24.163......61.39.......................................................
24.170......61.61.......................................................
24.171......61.62.......................................................
24.172......61.63.......................................................
24.173......61.64.......................................................
24.174......61.65.......................................................
24.175......61.66.......................................................
24.176......61.67.......................................................
24.177......61.68.......................................................
24.178......61.69.......................................................
24.179......61.70.......................................................
24.190......61.91.......................................................
24.191......61.92.......................................................
24.192......61.93.......................................................
24.193......61.94.......................................................
24.194......61.95.......................................................
24.195......61.96.......................................................
24.196......Omitted as executed and obsolete............................
24.200......61.311......................................................
24.201......61.312......................................................
24.202......61.313......................................................
24.203......61.314......................................................
24.204......61.315......................................................
24.205......61.316......................................................
24.206......61.317......................................................
24.207......61.318......................................................

[[Page 255]]

24.208......61.319......................................................
25.1........127.1.......................................................
25.3........127.2.......................................................
25.4........127.3.......................................................
25.5........127.4.......................................................
25.6........127.5.......................................................
25.7........127.6.......................................................
25.8........127.7.......................................................
25.9........127.8.......................................................
26.1........63.1........................................................
26.2........63.2........................................................
26.3........63.3........................................................
26.4........63.4........................................................
26.5........63.5........................................................
26.6........63.6........................................................
26.7........63.7........................................................
26.8........63.8........................................................
26.9........63.9........................................................
26.10.......63.10.......................................................
26.11.......63.10.......................................................
26.12.......63.11.......................................................
26.13.......63.12.......................................................
26.14.......63.13.......................................................
27.1........133.1.......................................................
27.2........133.31......................................................
27.3........133.32......................................................
27.4........133.33......................................................
27.5........133.34......................................................
27.6........133.35......................................................
27.7........133.36......................................................
27.8........133.37......................................................
27.17.......135.1.......................................................
27.18.......135.2.......................................................
27.19.......135.3.......................................................
27.20.......135.41......................................................
27.21.......135.42......................................................
27.22.......135.61......................................................
27.23.......135.62......................................................
27.24.......135.63......................................................
27.25.......135.81......................................................
27.26.......135.82......................................................
27.27.......135.83......................................................
27.28.......135.84......................................................
27.29.......135.85......................................................
27.30.......135.86......................................................
27.31.......135.87......................................................
27.32.......135.88......................................................
27.33.......135.111.....................................................
27.34.......135.112.....................................................
27.35.......135.141.....................................................
27.36.......135.142.....................................................
27.37.......135.171.....................................................
27.38.......135.172.....................................................
27.39.......135.173.....................................................
27.40.......135.174.....................................................
27.41.......135.175.....................................................
27.42.......135.176.....................................................
27.43.......135.177.....................................................
27.44.......135.178.....................................................
27.45.......135.179.....................................................
27.46.......135.180.....................................................
27.47.......135.181.....................................................
27.48.......135.182.....................................................
27.49.......135.211.....................................................

[[Page 256]]

27.50.......135.212.....................................................
27.51.......135.213.....................................................
27.52.......135.241.....................................................
27.53.......135.271.....................................................
27.54.......135.272.....................................................
27.55.......135.273.....................................................
27.56.......135.274.....................................................
27.57.......135.275.....................................................
27.58.......135.276.....................................................
27.59.......135.277.....................................................
27.60.......135.278.....................................................
27.61.......135.279.....................................................
27.62.......135.280.....................................................
27.63.......135.281.....................................................
27.64.......135.282.....................................................
27.65.......135.283.....................................................
27.66.......135.284.....................................................
27.67.......135.285.....................................................
27.68.......135.286.....................................................
27.69.......135.287.....................................................
27.70.......135.321.....................................................
27.71.......135.322.....................................................
27.72.......135.323.....................................................
27.73.......135.324.....................................................
27.74.......135.325.....................................................
27.75.......135.326.....................................................
27.76.......135.327.....................................................
27.77.......135.351.....................................................
27.78.......135.352.....................................................
27.79.......135.353.....................................................
27.80.......135.354.....................................................
27.81.......135.381.....................................................
27.82.......135.382.....................................................
27.83.......135.383.....................................................
27.84.......135.411.....................................................
27.85.......135.412.....................................................
27.86.......135.441.....................................................
27.87.......135.442.....................................................
27.88.......135.443.....................................................
27.89.......135.481.....................................................
27.90.......135.482.....................................................
27.91.......135.483.....................................................
27.92.......135.484.....................................................
27.93.......135.485.....................................................
27.94.......135.486.....................................................
27.95.......135.511.....................................................
________________________________________________________________________

                        Table 3--EXECUTIVE ORDERS
  Showing where executive orders of the President of the United States, 
not previously codified in CFR, have been carried into, or codified in, 
this revision of 35 CFR. Except as otherwise noted, the orders, as such, 
were repealed by one or another of the documents promulgating the 
regulations set out in this revision.

________________________________________________________________________


[[Page 257]]


                             Exec. Ord. DRevised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

2825........Mar. 25,....5.31............................................

3130........July 25,....5.21............................................

3352........Nov. 6, ....5.31............................................

4314, rule 1Sept. 25....115.6...........................................

5185........Sept. 6,....5.43............................................

7676........July 26,<SUP201.1.P> 1......................................

7676........July 26,<SUP1.3, 201.2. 3...................................

7676........July 26,<SUP1.4.SUP> 4......................................

7676........July 26,<SUP201.3.P> 8......................................

7676........July 26,10..201.4...........................................

7676........July 26,11, 201.5...........................................

7676................<SUP201.6.P> 12a....................................

7979........Sept. 26....5.22............................................

8515 <SUP>6.</SUP>Au....5.2.............................................

8962, Sec. 2Dec. 6, ....201.6...........................................

9434........Apr. 8, ....5.46............................................

9746................1...3.2.............................................

9746........July 1, 2...3.21............................................

9746........July 1, 3...3.1.............................................

9746........July 1, 4...3.1.............................................

9746................6...3.3.............................................

10595.......Feb. 7, ....3.1 to 3.3, 3.21................................

11171 <SUP>7</SUP>Au1-4.Part 251........................................

________________________________________________________________________


  <SUP>1</SUP> But this section not repealed.
  <SUP>2</SUP> But sections 2 and 3 not repealed.
  <SUP>3</SUP> But this section and sections 5-7 of this order not 
repealed.
  <SUP>4</SUP> But this section and section 9 of this order not 
repealed.
  <SUP>5</SUP> As added by E.O. No. 8962, Sec. 2, Dec. 6, 1941.
  <SUP>6</SUP> But this order not repealed.
  <SUP>7</SUP> But this order not repealed.
                         Table 4--PROCLAMATIONS
  Showing where proclamations of the President of the United States have 
been carried into, or codified in, this revision of 35 CFR. The 
proclamations were not repealed by any of the documents promulgating the 
regulations set out in this revision, and remain in full force and 
effect.
________________________________________________________________________

                                Proc. NoDRevised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

1371 (part).May 23, 131.1 to 131.13.....................................

2247........Aug. 25,133.1...............................................

2248........Aug. 27,135.1 to 135.511....................................

2249........Aug. 31,133.1...............................................

________________________________________________________________________




[[Page 258]]

________________________________________________________________________

                       Table 5--CANAL ZONE ORDERS
  Showing where Canal Zone orders of the Secretary of War and Secretary 
of the Army, not previously codified in CFR, have been carried into this 
revision of 35 CFR. These orders were repealed, as such, by one or 
another of the documents promulgating the regulations set out in this 
revision.

________________________________________________________________________


                                 C.ZRevised 35 CFR

                                   No.

________________________________________________________________________


      Mar.......5.23....................................................
      Jun.......5.44....................................................
      Aug10.....61.360..................................................
      Mar.......5.49....................................................
      Apr.......5.41....................................................
      Jul.......5.45....................................................
      Sep.......5.27....................................................
      Aug1......61.351..................................................
      Aug2......61.352..................................................
      Aug3......61.353..................................................
      Aug4......61.354, 61.364..........................................
      Aug5......61.355..................................................
      Aug6......61.356..................................................
      Aug7......61.357..................................................
      Aug8......61.358..................................................
      Aug9......61.359..................................................
      Aug11.....61.361..................................................
      Aug12.....61.362..................................................
      Aug13.....61.363..................................................
      Aug16.....61.365..................................................
      May.......5.24....................................................
      Aug.......5.29, 5.62..............................................
      Sep.......5.24 to 5.26, 5.61, 5.81................................
      Apr.......5.25....................................................
      Sep.......5.48, 5.49..............................................
      Sep.......5.47....................................................
      Jul.......5.48....................................................
      Dec.......5.27....................................................
      Jan.......5.26, 5.61, 5.81........................................
      Aug.......5.28, 5.30, 5.42........................................
      Aug.......5.24, 5.25, 5.61, 5.81..................................
      Jun.......5.71....................................................
________________________________________________________________________

                     Table 6--NAVIGATION REGULATIONS
  Showing where provisions of certain navigation regulations, not 
contained in 35 CFR (1960), but contained in ``Rules and Regulations 
Governing Navigation of the Panama Canal and Adjacent Waters'', 1952 
edition, as amended and supplemented, and as expanded in 1957 (chapter 
10), have been carried into this revision of 35 CFR.
________________________________________________________________________

                         NavigationRevised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

    Sec.    Sec.
10.12.......115.6.......................................................
10.17.......119.7.......................................................

[[Page 259]]

10.18.......119.14......................................................
10.19.......119.8.......................................................
10.20.......119.9.......................................................
10.21.......119.13......................................................
10.22.......119.10......................................................
10.23.......119.11......................................................
10.24.......119.12, 119.15..............................................
10.25.......119.16......................................................
10.26.......119.17......................................................
10.27.......119.18......................................................
10.28.......119.20......................................................
10.29.......119.21......................................................
10.30.......119.22......................................................
10.31.......119.23......................................................
10.32.......119.24......................................................
10.33.......119.25......................................................
10.34.......119.5.......................................................
10.35.......119.26......................................................
10.39.......119.61......................................................
10.40.......119.62......................................................
10.41.......119.63......................................................
10.42.......119.64......................................................
10.49.......119.101.....................................................
10.49a......119.102.....................................................
10.50.......119.141.....................................................
10.51.......119.142.....................................................
10.52.......119.143.....................................................
10.53.......119.44......................................................
10.53a......119.181.....................................................
10.53b......119.182.....................................................
10.54.......119.183.....................................................
10.54a......119.184.....................................................
10.54b......119.185.....................................................
10.55.......119.186.....................................................
10.56.......119.221.....................................................
10.57.......Omitted.....................................................
10.58.......119.222.....................................................
10.59.......119.223.....................................................
10.60.......119.224.....................................................
10.61.......119.225.....................................................
10.62.......119.226.....................................................
10.63.......119.227.....................................................
10.64.......119.228.....................................................
10.65.......119.229.....................................................
10.66.......119.230.....................................................
10.67.......119.231.....................................................
10.68.......119.232.....................................................
10.69.......119.233.....................................................
10.70.......119.19......................................................
10.71.......121.1.......................................................
10.72.......121.44......................................................
10.72a......121.46......................................................
10.73.......121.45......................................................
10.74.......121.47......................................................
10.75.......121.48......................................................
10.76.......121.49......................................................
10.77.......121.50......................................................
10.78.......121.51......................................................
10.79.......121.52......................................................
10.80.......121.53......................................................
10.81.......121.54......................................................
10.82.......121.55......................................................
10.83.......121.56......................................................
10.84.......121.57......................................................

[[Page 260]]

10.85.......121.58......................................................
10.86.......121.59......................................................
10.87.......121.60......................................................
10.88.......121.61......................................................
10.89.......121.62......................................................
10.90.......121.63......................................................
10.91.......121.64......................................................
10.92.......121.64......................................................
10.93.......121.65......................................................
10.94.......121.66......................................................
10.95.......121.67......................................................
10.96.......121.68......................................................
10.97.......121.69......................................................
10.98.......121.70......................................................
10.99.......121.71......................................................
10.100......121.72......................................................
10.101......121.73......................................................
10.102......121.74......................................................
10.103......121.75......................................................
10.104......121.76......................................................
10.105......121.77......................................................
10.106......121.78......................................................
10.107......121.79......................................................
10.108......121.80......................................................
10.109......121.81......................................................
10.110......121.82......................................................
10.111......121.83......................................................
10.112......121.84......................................................
10.113......121.85......................................................
10.114......121.86......................................................
10.115......121.87......................................................
10.116......121.88......................................................
10.117......121.89......................................................
10.118......121.90......................................................
10.119......121.91......................................................
10.120......121.92......................................................
10.121......121.93......................................................
10.122......121.94......................................................
10.123......121.95......................................................
10.124......121.96......................................................
10.125......121.97......................................................
10.126......121.98......................................................
10.127......121.99......................................................
10.128......121.100.....................................................
10.129......121.101.....................................................
10.130......121.102.....................................................
10.131......121.103.....................................................
10.132......121.104.....................................................
10.133......121.105.....................................................
10.134......121.106.....................................................
10.135......121.107.....................................................
10.136......121.2.......................................................
10.137......121.131.....................................................
10.138......121.132.....................................................
10.139......121.133.....................................................
10.140......121.134.....................................................
10.141......121.172.....................................................
10.142......121.41......................................................
10.143......121.42......................................................
10.144......121.43......................................................
10.145......121.108.....................................................
10.146......121.3.......................................................
11.10.......133.71......................................................
11.11.......133.72......................................................

[[Page 261]]

11.12.......133.73......................................................
11.13.......133.74......................................................
11.14.......133.75......................................................
19.4........101.1, 103.35...............................................
19.5........103.36......................................................
19.6........103.37......................................................
19.7........103.38......................................................
19.8........103.40......................................................
19.9........Omitted.....................................................
19.10.......103.41......................................................
19.11.......Omitted.....................................................
19.12.......103.39......................................................
________________________________________________________________________

                     Table 7--EXECUTIVE REGULATIONS
  Showing where executive regulations of the Governor of the Canal Zone, 
not previously codified in CFR, have been carried into this revision of 
35 CFR.
________________________________________________________________________

                                  EReRevised 35 CFR
                                   NoNo.

________________________________________________________________________

     ....July2..61.353..................................................
     ....July3..61.354..................................................
     ....July4..61.358..................................................
     ....July7..61.359..................................................
     ........8..61.363..................................................
     2...Aug....3.23....................................................
     9...May 1..69.1....................................................
     9...May 2..69.2....................................................
     9...May 3..69.3....................................................
     9...May 4..69.11...................................................
     9...May 5..69.12...................................................
     9...May 6..69.13...................................................
     9...May 7..69.14, 69.21 to 69.24, 69.31 to 69.33, 69.41 to 69.47, .
                69.61, 69.62, 69.64, 69.81, 69.82, 69.84, 69.85, 69.88, 
                69.111 to 69.115, 69.141 to 69.144, 69.161 to 69.163, 
                69.179, 69.180, 69.182.
     9...May 8..69.171 to 69.178, 69.181, 69.182........................
     9...May 9..69.63, 69.117, 69.191 to 69.193.........................
     9...May 10.69.211 to 69.213, 69.231................................
     9...May 11.69.86, 69.87............................................
     9...May 12.69.116, 69.221 to 69.224................................
     9...May 13.69.233..................................................
     9...May 14.69.232..................................................
________________________________________________________________________


[[Page 262]]


                Table 8--CANAL ZONE OFFICIAL POSTAL GUIDE
  Showing where sections of the Canal Zone Official Postal Guide have 
been carried into, and codified in, revised 35 CFR.
________________________________________________________________________


                         C.Z. OfficRevised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________


    Sec.    Sec.
1.11........67.1........................................................
1.31........67.2........................................................
1.41........67.7........................................................
1.42........67.8........................................................
2.211.......67.10.......................................................
2.221.......67.10.......................................................
2.231.......67.10.......................................................
2.241.......67.10.......................................................
2.251.......67.10.......................................................
2.252.......67.10.......................................................
2.253.......67.10.......................................................
2.261.......67.11.......................................................
4.51........67.651......................................................
4.52........67.653......................................................
4.53........67.652......................................................
5.21........67.4........................................................
5.22........67.4........................................................
5.221.......67.4........................................................
5.231.......67.5........................................................
12.11.......67.351......................................................
12.12.......67.351......................................................
12.21.......67.352......................................................
12.31.......67.353......................................................
12.41.......67.354......................................................
12.42.......67.355......................................................
12.431......67.356......................................................
12.432......67.356......................................................
12.51.......67.357......................................................
12.53.......67.357......................................................
12.54.......67.357......................................................
12.55.......67.357......................................................
12.56.......67.357......................................................
12.61.......67.358......................................................
12.62.......67.358......................................................
12.63.......67.358......................................................
12.64.......67.358......................................................
12.65.......67.358......................................................
12.66.......67.358......................................................
12.67.......67.358......................................................
12.71.......67.359......................................................
12.72.......67.359......................................................
12.73.......67.359......................................................
12.81.......67.360......................................................
12.82.......67.360......................................................
15.211......67.6........................................................
15.222......67.6........................................................
30.1........67.31.......................................................
30.2........67.31.......................................................
30.31.......67.41.......................................................
30.32.......67.42.......................................................
30.33.......67.45.......................................................
30.331......67.45.......................................................
30.332......67.45.......................................................

[[Page 263]]

30.333......67.45.......................................................
30.334......67.45.......................................................
30.341......67.43.......................................................
30.342......67.44.......................................................
32.11.......67.371......................................................
32.21.......67.372......................................................
32.22.......67.372......................................................
32.31.......67.373......................................................
32.32.......67.373......................................................
32.35.......67.373......................................................
35.11.......67.381......................................................
35.15.......67.381......................................................
35.17.......67.381......................................................
35.21.......67.382......................................................
35.24.......67.382......................................................
35.32.......67.383......................................................
35.41.......67.384......................................................
35.51.......67.385......................................................
35.52.......67.386......................................................
35.53.......67.386......................................................
35.54.......67.387......................................................
35.61.......67.388......................................................
35.71.......67.389......................................................
35.72.......67.389......................................................
35.73.......67.389......................................................
35.81.......67.390......................................................
36.11.......67.621......................................................
36.12.......67.622......................................................
36.121......67.623......................................................
39.11.......67.71.......................................................
39.12.......67.71.......................................................
39.211......67.72.......................................................
39.212......67.73.......................................................
42.11.......67.401......................................................
42.111......67.401......................................................
42.112......67.401......................................................
42.113......67.401......................................................
42.114......67.401......................................................
42.12.......67.401......................................................
53.11.......67.3........................................................
53.21.......67.10.......................................................
54.1........67.91.......................................................
54.2........67.92.......................................................
54.51.......67.93.......................................................
54.52.......67.93.......................................................
54.61.......67.94.......................................................
54.62.......67.95.......................................................
54.71.......67.96.......................................................
55.11.......67.111......................................................
55.111......67.111......................................................
55.112......67.111......................................................
55.12.......67.112......................................................
55.13.......67.113......................................................
55.14.......67.114......................................................
55.15.......67.115......................................................
55.161......67.116......................................................
55.17.......67.117......................................................
55.21.......67.118......................................................
55.31.......67.119......................................................
55.32.......67.119......................................................
55.33.......67.119......................................................
55.34.......67.119......................................................
55.35.......67.119......................................................

[[Page 264]]

55.41.......67.120......................................................
55.51.......67.121......................................................
56.11.......67.131......................................................
56.12.......67.131......................................................
56.21.......67.131......................................................
56.22.......67.131......................................................
56.32.......67.131......................................................
56.33.......67.131......................................................
56.41.......67.131......................................................
56.42.......67.131......................................................
56.421......67.131......................................................
56.51.......67.131......................................................
56.52.......67.131......................................................
56.53.......67.131......................................................
56.61.......67.131......................................................
56.71.......67.131......................................................
56.81.......67.131......................................................
56.91.......67.132......................................................
57.11.......67.141......................................................
57.12.......67.141......................................................
57.13.......67.141......................................................
57.14.......67.141......................................................
57.15.......67.141......................................................
57.21.......67.142......................................................
57.22.......67.142......................................................
57.23.......67.142......................................................
57.3........67.143......................................................
57.31.......67.143......................................................
57.32.......67.143......................................................
57.41.......67.144......................................................
57.51.......67.145......................................................
57.61.......67.145......................................................
57.71.......67.146......................................................
57.81.......67.147......................................................
57.82.......67.147......................................................
57.91.......67.148......................................................
58.111......67.161......................................................
58.112......67.161......................................................
58.12.......67.161......................................................
58.121......67.161......................................................
58.122......67.161......................................................
58.13.......67.161......................................................
58.14.......67.161......................................................
58.15.......67.161......................................................
58.16.......67.161......................................................
58.161......67.161......................................................
58.162......67.161......................................................
58.163......67.162......................................................
58.21.......67.163......................................................
58.221......67.163......................................................
58.222......67.163......................................................
58.223......67.163......................................................
58.224......67.163......................................................
58.225......67.163......................................................
58.231......67.163......................................................
58.232......67.163......................................................
58.241......67.163......................................................
58.251......67.163......................................................
58.252......67.163......................................................
58.253......67.163......................................................
59.11.......67.181......................................................
59.17.......67.181......................................................
59.21.......67.182......................................................

[[Page 265]]

59.23.......67.182......................................................
59.24.......67.182......................................................
59.241......67.182......................................................
59.25.......67.182......................................................
59.261......67.182......................................................
59.262......67.182......................................................
59.31.......67.183......................................................
59.41.......67.184......................................................
59.42.......67.184......................................................
59.43.......67.184......................................................
59.44.......67.184......................................................
60.11.......67.201......................................................
60.12.......67.201......................................................
60.13.......67.201......................................................
60.14.......67.201......................................................
60.15.......67.201......................................................
60.21.......67.201......................................................
61.1........67.211......................................................
61.2........67.211......................................................
61.3........67.211......................................................
61.4........67.211......................................................
61.5........67.211......................................................
62.1........67.591......................................................
62.11.......67.591......................................................
62.12.......67.591......................................................
62.121......67.591......................................................
62.21.......67.592......................................................
62.22.......67.592......................................................
62.31.......67.593......................................................
62.411......67.594......................................................
62.421......67.594......................................................
62.431......67.594......................................................
62.441......67.594......................................................
62.451......67.594......................................................
62.51.......67.595......................................................
62.52.......67.595......................................................
62.53.......67.595......................................................
62.54.......67.595......................................................
62.55.......67.595......................................................
62.56.......67.595......................................................
62.61.......67.596......................................................
62.71.......67.597......................................................
62.81.......67.598......................................................
63.11.......67.221......................................................
63.12.......67.222......................................................
63.21.......67.223......................................................
63.22.......67.223......................................................
63.23.......67.223......................................................
63.31.......67.224......................................................
63.32.......67.224......................................................
63.33.......67.224......................................................
63.41.......67.225......................................................
63.51.......67.226......................................................
63.52.......67.227......................................................
63.53.......67.228......................................................
63.61.......67.229......................................................
63.71.......67.230......................................................
63.81.......67.311......................................................
63.82.......67.312......................................................
63.83.......67.313......................................................
63.84.......67.314......................................................
63.85.......67.315......................................................
63.86.......67.316......................................................

[[Page 266]]

63.87.......67.317......................................................
63.88.......67.318......................................................
63.91.......67.331......................................................
63.92.......67.332......................................................
63.93.......67.333......................................................
64.131......67.272......................................................
64.132......67.272......................................................
64.133......67.273......................................................
64.134......67.274......................................................
64.141......67.261......................................................
64.142......67.262......................................................
64.143......67.262......................................................
64.144......67.263......................................................
64.151......67.241......................................................
64.152......67.242......................................................
64.153......67.243......................................................
64.154......67.244......................................................
64.155......67.245......................................................
65.11.......67.281......................................................
65.12.......67.281......................................................
65.121......67.281......................................................
65.122......67.281......................................................
65.123......67.281......................................................
65.124......67.281......................................................
65.21.......67.282......................................................
64.24.......67.282......................................................
66.11.......67.411......................................................
66.21.......67.411......................................................
66.22.......67.411......................................................
66.23.......67.411......................................................
66.24.......67.412......................................................
66.25.......67.413......................................................
66.27.......67.415......................................................
66.28.......67.416......................................................
66.31.......67.411......................................................
66.41.......67.411......................................................
66.511......67.417......................................................
66.512......67.417......................................................
66.513......67.417......................................................
66.514......67.417......................................................
66.515......67.417......................................................
66.516......67.417......................................................
66.521......67.417......................................................
66.522......67.417......................................................
66.531......67.417......................................................
66.541......67.417......................................................
66.61.......67.418......................................................
66.71.......67.419......................................................
66.72.......67.419......................................................
66.81.......67.420......................................................
66.82.......67.420......................................................
66.83.......67.420......................................................
66.84.......67.420......................................................
67.21.......67.46.......................................................
67.22.......67.46.......................................................
67.381......35.12 to 35.18, 35.21.......................................
67.382......35.22, 35.23................................................
67.383......35.31.......................................................
67.41.......67.9........................................................
67.414......67.414......................................................
69.11.......67.441......................................................
69.111......67.441......................................................
69.112......67.441......................................................

[[Page 267]]

69.113......67.441......................................................
69.121......67.442......................................................
69.122......67.442......................................................
69.123......67.442......................................................
69.124......67.442......................................................
69.125......67.442......................................................
69.13.......67.443......................................................
69.131......67.443......................................................
69.132......67.443......................................................
69.133......67.443......................................................
69.134......67.443......................................................
69.135......67.443......................................................
69.136......67.443......................................................
69.137......67.443......................................................
69.141......67.444......................................................
69.142......67.444......................................................
69.143......67.444......................................................
69.144......67.444......................................................
69.145......67.444......................................................
69.21.......67.451......................................................
69.211......67.451......................................................
69.212......67.451, 67.452..............................................
69.31.......67.461......................................................
69.41.......67.471......................................................
69.411......67.471......................................................
69.412......67.471......................................................
69.413......67.471......................................................
69.414......67.471......................................................
69.51.......67.472......................................................
69.61.......67.481......................................................
71.11.......67.561, 67.562..............................................
71.21.......67.561......................................................
71.31.......67.561......................................................
71.33.......67.561......................................................
71.41.......67.563......................................................
71.42.......67.564......................................................
71.43.......67.565......................................................
71.44.......67.561......................................................
71.51.......67.566......................................................
71.52.......67.567......................................................
71.53.......67.568......................................................
72.11.......67.491, 67.492..............................................
72.32.......67.561......................................................
72.121......67.493......................................................
72.122......67.493......................................................
72.123......67.493......................................................
72.131......67.494......................................................
72.132......67.494......................................................
72.133......67.494......................................................
72.142......67.495......................................................
72.151......67.496......................................................
72.152......67.496......................................................
72.171......67.498......................................................
72.172......67.498......................................................
72.173......67.498......................................................
72.134......67.494......................................................
72.135......67.494......................................................
72.141......67.495......................................................
72.16.......67.497......................................................
72.18.......67.499......................................................
72.21.......67.511, 67.512..............................................
72.31.......67.521......................................................
73.11.......67.541......................................................

[[Page 268]]

73.12.......67.542......................................................
73.13.......67.543......................................................
73.21.......67.551......................................................
73.22.......67.551......................................................
73.23.......67.551, 67.552..............................................
73.24.......67.551......................................................
73.31.......67.531......................................................
73.32.......67.532......................................................
73.33.......67.533......................................................
75.12.......67.840......................................................
75.13.......67.838......................................................
75.14.......67.841......................................................
________________________________________________________________________

            Table 9--CANAL ZONE POSTAL SAVINGS SYSTEM BOOKLET
  Showing where sections of the Canal Zone Postal Savings System Booklet 
have been carried into, and codified in, revised 35 CFR.
________________________________________________________________________

                         C.Z. Post.Revised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

    Sec.    Sec.
1.2.........67.791......................................................
1.3.........67.792......................................................
1.4.........67.793......................................................
1.5.........67.794......................................................
2.25........67.811......................................................
2.31........67.812......................................................
2.32........67.812......................................................
2.41........67.813......................................................
2.51........67.814......................................................
2.52........67.814......................................................
3.111.......67.831......................................................
3.112.......67.831......................................................
3.113.......67.831......................................................
3.121.......67.831......................................................
3.131.......67.831......................................................
3.141.......67.831......................................................
3.211.......67.832......................................................
3.212.......67.832......................................................
3.213.......67.832......................................................
3.31........67.833......................................................
3.32........67.833......................................................
3.331.......67.833......................................................
3.332.......67.833......................................................
3.333.......67.834......................................................
3.334.......67.835......................................................
3.41........67.836......................................................
3.42........67.836......................................................
3.421.......67.836......................................................
3.422.......67.836......................................................
3.423.......67.836......................................................
3.43........67.836......................................................
3.51........67.837......................................................
3.511.......67.837......................................................

[[Page 269]]

3.5111......67.837......................................................
3.512.......67.837......................................................
3.513.......67.837......................................................
3.514.......67.837......................................................
3.515.......67.837......................................................
3.516.......67.837......................................................
3.517.......67.837......................................................
3.518.......67.837......................................................
3.521.......67.838......................................................
3.522.......67.838......................................................
3.523.......67.838......................................................
3.524.......67.838......................................................
3.525.......67.838......................................................
3.526.......67.838......................................................
3.527.......67.838......................................................
3.6.........67.839......................................................
5...........67.840......................................................
6.1.........67.861......................................................
6.2.........67.862......................................................
6.22........67.862......................................................
6.23........67.862......................................................
6.24........67.863......................................................
6.31........67.864......................................................
________________________________________________________________________

         Table 10--CANAL ZONE POSTAL MONEY ORDER SYSTEM BOOKLET
  Showing where sections of the Canal Zone Postal Money Order System 
Booklet have been carried into, and codified, in, revised 35 CFR.

________________________________________________________________________

                         C.Z. Post.Revised 35 CFR
________________________________________________________________________

    Sec.    Sec.
1.1.........67.671......................................................
1.2.........67.672......................................................
2.25........67.681......................................................
2.3.........67.682......................................................
2.31........67.682......................................................
2.32........67.682......................................................
2.4.........67.683......................................................
2.41........67.683......................................................
2.5.........67.684......................................................
2.51........67.684......................................................
2.53........67.684......................................................
3.1.........67.701......................................................
3.11........67.701......................................................
3.12........67.701......................................................
3.13........67.701......................................................
3.14........67.701,67.702...............................................
3.15........67.701......................................................
3.151.......67.701......................................................
3.16........67.701......................................................
3.161.......67.701......................................................
3.2.........67.701......................................................
3.21........67.701......................................................
3.3.........67.701......................................................

[[Page 270]]

3.31........67.701......................................................
3.312.......67.701......................................................
3.32........67.701......................................................
3.321.......67.701......................................................
3.322.......67.701......................................................
3.323.......67.701......................................................
3.4.........67.702......................................................
3.5.........67.703......................................................
3.411.......67.702......................................................
3.511.......67.703......................................................
3.521.......67.703......................................................
3.522.......67.703......................................................
3.523.......67.703......................................................
3.6.........67.704......................................................
3.61........67.704......................................................
3.62........67.704......................................................
3.621.......67.704......................................................
4.1.........67.721......................................................
4.111.......67.721......................................................
4.12........67.721......................................................
4.121.......67.721......................................................
4.122.......67.721......................................................
4.123.......67.721......................................................
4.124.......67.721......................................................
4.125.......67.721......................................................
4.2.........67.722......................................................
4.21........67.722......................................................
4.211.......67.722......................................................
4.221.......67.722......................................................
4.2211......67.722......................................................
4.2212......67.722......................................................
4.2213......67.722......................................................
4.2214......67.722......................................................
4.222.......67.722......................................................
4.223.......67.722......................................................
4.23........67.722......................................................
4.231.......67.722......................................................
4.232.......67.722......................................................
4.233.......67.722......................................................
4.234.......67.722......................................................
4.235.......67.722......................................................
4.236.......67.722......................................................
4.237.......67.722......................................................
4.238.......67.722......................................................
4.24........67.722......................................................
4.241.......67.722......................................................
4.242.......67.722......................................................
4.243.......67.722......................................................
4.25........67.722......................................................
4.251.......67.722......................................................
4.252.......67.722......................................................
4.253.......67.722......................................................
4.26........67.722......................................................
4.261.......67.722......................................................
4.262.......67.722......................................................
4.262.......67.722......................................................
4.264.......67.722......................................................
4.265.......67.722......................................................
4.266.......67.722......................................................
4.27........67.722......................................................
4.28........67.722......................................................
4.291.......67.722......................................................
4.292.......67.722......................................................
4.293.......67.722......................................................

[[Page 271]]

4.294.......67.722......................................................
4.31........67.723......................................................
4.311.......67.723......................................................
4.312.......67.723......................................................
4.32........67.723......................................................
4.321.......67.723......................................................
4.322.......67.723......................................................
6.11........67.741......................................................
6.21........67.742......................................................
7.1.........67.761......................................................
7.11........67.761......................................................
7.12........67.761......................................................
7.121.......67.761......................................................
7.21........67.762......................................................
7.22........67.762......................................................
7.23........67.762......................................................
7.24........67.762......................................................
7.3.........67.763......................................................
7.31........67.763......................................................
7.32........67.763......................................................
7.4.........67.764......................................................
7.41........67.764......................................................
7.42........67.764......................................................
7.43........67.764......................................................
7.5.........67.765......................................................
7.51........67.765......................................................
7.52........67.765......................................................
7.6.........67.765......................................................
7.61........67.765......................................................
7.62........67.765......................................................
7.71........67.766......................................................
8.1.........67.673......................................................
________________________________________________________________________

                   Table 11--MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
  Showing where miscellaneous regulations, instructions and other 
documents have been carried into this revision of 35 CFR. Except as 
otherwise noted, these separate regulations were repealed, as such by 
one or another of the documents promulgating the regulations set out in 
this revision.
________________________________________________________________________

                      Regulations or otheRevised 35 CFR

________________________________________________________________________

Letter of President Harr3.2. Truman, May 30, 1952 (status of Sec'y of 
  Army in supervising administration of C.Z. Government).
Resolution of Panama Can</SUP>133.71 to 133.75.tors, Oct. 9, 1954 
  (Payment of tolls and other vessel charges).<SUP>1
Regulations of Governor 119.181, 119.182.ne 30, 1960 (small-tug 
  masters).
U.S. Treas. Dept. Order </SUP>65.1 to 65.7., Apr. 13, 1961.<SUP>2
Panama Canal Co. Comptro65.73. Circular No. 44, Sec. 6, Oct. 27, 1961 
  (narcotic drugs).
Canal Zone Health Direct65.81 to 65.91, 65.111, 65.112.--12, 14, May 4, 
  1964 (narcotic drugs).
________________________________________________________________________


[[Page 272]]


  <SUP>1</SUP> But this resolution not repealed.
  <SUP>2</SUP> But this order not repealed.
                Table 12--OMITTED 35 CFR (1960) SECTIONS
  Showing sections of 35 CFR (1960) omitted from this revision of 35 
CFR, but not repealed by any of the documents promulgating this revision 
nor superseded by any of the regulations set out in the revision.<SUP>1
________________________________________________________________________

                           </SUP>35 CFRSource)
________________________________________________________________________

1.4.........E.O. 4019, June 5, 1924, as affected by E.O. 5704, Sept. 2, 
            1931.
4.175.......Proc. 1371 (part), May 23, 1917.............................
________________________________________________________________________

  <SUP>1</SUP> This table does not purport to list sections of 35 CFR 
(1960) which were omitted from this revision, and which were repealed by 
one or another of the documents promulgating the revision. Those 
sections are included in Table 2. Nor does this table purport to set 
forth omitted orders dealing with the Canal Zone which were not codified 
in 35 CFR (1960) and which continue to be in full force and effect. 
Examples of these are those provisions of Exec. Order No. 1888, Feb. 2, 
1914, as amended, relating to leave of Canal Zone employees; and Exec. 
Order No. 2455, Sept. 15, 1916, transferring to the Governor of the 
``Panama Canal'' (now Governor of Canal Zone) the administration of the 
Federal Employees' Compensation Act (5 U.S.C. 751 et seq.) with respect 
to Federal employees in the Canal Zone.
________________________________________________________________________

      Table 13--Orders Omitted as Executed, Superseded, or Obsolete
  Showing executive orders of the President of the United States, and 
other orders, relating to or affecting the Canal Zone, omitted from this 
revision as executed, superseded, and/or obsolete, or obsolete with 
respect to further effectiveness in the Canal Zone. The reason for the 
omission is given in the last column. Citations in that column to 
``C.Z.C.'' and ``U.S.C.'' refer to the Canal Zone Code of 1963, and 
United States Code, respectively; and citations therein to 35 CFR refer 
to this revision of 35 CFR.
________________________________________________________________________



         Executive Orders of the President of the United States

________________________________________________________________________

Exec. Ord. No.                       Reasons for Omission
________________________________________________________________________

                                          
                                       1904
.........MCompensationObsolete.ian Canal Commissioners..................

[[Page 273]]

.........MDefining jurPartly superseded by Title 1, Sec.  1 of C.Z. Code 
          Commission. of 1934 (now 1 C.Z.C. (1963) 31). Remainder 
                      obsolete.
.........NCivil servicObsolete.ication of Isthmian Canal Commission.....
.........DEmployees' cObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7......................
                                       1905
.........JCivil servicNow covered by C.Z. personnel laws and  Canal ....
          Commission).regulations. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7; 35 CFR Parts 251, 
                      253.
.........JSpecial CommExecuted and obsolete.w)..........................
.........AReorganizatiObsolete.hmian Canal Commission...................
.........AAccounting sObsolete. See 31 U.S.C. Secs. 41 et seq., 65 et ..
                      seq., 71 et seq., 841 et seq.
.........JAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.thmian Canal Commission.....
.........JAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.g engineers re canal .......
          construction.
.........JCompensationExecuted and obsolete.. Commissioner (J. L. ......
          Bristow).
.........ACompensationExecuted and obsolete.rs re canal construction....
.........SRemoval of CNow covered by C.Z. personnel laws and ...........
                      regulations. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7; 35 CFR Parts 251, 
                      253.
.........NCompensationExecuted and obsolete.rs re canal construction....
.........DSessions of Executed and obsolete.ion.........................
.........DAppointment Executed and obsolete.mian Canal Commission (A. F. 
          McCormick).
                                       1906
.........JAppointment Executed and obsolete.mian Canal Commission (R. ..
          Whitman).
.........FCompensationExecuted and obsolete.rs re canal construction....
.........FCompensationExecuted and obsolete.n Canal Commission..........

[[Page 274]]

.........MClarifies orExecuted and obsolete.relating to compensation of 
          Commissioners.
.........MProcedure foObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7; 35 CFR Parts 251, ..
                      253.
.........JCompensationExecuted and obsolete.mission members.............
.........JAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.on Isthmus of Panama........
.........SSessions of Obsolete.Canal Commission.........................
.........NReorganizatiObsolete.hmian Canal Commission...................
                                       1907
.........FTransfer of Executed and obsolete.to classified service in ...
          U.S. (J. E. Kidwell).
.........MAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.mission.....................
.........MAdministratiObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C.; 3 C.Z.C.; 35 CFR Parts 1, 
                      3, 5, 201.
.........MMarriages inSuperseded by E.O. May 31, 1907, and now covered .
                      by 8 C.Z.C. ch. 1.
.........MAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.embers of Isthmian Canal ...
          Commission.
.........MAllowances fExecuted and obsolete. Goethals...................
.........MPromulgationNow covered by 4 C.Z.C.; 5 C.Z.C., and court .....
                      rules.
.........MTransfer of Executed and obsolete.lerk, to another position...
.........AAppointment Executed and obsolete. Goethals to charimanship of 
          Isthmian Canal Commission; compensation.
.........AAppointment Executed and obsolete.as Commission member........
.........MMarriages inNow covered by 8 C.Z.C. ch. 1.....................
.........JSupervision Obsolete. See particularly 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 66.y.....
.........ACompensationExecuted and obsolete.Gorgas and Jackson Smith....
.........AReorganizatiObsolete.hington office of Isthmian Canal ........
        Commission.
[[Page 275]]

.........ADisbursing aObsolete. See 31 U.S.C. Secs. 41 et seq., 65 et ..
                      seq., 71 et seq., 841 et seq.
                                       1908
.........JPowers of IsPartly revoked by order of Sec'y War, Aug. 4, ....
                      1932. Remainder obsolete.
.........JUnclaimed frObsolete. See 4 C.Z.C. Secs. 1872, 2446, 2627.....
.........JJudicial cirNow covered by 35 CFR Sec. 201.2. See, also, 2 ...
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 2.
750......FJury trials Now covered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 4091 et seq., and ...
                      court rules.
.........FReinstatemenExecuted and obsolete.on, with privilege of ......
          transfer.
.........FAppointment Executed and obsolete.classified service..........
.........MJury trials Now covered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 4091 et seq., and ...
                      court rules.
.........ADefacing of Now covered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 1594.................
.........SAppointment Executed and obsolete. Cunningham.................
.........SContinuance Executed and obsolete.haffer, Olof Ekedahl and ...
          Willoughby Culbertson.
.........ORetention ofExecuted and obsolete.d jointly by Panama R.R. Co. 
          and Isthmian Canal Commission.
.........NCriminal appNow covered by 6 C.Z.C., 28 U.S.C.; and court.....
.........DAppointment Executed and obsolete.ef Justice of Supreme Court 
          of C.Z.
.........DAppointment Executed and obsolete.Associate Justice of Supreme 
          Court of C.Z.
                                       1909
.........JSafety-appliObsolete. (amendment of E.O. No. 1002, Jan. 6, ...
          1909).
.........JHours of worObsolete.rday (inapplicability of certain orders .
          to Isthmian employees.
.........JGood behavioCovered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 6541 et seq..............
.........OBoard of LocSuperseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, and .
                      now covered by 35 CFR Parts 115 et seq.

[[Page 276]]

                                       1910
.........JSanitary impObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 911; 35 CFR Part 61...
.........ACollection oObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 731; 35 CFR Part 53...
.........AAppointment Executed and obsolete.urice H. Thatcher as .......
          Commission member.
.........ADuties of CoNow covered by 3 C.Z.C. and 6 C.Z.C., generally.of 
          Criminal Procedure.
.........JAuthority ofObsolete. Canal Commission to establish rules and 
          regulations.
.........OCollection oObsolete..........................................
.........OLease of pubObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 331 et seq............
                                       1911
.........JFrench dump Obsolete.)........................................
.........JLand office Obsolete..........................................
.........MAppointment Executed and obsolete.lter W. Warwick as Associate 
          Justice of Supreme Court of C.Z.
.........MAppointment Executed and obsolete.omas E. Brown, Jr. as ......
          Associate Justice of Supreme Court of C.Z.
.........MClassificatiExecuted and obsolete.s...........................
.........MDeserting seSuperseded and obsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 1381, 
                      1382; 46 U.S.C. Sec. 541 et seq.
.........MInsane asyluObsolete. See 5 C.Z.C. Secs. 722(a), 1631 et seq.; 
                      6 C.Z.C. Sec. 4454 et seq.; 24 U.S.C. Sec. 196.
.........MDistillationObsolete. Stills discontinued as of Jan. 1, 1913 .
                      by E.O. No. 1532, May 21, 1912.
.........JAmends E.O. Executed and obsolete.stillation tax..............
1386.....JInspection oSuperseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, and .
                      now covered by 35 CFR Part 121.
1392.....AAnimal fightNow covered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 234..................
1413.....SAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
1414.....SPleadings, dObsolete. See 3 C.Z.C. Sec. 373; 5 C.Z.C. s.......
                      Secs. 717, 771.
1419.....OContagious dObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 911, 912; 35 CFR Part 
                      61.

[[Page 277]]

1420.....OPractice of Now covered by 35 CFR Part 69.etc.................
1430.....NAlumni of MeObsolete.ineering school..........................
1435.....NNotaris publNow covered by 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 1071.................
                                       1912
1457.....JAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
1463.....JCensus......Executed..........................................
1466.....JAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
1468.....FAdministratiNow covered by 7 C.Z.C. Sec. 2141 et seq..........
1532.....MStills......Obsolete. See reason given above for omitting E.O. 
                      of May 13, 1911.
1547.....JTemporary waExecuted and obsolete.o hours of labor............
1605.....SAdministratiObsolete.cts in C.Z...............................
                                       1913
1680.....JInspection oNow covered by 35 CFR Part 121....................
1722\1/2\FWorkmen's coNow covered by 5 U.S.C. Sec. 751 et seq. See .....
                      particularly, 5 U.S.C. Secs. 790, 791, 793.
1749.....MBirds and neSuperseded by Act July 5, 1932, ch. 420, 47 Stat. 
                      576 (2 C.Z.C. 1934, Secs. 291-293), and now 
                      covered by 2 C.Z.C. (1963) Secs. 1471, 1474, 1511.
1751.....MAdministratiNow covered by 7 C.Z.C. Sec. 2141 et seq..........
1752.....MForeign corpNow covered by 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 871 et seq...........
1755.....MSuspends E.OExecuted and obsolete.kmen's compensation.........
1761.....AMaritime quaObsolete. See 35 CFR 61.121 et seq., 101.5........
1792.....JJury trials Now covered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 4091 et seq., and ...
                      court rules.
1810.....AAircraft (unNow covered by 35 CFR Part 51. See also, 2 C.Z.C. 
                      Secs. 701, 702.
1812.....AAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
1832.....SReturning deSuperseded by Act July 5, 1932, ch. 423, 47 Stat. 
                      577, and now covered by 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 842, 843.
                                       1914
.........JCorrupt inflNo statute authorizating promulgation.............

[[Page 278]]

1885.....J Government Obsolete.ion......................................
1888, SecJConditions oSections 1-19, 40 (section 19, as last amended by 
          of employeesC.Z.O. 32, Feb. 25, 1954, 19 F.R. 1246, and 
                      section 40, as so recommended by E.O. 9740, June 
                      20, 1946, 11 F.R. 7029), are obsolete and 
                      superseded. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7, 76A Stat.; also 
                      local regulations and 35 CFR 251, 253.
1902.....MClaims for iObsolete. See 5 U.S.C. Sec. 751 et seq., .........
                      particularly Secs. 790, 791, 793.
1917.....APayment of tNow covered by 35 CFR Part 133....................
1938.....MPardons; remNow covered by 6 C.Z.C., Secs. 6501, 6502, 6541 et 
                      seq., 6581.
1944.....MCeremonial cExecuted and obsolete.............................
1948.....MBalboa NavalObsolete.ation....................................
1962.....JHours of worObsolete in C.Z. See 2 C.Z.C. 101 et seq., 76A ...
                      Stat. 14; and local regulations.
1964.....JAmending CivObsolete in C.Z. See 2 C.Z.C. 141 et seq., 76A ...
                      Stat. 16; 35 CFR Parts 251, 253.
1988.....JRadio equipmNow covered by 47 U.S.C. Sec. 351 et seq..........
1989.....JBoard of admCovered by 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 1101, 1102. etc.........
1990.....JNavigation..Now covered by 35 CFR Part 101 et seq.; 2 C.Z.C. .
                      ch. 81.
2014.....ABoard of HeaObsolete..........................................
2016.....ACustoms servSuperseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, and .
                      now covered by 35 CFR Part 57.
2018.....APostal crimeNow covered by 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 2001.................
2020.....AMaritime QuaObsolete. See 35 CFR Part 61.121 et seq., 101.5...
2026.....AStreet railwObsolete.ation)...................................
2037.....SPunishment fNow covered by 2 C.Z.C. ch. 81. See particularly, 
                      2 C.Z.C. Sec. 1331.
2051.....SGambling....Obsolete. See 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 1531 et seq...........
2052.....SWorkmen's coObsolete. See 5 U.S.C. Sec. 751 et seq., .........
                      particularly Secs. 790, 791, 793.

[[Page 279]]

2073.....NNavigation; Covered by 35 CFR 123.11.anal business............
                                       1915
2118.....JMaritime QuaObsolete. See 35 CFR Part 61.121 et seq., 101.5...
2135.....FAccounting tObsolete. Enabling act repealedanal collections...
2142.....MNarcotics...Now covered by CFR Part 65........................
2152.....MAppointment.Executed..........................................
2185.....ARenaming of Culebra Cut as Gaillard Cut.......................
2204.....MTemporary suExecuted.of certain rent, fuel and power charges..
                                       1916
.........MAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.............................
2410.....JAppointmentsExecuted and obsolete.............................
2428.....JQuarters, fuSuperseded and obsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 66, ..
                      103, 122.
2440.....AAlien silverObsolete. (quarters, fuel and electricity)........
2475.....OCommutation Temporary and obsolete.certain cases..............
                                       1917
2526.....FExclusion ofSuperseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, rules 
                      129-141, which, in turn, were revoked by C.Z.O. 
                      No. 22, Oct. 20, 1950.
2527.....FExclusion ofNow covered by 35 CFR Part 59. See also, 2 C.Z.C. 
                      Sec. 841 et seq.
                                       1918
2825.....MFt. Sherman Now covered by 35 CFR 5.31........................
2907.....JAnchorage anObsolete.t of vessels during national emergency ..
          arising from World War I.
2926.....JNavigation..Now covered by 35 CFR ch. I, subch. C.............
2968-A...OFunds for maTemporary and obsolete............................
2971.....OLicensing ofNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.; 35 CFR 3.3(a) (1) (2).
.........NWar Trade fuObsoletensfer for expenditure in C.Z.)............

[[Page 280]]

                                       1919
3031.....JLeave due emObsolete.eturning from military service...........
3062.....MTonnage certNow covered by 35 CFR Part 135....................
3093.....MAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
.........NEmployment, Obsolete. See 2 C.Z.C., ch. 7; 35 CFR Parts 251, .
          No. 1888 Sec253..
                                       1920
.........JLiquors (useNow covered by 35 CFR Part 53, 2 C.Z.C. ch. 53....
.........FObtaining veObsolete. equipment from Navy.....................
.........FQuarantine sNow covered by 35 CFR ch. I, subchs. B, C.........
.........FThat part amObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7; 35 CFR Parts 251, ..
                      253.
.........MPunta Mala NObsolete.o Station................................
.........MQuarantine iSuperseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, and .
                      now covered by 35 CFR Part 61.
.........SPaitilla PoiObsolete.ry Reservation...........................
3332.....OLease of HobObsolete. to Panama R. S.S. Co....................
.........OLicensing ofNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.; 35 CFR 3.3(a) (1) (2).
.........NFt. Sherman Now covered by 35 CFR 5.31........................
                                       1921
.........JPayment of tNow covered by 35 CFR Part 133.offices, etc.).....
3434.....AMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.
3522.....JNavigation oNow covered by 35 CFR ch. 1, subch. C.............
3562.....OEntry of aliNow covered by 35 CFR Part 59.....................
3573.....NHoboken pierExecuted and obsolete.R.S.S. Line.................
3581.....NTolls exemptNow covered by 35 CFR 133.35.nal for repairs......
3585.....DRent and othNow covered by local personnel regulations. See ..
                      also, 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 66, 101, 121.
                                       1922
3709.....JAmendment ofNow covered by local personnel regulations........

[[Page 281]]

3754.....NBoxing......Now covered by local regulations. See also, 6 ....
                      C.Z.C. Secs. 2061, 2062.
3761.....DInterest on Obsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 1134; 35 CFR 67.831 et 
                      seq.
                                       1923
3848.....MBalboa NavalObsolete.ation (addition).........................
3903.....SExclusion anSuperseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, and .
                      now covered by 35 CFR Part 59.
3917.....OTransfer of Executed and obsolete. See E.O. No. 6072, Mar. 8, 
                      1933, transferring same property to Navy 
                      Department.
3938.....DTransit and Superseded by E.O. No. 4314, Sept. 25, 1925, and .
                      now covered by 35 CFR Part 101 et Seq.
                                       1924
3968.....MPardons, parNow covered by 6 C.S.Z. Secs. 6541 et seq., 6581, 
                      6621 et seq.
4006.....MAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
4087.....OAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
                                       1925
4276.....JRules of proNow covered by 3 C.Z.C.; 5 C.Z.C.; 6 C.Z.C. ......
                      Sec. 3501 et seq., Federal procedural rules, and 
                      local rules of district court.
4314 (excSRules governObsolete and covered by 35 CFR 57.1 et seq., 59.1 
                      et seq., 61-121 et seq., and Part 101 et seq.; 2 
                      C.Z.C. 291 et seq., 76A Stat. 23-25. Rules 129-141 
                      repealed by C.Z.O. No. 22, Oct. 20, 1950.
4335.....NMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.
                                       1926
4370.....JAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
4459.....JOvertime comNow covered by local personnel regulations. See  .
          Sec. 12).   also, 2 C.Z.C., ch. 7; 35 CFR Part 253.
4481.....JAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
                                       1927
4567.....JAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................

[[Page 282]]

4636.....AMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See, also, 2 ...
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.
4721, parSCompensationObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 101, 121, 141 et ....
                      seq.; 35 CFR 253.132.
4729.....SMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.; 6 C.Z.C. Sec. 1691 et 
                      seq.
4767.....NAppointment.Executed and obsolete.............................
                                       1928
4801.....FLicensing ofObsolete..........................................
                                       1929
5065.....FExclusion ofNow covered by 2 C.Z.C., ch. 59; 35 CFR Part 59...
5250.....DPardons, parNow covered by 6 C.Z.C. Secs. 6581, 6621 et seq...
                                       1930
5298.....MMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.
5369.....JCerro Tigre Now covered by 35 CFR 5.23.ervation...............
5382.....JAdvance of fObsolete.onded employees..........................
                                       1932
5788.....FSize, weightObsolete. See local regulations; also, 2 C.Z.C. ..
                      Sec. 1001 et seq.
5849.....MBalboa NavalNow covered by 35 CFR 5.47........................
5880.....JC.Z. JudiciaNow covered by 35 CFR 201.2. See also, 3 C.Z.C. ..
                      Sec. 2.
5888.....JTransportatiObsolete. See 35 CFR 53; 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 731, 732..
                                       1933
6010.....JFort RandolpObsolete. See 35 CFR 5.30.........................
6128.....MNavigation oNow covered by 35 CFR ch. I, subch. C.............
6219.....JHealing artsCovered by 35 CFR 69.301 et seq.Zone..............
6243.....APostpones trExecuted and obsolete.rt to Department of Justice.
6301.....SPostpones trExecuted and obsolete.rt to Department of Justice.
                                       1934
6589.....FMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.

[[Page 283]]

6608.....FInterest on Obsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 1134; 35 CFR 67.836...
6848.....SFt. William Now covered by 35 CFR 5.27........................
                                       1935
6997.....MRegulations Covered by 35 CFR Part 53.. of alcoholic beverages 
          in Canal Zone.
7242.....DMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations. See also, 2 ....
                      C.Z.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.
                                       1937
7687.....ARetirement bObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 181; Act July 25, ....
                      1958, Pub. L. 85-550, Sec. 13, 72 Stat. 410, as 
                      amended Oct. 18, 1962, Pub. L. 87-845, Sec. 2, 76A 
                      Stat. 697 (5 U.S.C. Sec. 2252 note).
                                       1939
8191.....JGoethals MemExecuted.mission..................................
8215.....JFree transpoNow covered by local personnel regulations.t .....
          (amendment of E.O. No. 1888, Sec. 15).
8267.....OMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations.No. 7242 of Dec. 
          6, 1935).
8306.....DTaxes and liNow covered by 35 CFR Part 63.....................
                                       1940
8417.....MAmending E.OCovered by 35 CFR 59.1. 25, 1925..................
                                       1941
8719.....MSuspending cObsolete.atutory provisions relating to employment 
          in Canal Zone, during national emergency proclaimed by Proc. 
          No. 2352, Sept. 8, 1939.
8753.....MMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations..................
8812.....JSuspension, Obsolete.ergency, of certain statutory provisions 
          re employment in C.Z.
8846.....ARevokes liceExecuted.treet railways...........................
8879.....AInterest on Now covered by 35 CFR 67.836. See also, 2 C.Z.C. .
                      Sec. 1134.

[[Page 284]]

                                       1942
9064.....FTransportatiObsolete.thmian employees during World War II, etc
9065.....FMotor vehiclObsolete. See local regulations...................
9175.....MMotor vehiclNow covered by local regulations..................
9188.....JEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
9189.....JEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
9212.....ATransportatiObsolete.ployees (temporary)......................
9227.....AAmending E.OCovered by 35 CFR 105.6 117.1 et seq.; 2 C.Z.C. ..
                      291 et seq., 76A Stat. 23-25.
9228.....AAmending E.OCovered by 35 CFR 103.24.y adding rule 45a........
                                       1943
9359.....JEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
9404.....DAcquisition Obsolete.sal of property under title II of Second 
          War Powers Act, 1942.
                                       1944
9456.....JEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
9467, SecACompensationNow covered by local personnel regulations. See, .
                      also, 35 CFR Part 253; 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 101, 121, 
                      233, 76A. Stat. 14, 15, 22.
                                       1945
9515.....JNavigation (Now covered by 35 CFR ch. I, Subch. C.............
9563.....JNavigation (Now covered by 35 CFR ch. I, subch. C.rtain cases)
9584.....JEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1946
9740<SUP><Office hoursSuperseded. See 2 C.Z.C. ch. 7, 76A Stat. 14; and 
                      local regulations. See, also, 35 CFR Parts 251, 
                      253.

[[Page 285]]

9759.....JEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1947
9888.....AEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1948
9999.....SEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1949
10040....FEmployment (Obsolete. of E.O. No. 9999, Sept. 14, 1948).......
10089....DEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1950
10176....OEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1951
10311....DEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1953
10502....DEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1954
10523....MGoethals memExecuted.ication..................................
10568....OEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1955
10642....OEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1956
10690....NEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
                                       1957
10726....AEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
        provisions).
[[Page 286]]

                                       1958
10788....NEmployment (Obsolete. suspension of certain statutory ........
          provisions).
________________________________________________________________________

  <SUP>1</SUP> That part renumbering (as sec. 40) and amending sec. 42 
of E.O. 1888, which see in this table.


                     Orders of the Secretary of War

________________________________________________________________________

                                  DaSReasons for Omission
________________________________________________________________________

                                  1905
Jan. 17 Appointments tObsolete.ommission................................
Jan. 19 Appointment toObsolete.mmission (amendment of order of Jan. 17, 
         1905).
Apr. 3  Compensation aObsolete.nces of Isthmian Canal Commissioners.....
Apr. 18 Appointments tObsolete.ommission................................
Apr. 24 Appropriation.Obsolete..........................................
May 31  Compensation oObsolete.n Canal Commissioners....................
Nov. 5  Accounting sysObsolete. See 31 U.S.C. Secs. 41 et seq., 65 et ..
                      seq., 71 et seq., 841 et seq.
                                  1906
July 27 Accounting regObsolete.for C.Z..................................
Sept. 24Appropriation Obsolete.ls.......................................
Sept. 24Appropriation Obsolete.for contingent expenses of C.Z. 
         Government.
Nov. 17 Panamanian staObsolete..........................................
                                  1907
Feb. 21 Ratifies actioObsolete.ission re salaries.......................
Feb. 28 Ratifies acts Obsolete.utions of Commission changing C.Z. laws..
Feb. 28 Ratifies paymeObsolete.ety bond premiums........................
Mar. 4  Appointment ofObsolete.shop.....................................
Mar. 12 Patent, trade-Now covered by 4 C.Z.C. Sec. 471..................
Mar. 12 Appointments tObsolete.ommission................................
Mar. 12 Insurance compNow covered by 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 871, et seq..........
Apr. 2  Authority of GObsolete.ested in Chairman of Isthmian Canal 
         Commission.
Aug. 15 Appointment ofObsolete.dges.....................................

[[Page 287]]

Aug. 15 Compensation oObsolete. of joint tribunal.......................
Aug. 17 Expenses of JoObsolete.ssioners.................................
Sept. 4 Water rates coObsolete.atification).............................
Sept. 4 Liquor regulatObsolete..........................................
Sept. 13Compensation oObsolete.rias F., member of joint tribunal........
Sept. 13License fees (Obsolete. musical, variety, and other shows)......
Sept. 25Purchase of brObsolete..........................................
Oct. 16 Sewer and wateObsolete.ions.....................................
                                  1908
Feb. 8  Gold employeesObsolete.ments as to U.S. citizenship)............
Feb. 27 Hospital chargObsolete.namanian indigent sick, lepers, etc......
Apr. 25 Transfer of ceObsolete.k projects to Dept. of Civil 
         Administration.
May 19  Appropriation.Obsolete..........................................
July 6  Appointment ofObsolete.ggs......................................
Aug. 6  Compensation oObsolete. Joint Commission members................
Aug. 6  Compensation oObsolete. Panamanian Joint Commission members.....
Aug. 12 Approval of reObsolete.authorizing approval of vouchers, etc....
Sept. 17Changes names Obsolete.n divisions under Dept. of Civil 
         Administration.
Sept. 28Compensation EObsolete.us.......................................
Oct. 23 Compensation oExecuted. purchasing officer and officers detailed 
         for commissary work.
Dec. 23 C.Z. Gold emplObsolete.strictions as to U.S. citizenship).......
                                  1909
Mar. 20 AdministrationExecuted.estate...................................
May 14  Abolishes offiExecuted.ector of Hospitals.......................
May 14  Payment of finObsolete.es (amending E.O. Mar. 13, 1907, re 
         administrative districts).
Oct. 15 Insurance compObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 871 et seq............
                                  1910

[[Page 288]]

Feb. 8  Board of LocalNow covered by 2 C.Z.C. Sec. 1101.hs).............
May 24  Executive SecrObsolete. Office still exists.....................
Oct. 4  Department of Obsolete..........................................
                                  1911
Mar. 11 Exemption of JObsolete.ro from employment restrictions..........
Sept. 1 Appointment ofObsolete.hnson....................................
                                  1913
Jan. 24 Compensation oObsolete.and Commissioners........................
Sept. 20Retention and Obsolete.D. DuB. Gaillard.........................
                                  1914
Jan. 20 Compensation oObsolete.ohnson...................................
May 8   Compensation oObsolete.and Commissioners........................
May 13  Approval of acObsolete.hmian Canal Commission...................
June 16 Exemption of IObsolete.mployees from E.O. No. 1962, June 9, 1914 
         (Saturday hours of work).
Sept. 8 Compensation oObsolete.et.......................................
Sept. 29Payment of tolNow covered by 35 CFR Part 133. See 35 CFR 133.72.
Nov. 16 Payment of tolObsolete.imated tonnage, plus percentage, until 
         Oct. 1, 1915.
                                  1915
May 12  Sale of materiObsolete.ed for Canal construction................
Oct. 16 Recesses for JObsolete. Commission, and leave regulations.......
                                  1916
Mar. 25 Appointment ofObsolete.uve......................................
May 13  Umpire for JoiObsolete.ommission................................
                                  1917
Mar. 20 Compensation oObsolete.ommission umpire.........................
Sept. 14Compensation oObsolete.and Commissioners........................
Nov. 8  Compensation oObsolete.and Commissioners........................

[[Page 289]]

                                  1918
May 18  Coordination oObsolete.es with War Industries Board.............
                                  1920
Jan. 30 Appointment ofObsolete.ith......................................
May 1   Expenses of JoObsolete.Commission umpire........................
                                  1921
Feb. 26 Maximum rates Obsolete, and covered by local regulations........
June 6  Special PanamaObsolete.mmission.................................
                                  1922
July 28 Marine SuperinObsolete.s acting Governor of C.Z.................
                                  1923
Aug. 15 Motor vehicle Obsolete, and covered by local regulations........
                                  1924
June 21 Saturday hoursObsolete.(exemption of Isthmian employees from 
         E.O. No. 4026).
Dec. 23 Motor vehicle,Obsolete, and covered by local regulations.
         (amendments).
                                  1925
Jan. 10 Conditions of Obsolete.t (amending E.O. No. 3585, Dec. 3, 1921).
                                  1927
May 24  Saturday hoursObsolete.(exemption of Isthmian employees from 
         E.O. No. 4644).
May 25  Supplemental iObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. chs. 3-7; 3 C.Z.C. ch. 1; 
         civil officer35 CFR Part 3.
                                  1928
June 18 Appointment ofObsolete.ntz......................................
Sept. 4 Authorizing coExecuted and obsolete.............................
                                  1929
Jan. 28 Passenger tranNow covered by local regulations..................
Aug. 7  Pay increase fObsolete.itional alien employees..................
                                  1930
Oct. 10 Passenger tranNow covered by local regultions...................
                                  1932

[[Page 290]]

Aug. 4  Purchase of suExecuted.evocation of certain requirement)........
                                  1934
July 18 Alcoholic beveObsolete. See 2 C.Z.C. Secs. 731, 732; 35 CFR Part 
                      53.
________________________________________________________________________



 Canal Zone Orders of the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Army

________________________________________________________________________

C.Z.O. No.                           Reasons for Omission
________________________________________________________________________
                                        
                                       1946
1........JCompensationNow covered by personnel regulations. See also, 35 
          1914).      CFR Part 253.
                                       1947
8........MCompensationNow covered by personnel regulations. See also, 35 
          1914).      CFR Part 253.
10.......SSmallpox vacSuperseded by C.Z.O. 39, 20 F.R. 1399, Mar. 9, ...
                      1955; C.Z.O. 41, 20 F.R. 7825, Oct. 19, 1955, and 
                      now covered by 35 CFR 61.1 et seq., 61.226 et 
                      seq., 61.281.
11.......NNavigation (Now covered by 35 CFR Part 111.es 46-85, Sept. 25, 
          1925).
                                       1948
15.......JNavigation aNow covered by 35 CFR 61.121 et seq., 101.2.ept. .
          25, 1925).
                                       1950
22.......ORevokes E.O.Executed, and not an appropriate subject of ......
                      codification.
                                       1951
24.......NCompensationNow covered by personnel regulations. See also, 35 
          1914).      CFR Part 253.
                                       1952
25.......MMaritime andSuperseded by C.Z.O. 39, 20 F.R. 1395, Mar. 9, ...
          rules 119c, 1955, as amended by C.Z.O. 40, 20 F.R. 2751, Apr. 
                      26, 1955, and now covered by 35 CFR 61.171, 
                      61.192.

[[Page 291]]

                                       1954
32.......FMedical and Obsolete and superseded. See local personnel  No. 
          1888, Sec. 1regulations; also 2 C.Z.C. 101, 121, 233, 76A 
                      Stat. 14, 15, 22.
                                       1960
55.......SAir navigatiSuperseded by C.Z.O. 67, 28 F.R. 12164, Nov. 15,  
          of 5.25 to 51963, and now covered by 35 CFR 51.1, 51.31 to 
                      51.33.
________________________________________________________________________

           Table 14--EXECUTIVE ORDERS OMITTED BUT NOT REPEALED
  Showing executive orders of the President of the United States, 
relating to the Canal Zone, not codified in this revision of 35 CFR, but 
regarded as still being in force or serving as the basic authority for 
actions taken, and therefore not repealed. Orders merely rescinding or 
repealing prior orders, which also are not repealed, are not included in 
this table.
________________________________________________________________________

                                E.O. No.Date
________________________________________________________________________

1888, Secs. </SUP>Feb. 2, 1914.eave provisions)<SUP>1...................
2455........Sept. 15, 1916..............................................
4019 (as affJune 5, 1924; 35 CFR (1960) 1.4.............................
5704........Sept. 2, 1931; 35 CFR (1960) 1.4............................
7676, Secs. July 26, 1937...............................................
7837........May 12, 1938................................................
8234........Sept. 5, 1939...............................................
8382........Mar. 25, 1940...............................................
8398........Apr. 25, 1940...............................................
10263.......June 29, 1951...............................................
________________________________________________________________________

  <SUP>1</SUP>As renumbered and amended by E.O. No. 9740, June 20, 1946, 
11 F.R. 7029; amended by Canal Zone Orders No. 5 of Jan. 30, 1947 
(Secretary of War), 13 F.R. 8648, No. 17 of Mar. 25, 1949 (Secretary of 
the Army), 14 F.R. 1499, No. 19 of Feb. 218, 1950 (Secretary of the 
Army), 15 F.R. 1271, and No. 37 of Oct. 26, 1954 (Secretary of the 
Army), 19 F.R. 7127; renumbered and amended by Canal Zone Order No. 51 
of Feb. 17, 1959 (Secretary of the Army), 24 F.R. 1462; and amended by 
Canal Zone Order No. 57 of Oct. 19, 1961 (Secretary of the Army), 26 
F.R. 10055.

[[Page 292]]

      Table 15--ORDERS AND PROCLAMATIONS REPEALED PRIOR TO REVISION
  Showing orders and proclamations, relating to the Canal Zone, 
specifically repealed, superseded, or terminated prior to this revision 
of 35 CFR. In the last column, ``E.O.'' means Executive Order of the 
President of the United States; ``Proc.'' means Proclamation of the 
President of the United States; and ``C.Z.O.'' means Canal Zone Order of 
the Secretary of War or Secretary of the Army.


         Executive Orders of the President of the United States

________________________________________________________________________

                             No.Repealed or superseded by
________________________________________________________________________


Temporary apNov. 15, 1905...............................................
                                    E.O. Jan. 12, 1906.
Transfer of June 11, 1907lassified position.............................
                                    E.O. Aug. 3, 1907.
Chinese.....Jan. 9, 1908................................................
                               E.O. No. 2526, Feb. 16, 1917.
1076........May 22, 1909................................................
                               E.O. No. 9636, Oct. 3, 1945.
Hunting.....Sept. 8, 1909...............................................
                   E.O. No. 1884, Jan. 27, 1914; Act July 5, 1932, ch. 
                                 417, Sec. 2, 47 Stat. 572.
Enticement oNov. 23, 1909...............................................
                         Act Feb. 16, 1933, ch. 86, 47 Stat. 810.
1239........Aug. 20, 1910...............................................
                   Act Feb. 27, 1933, ch. 128, Sec. 1732, 47 Stat. 1346.
1295........Feb. 2, 1911................................................
                   Act Feb. 27, 1933, ch. 128, Sec. 1732, 47 Stat. 1346.
Deportees whMay 2, 1911.................................................
                              E.O. No. 1832, Sept. 25, 1913.
1409........Sept. 8, 1911...............................................
                   E.O. No. 2040, Sept. 5, 1914; Act Feb. 16, 1933, ch. 
                                  89, Sec. 4, 47 Stat. 813.
1448........Dec. 26, 1911...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 68, May 27, 1964.
1489........Feb. 28, 1912...............................................
                               E.O. No. 3434, Apr. 14, 1921.
1705........Feb. 18, 1913...............................................
                               E.O. No. 2121, Jan. 19, 1915.
1857........Nov. 7, 1913................................................
                  E.O. Mar. 6, 1920; Act July 5, 1932, ch. 418, Sec. 8, 
                                        47 Stat. 574.
1884........Jan. 27, 1914...............................................
                     Act July 5, 1932, ch. 417, Sec. 2, 47 Stat. 572.
1897........Mar. 12, 1914...............................................
                            Order Secretary War, Aug. 4, 1932.
1898........Mar. 12, 1914...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
2006........July 30, 1914...............................................
                              E.O. No. 8250, Sept. 11, 1939.
2007........Aug. 3, 1914................................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
2019........Aug. 14, 1914...............................................
                                    E.O. Jan. 9, 1920.
2062........Oct. 13, 1914...............................................
                               E.O. No. 8306, Dec. 9, 1939.
2120........Jan. 15, 1915...............................................
                                    E.O. July 25, 1916.
2164........Apr. 7, 1915................................................
                               E.O. No. 10351, May 15, 1952.
2382........May 17, 1916................................................
                              E.O. No. 10398, Sept. 26, 1952.
2451........Sept. 5, 1916...............................................
                               E.O. No. 3434, Apr. 14, 1921.
2479........Oct. 22, 1916...............................................
                               E.O. No. 3761, Dec. 6, 1922.
Control of CApr. 9, 1917ring hostilities................................
                               E.O. No. 3032, Jan. 25, 1919.
2692........Aug. 27, 1917...............................................
                               E.O. No. 3027, Jan. 25, 1919.
2737........Oct. 24, 1917...............................................
                               E.O. No. 3027, Jan. 25, 1919.
2867........May 28, 1918................................................
                               E.O. No. 2907, July 9, 1918.
2869........May 28, 1918................................................
                               E.O. No. 3130, July 25, 1919.
2987........Nov. 4, 1918................................................
                               E.O. No. 9147, Apr. 25, 1942.
2993........Nov. 14, 1918...............................................
                               E.O. No. 9039, Jan. 24, 1942.
2996........Nov. 16, 1918...............................................
                                    E.O. May 16, 1921.
3202........Dec. 22, 1919...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7407, July 6, 1936.

[[Page 293]]

3203........Dec. 22, 1919...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7806, Feb. 5, 1938.
3207........Dec. 30, 1919...............................................
                              C.Z.O. No. 29, Sept. 26, 1952.
Carrying andMar. 6, 1920s...............................................
                     Act July 5, 1932, ch. 418, Sec. 8, 47 Stat. 574.
3257........Apr. 9, 1920................................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 31, June 30, 1953.
3386........Jan. 21, 1921...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7407, July 6, 1936.
3427........Apr. 7, 1921................................................
                               E.O. No. 3562, Oct. 18, 1921.
3428........Apr. 8, 1921................................................
                               E.O. No. 7407, July 6, 1936.
3603........Dec. 30, 1921...............................................
                               E.O. No. 4276, July 28, 1925.
3965........Feb. 26, 1924...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
3985........Apr. 3, 1924................................................
                                E.O. No. 4006, May 7, 1924.
4047........July 8, 1924................................................
                               E.O. No. 7387, June 15, 1936.
4104........Nov. 22, 1924...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7387, June 15, 1936.
4125........Jan. 12, 1925...............................................
                               E.O. No. 4476 July 12, 1926.
4314, rules Sept. 25, 1925..............................................
                  C.Z.O. No. 22, Oct. 20, 1950; C.Z.O. No. 36, Oct. 26, 
                                            1954.
4711........Aug. 29, 1927...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
4792........Jan. 3, 1928................................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
4813........Feb. 21, 1928...............................................
                               E.O. No. 5426, Aug. 20, 1930.
4947........Aug. 11, 1928...............................................
                               E.O. No. 8354, Feb. 25, 1940.
4971........Sept. 28, 1928..............................................
                              E.O. No. 8251, Sept. 12, 1939.
5047........Feb. 18, 1929...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 3, Jan. 21, 1947.
5426........Aug. 20, 1930...............................................
                               E.O. No. 5869, June 30, 1932.
5704........Sept. 2, 1931...............................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
6010........Jan. 31, 1933...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 31, June 30, 1953.
6390........Nov. 3, 1933................................................
                               E.O. No. 7676, July 26, 1937.
6713........May 21, 1934................................................
                              C.Z.O. No. 29, Sept. 26, 1952.
6843........Sept. 15, 1934..............................................
                               E.O. No. 7806, Feb. 5, 1938.
7021........Apr. 19, 1935...............................................
                              E.O. No. 10102, Jan. 31, 1950.
7234........Nov. 25, 1935...............................................
                               E.O. No. 8879, Aug. 30, 1941.
7387........June 15, 1936...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 44, Sept. 7, 1956.
7399........June 23, 1936...............................................
                               E.O. No. 9434, Apr. 8, 1944.
7407........July 6, 1936................................................
                               E.O. No. 9293, Jan. 2, 1943.
7806........Feb. 5, 1938................................................
                              C.Z.O. No. 18, Sept. 14, 1949.
7862........Apr. 7, 1938................................................
                               C.Z.O. No.44, Sept. 7, 1956.
8232........Sept. 5, 1939...............................................
                               E.O. No. 10107, Feb. 8, 1950.
8251........Sept. 12, 1939..............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 3, Jan. 21, 1947.
8271........Oct. 16, 1939...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 3, Jan. 21, 1947.
8306........Dec. 19, 1939...............................................
                       C.Z.O. No. 69, 29 F.R. 15573, Nov. 20, 1954.
8354........Feb. 25, 1940...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 28, Aug. 11, 1952.
8430........June 5, 1940................................................
                               E.O. No. 8766, June 3, 1941.
8737........Apr. 16, 1941...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 6, Mar. 31, 1947.
8782........June 12, 1941...............................................
                                C.Z.O. No. 2, Dec. 1, 1946.
8981........Dec. 17, 1941...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 23, May 18, 1951.
8986........Dec. 19, 1941...............................................
                               E.O. No. 9467, Aug. 19, 1944.
9039........Jan. 24, 1942...............................................
                               E.O. No. 9740, June 20, 1946.
9110........Mar. 24, 1942...............................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 6, Mar. 31, 1947.
9164........May 18, 1942................................................
                               E.O. No. 9467, Aug. 19, 1944.
9171........May 21, 1942................................................
                               E.O. No. 9434, Apr. 8, 1944.
9293........Jan. 2, 1943................................................
                               C.Z.O. No. 65, June 18, 1963.
9479........Sept. 6, 1944...............................................
                              E.O. No. 10102, Jan. 31, 1950.
9512........Jan. 16, 1945...............................................
                              E.O. No. 10093, Dec. 20, 1949.
10101.......Jan. 31, 1950...............................................
                               E.O. No. 10595, Feb. 7, 1955.
10794.......Dec. 10, 1958...............................................
                              E.O. No. 11171, Aug. 18, 1964.
________________________________________________________________________



           Proclamations of the President of the United States

________________________________________________________________________

                               Repealed or superseded by

________________________________________________________________________

1225........Nov. 13, 1912...............................................
                              Proc. No. 2247, Aug. 25, 1937.

[[Page 294]]

1258........Nov. 21, 1913...............................................
                              Proc. No. 2248, Aug. 25, 1937.
2775........Mar. 26, 1948...............................................
                              Proc. No. 2903, Sept. 26, 1950.
2808........Sept. 7, 1948...............................................
                              Proc. No. 2903, Sept. 26, 1950.
2831........Mar. 12, 1949...............................................
                              Proc. No. 2903, Sept. 26, 1950.
2852........Aug. 25, 1949...............................................
                              Proc. No. 2903, Sept. 26, 1950.
2875........Mar. 6, 1950................................................
                              Proc. No. 2903, Sept. 26, 1950.
________________________________________________________________________



                     Orders of the Secretary of War

________________________________________________________________________

                                Repealed or superseded by
________________________________________________________________________

Customs servJune 24, 1904...............................................
                            Order Secretary War, Dec. 16, 1904.
Postal serviJune 24, 1904...............................................
                     Act Feb. 16, 1933, ch. 89, Sec. 4, 47 Stat. 813.
ImportationsDec. 3, 1904................................................
                  Proc. No. 1699, May 28, 1924; see also, 43 Stat. 1952; 
                      Act Feb. 16, 1933, ch. 89, Sec. 4, 47 Stat. 813.
ImportationsDec. 6, 1904................................................
                  Proc. No. 1699, May 28, 1924; see also, 43 Stat. 1952.
Customs admiDec. 28, 1904...............................................
                  Proc. No. 1699, May 28, 1924; see also, 43 Stat. 1952.
Entries of mJan. 7, 1905................................................
                  Proc. No. 1699, May 28, 1924; see also, 43 Stat. 1952.
Recording inMar. 12, 1907...............................................
                                    E.O. Feb. 2, 1911.
AdministratiJune 22, 1907...............................................
                               E.O. No. 1468, Feb. 5, 1912.
Speed of autFeb. 27, 1908...............................................
                               E.O. No. 1489, Feb. 28, 1912.
Amendment ofJuly 3, 1908roc. Sec. 321...................................
                   Act Feb. 27, 1933, ch. 127, Sec. 1240, 47 Stat. 1123.
AdministratiJuly 21, 1909...............................................
                               E.O. No. 1468, Feb. 5, 1912.
Arms and hunDec. 1, 1909s...............................................
                    E.O. No. 1857, Nov. 7, 1913; Act July 5, 1932, ch. 
                                 418, Sec. 8, 47 Stat. 574.
Import dutieJan. 5, 1911sary privileges.................................
                  Proc. No. 1699, May 28, 1924, see also, 43 Stat. 1952.
Hunting liceNov. 3, 1911ed men).........................................
                    E.O. No. 1857, Nov. 7, 1913; Act July 5, 1932, ch. 
                                 418, Sec. 8, 47 Stat. 574.
Rates of farJan. 12, 1918rtation........................................
                            Order Secretary War, Feb. 26, 1921.
Rates of farMay 29, 1919ortation........................................
                            Order Secretary War, Feb. 26, 1921.
________________________________________________________________________



                            Canal Zone Orders
           Issued by Secretary of War or Secretary of the Army

________________________________________________________________________

                                Repealed or superseded by
________________________________________________________________________

2...........Dec. 1, C.Z.O. No. 49, July 8, 1958.........................

4...........Jan. 24,E.O. No. 10263, June 29, 1951.......................

6...........Mar. 31,C.Z.O. No. 20, June 29, 1950........................

20..........June 29,C.Z.O. No. 49, July 8, 1958.........................

23..........May 18, C.Z.O. No. 35, Sept. 27, 1954.......................

26..........Mar. 18,C.Z.O. No. 29, Sept. 26, 1952.......................

27..........Apr. 18,C.Z.O. No. 29, Sept. 26, 1952.......................

31..........June 30,C.Z.O. No. 54, Aug. 22, 1960........................

38..........Dec. 23,C.Z.O. No. 52, Feb. 17, 1959........................

39..........Mar. 9, C.Z.O. No. 68, May 27, 1964.........................

49..........July 8, C.Z.O. No. 54, Aug. 22, 1960........................

[[Page 295]]

50..........Nov. 26,C.Z.O. No. 54, Aug. 22, 1960........................

________________________________________________________________________


              Table 16--EXECUTIVE ORDERS TO CANAL ZONE CODE
  This table shows the location in the Canal Zone Code of sections 
having their original source in Executive Orders.
________________________________________________________________________

                               CanaCanal Zone Code (1963)
                                           
                                  DateSeTitSeTitSection
________________________________________________________________________

                                  1904
    May 9...1.......1...1.....31........................................
                                  1907
    Mar. 1..5.......342,6.....331,332,..................................
                    441,773...1342......................................
    Mar. 2184.......43..8.....431.......................................
    Do....294.......65..4.....43........................................
    Do....244.......11614.....65........................................
    Do....244.......11634.....1161......................................
    Do....244.......11714.....1163......................................
    Do....394.......151.4.....1171......................................
    Do....394.......958.4.....151.......................................
    Do....414.......169.4.....958.......................................
    Do....524.......10094.....169.......................................
    Do....534.......10074.....1007......................................
    Do....534.......10054.....1005......................................
    Do....673.......532.4.....1009......................................
    Do....673.......533.3.....532.......................................
    Do....793.......191.3.....533.......................................
    Do....793.......192.3.....191.......................................
    Do....793.......193.3.....192.......................................
    Do....793.......194.................................................
    Mar. 2793.......195.................................................
    Do....804.......981.................................................
    Do....814.......985.................................................
    Do....814.......986,................................................
    Do....814.......988.................................................
    Do....814.......989.................................................
    Do....814.......991.................................................
                                  1908
    Jan. 9..5.......603.5.....603.......................................
    Aug. 1..5.......773.5.....733.......................................
                                  1909
    Jan. 61.2.......241.2.....241.......................................
    Do....2.2.......242.2.....242.......................................
    Do....3.2.......243.2.....243.......................................
    Do....4.2.......244.2.....244.......................................

[[Page 296]]

    Do....5.2.......244,2.....244, note.................................
    July 3..5.......254.5.....254.......................................
    Do....79............3.....193.......................................
    Do....79............3.....194.......................................
    Do....79............3.....195.......................................
    Do....80............4.....981.......................................
    Do....81............4.....985.......................................
    Do....81............4.....986, 987..................................
    Do....81............4.....988.......................................
    Do....81............4.....989.......................................
    Do....81............4.....991.......................................
    Oct. 21.5.......443.5.....443.......................................
    Do....2.5.......810.5.....810.......................................
    Do....3.5.......44, 5.....444, 811..................................
    Nov. 2..2.......224.2.....224.......................................
                                  1910
    July 21.4.......121.4.....121.......................................
                                  1911
    May 111.5.......828.5.....828.......................................
    June 2..2.......304.2.....304.......................................
    Sept. 1.5.......843.5.....843.......................................
    Sept. ..5.......827.5.....827.......................................
    Nov. 1..5.......787.5.....787.......................................
                                  1912
    Apr. 11.5.......844.5.....844.......................................
    Do....2.5.......845.5.....845.......................................
    Do....3.5.......846.5.....846.......................................
                                  1913
    Mar. 1..2.......244,2.....244, note.................................
    Aug. 23.6.......613.6.....613.......................................
    Nov. 11.3.......12663.....1266......................................
    Do....2.3.......12673.....1267......................................
    Do....3.3.......12683.....1268......................................
    Nov. 14.3.......12693.....1269......................................
                                  1914
    July 31.4.......967.4.....967.......................................

                                  1920
    Jan. 91.4.......10014.....1001......................................
    Do....2.4.......982.4.....982.......................................
    Do....3.4.......983.4.....983.......................................
    Do....4.4.......10214.....1021......................................
    Do....5.4.......10224.....1022......................................
    Do....6.4.......10234.....1023......................................
    Do....7.4.......10024.....1002......................................
    Do....8.4.......10244.....1024......................................
    Do....9.4.......10254.....1025......................................
    Do....104.......10264.....1026......................................
    Do....124.......10034.....1003......................................
    Do....154.......10044.....1004......................................
    Do....164.......10064.....1006......................................

[[Page 297]]

    Do....174.......984.4.....984.......................................
                                  1924
    Mar. 51.4.......982.4.....982.......................................
    Do....2.4.......984,4.....984, 1004,................................
                                                             1005, 1006.
                                  1925
    July 2Ru4.......153.4.....153.......................................
    Do....Ru4.......26..4.....26........................................
    Do....Ru4.......442.4.....442.......................................
    Do....Ru4.......45..4.....45........................................
    Do....Ru4.......965,4.....965, 966..................................
                                  1928
    Jan. 32.4.......393.4.....393.......................................
    Do....3.4.......394.4.....394.......................................
    Do....4.4.......395.4.....395.......................................
    Do....5.4.......396.4.....396.......................................
    Do....7.4.......397.4.....397.......................................
    June 2..4.......987.4.....987.......................................
    Nov. 33.4.......17514.....1751......................................
    Do....4.4.......17524.....1752......................................
    Do....5.4.......17534.....1753......................................
    Do....6.4.......17544.....1754......................................
    Do....7.4.......17554.....1755......................................
    Do....9.4.......17564.....1756......................................
    Do....104.......17584.....1758......................................
    Do....114.......17594.....1759......................................
    Do....124.......17604.....1760......................................
    Do....134.......17614.....1761......................................
    Do....144.......17624.....1762......................................
    Do....154.......17624.....1762......................................
________________________________________________________________________


[[Page 299]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.

For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

35 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
3.1 (Subpart A)  Revised eff. 7-14-86..............................21359
61  Part heading revised...........................................21360
61.121--61.281 (Subpart E)  Revised eff. 7-14-86...................21361
103.8  (f)(1) revised; interim.....................................27174
    Confirmed......................................................45884
105  Authority citation revised....................................36011
105.1  (a) revised.................................................36011
105.7  Added.......................................................36011
251  Authority citation revised....................................33262
251.3  (b)(4) amended..............................................33262
251.4  (a) and (b)(2) amended; (b)(3) and (4) removed; (c)(8) 
        redesignated as (b)(6); (g) added..........................33262
    (b) (4) and (6) effective date corrected.......................40418
251.6  Added.......................................................33262
251.12  (b)(1) amended.............................................33262
251.43  (a) and (b) amended........................................33262
253  Authority citation revised....................................33262
253.8  (b) introductory text, (1), and (6) revised.................25693
    (a) and (c)(9) and (10) amended; (c)(8) removed................33262
    (b)(6) revised.................................................37182
253.44  (e) revised................................................33262
253.47  (b) and (c) amended........................................33262
253.291 (Subpart J)  Revised.......................................33262
253.292  Removed...................................................33262

                                  1987

35 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
9  Authority citation revised......................................31397
9.2  Revised.......................................................31397
9.4  Amended.......................................................31397
9.5  (a) revised...................................................31397
9.6  (a)(1) amended; (b) revised...................................31397
9.8  (b)(1) revised................................................31397
9.11  Revised......................................................31397
9.12  Redesignated as 9.14.........................................31397
    Added..........................................................31398
9.13  Redesignated as 9.15.........................................31397
    Added..........................................................31398
9.14  Redesignated from 9.12.......................................31397
9.15  Redesignated from 9.13.......................................31397
103.8  (d)(2) and (3) and (g) revised; (d)(4) added; (f)(1) 
        amended....................................................37952
119  Authority citation revised.....................................3800
119.103  Revised....................................................3800
257  Added.........................................................26007

                                  1988

35 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
9.2  Confirmed.....................................................16256

[[Page 300]]

9.4  Confirmed.....................................................16256
9.5  Confirmed.....................................................16256
9.6  Confirmed.....................................................16256
9.8  Confirmed.....................................................16256
9.11  Revision confirmed; (e) revised..............................16256
9.12  Redesignation and addition confirmed.........................16256
9.13  Redesignation and addition confirmed.........................16256
9.14  Confirmed....................................................16256
9.15  Confirmed....................................................16256
60  Revised.........................................................7894
103  Authority citation revised....................................12517
103.6  (e)(1) revised..............................................12517
103.8  (d)(2) and (3) and (g) revisions, (d)(4) addition, and 
        (f)(1) amendment confirmed.................................15385

                                  1989

35 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
101.10  (a)(3), (e) and (f) revised................................37326
103.1  Amended (OMB numbers).......................................29336
103.7  Revised.....................................................43962
103.19  Heading, (a), and (d) revised; new (e) and (f) added.......43962
113.3  (a) introductory text revised...............................37326
113.4  (a) revised.................................................37327
113.5  Revised.....................................................37327
113.21  Revised....................................................37327
113.22  Revised....................................................37327
113.26  (a) revised................................................37327
113.29  (b) and (c) revised........................................37327
113.42  Revised....................................................37327
113.43  (c) revised................................................37327
113.45  Revised....................................................37327
113.49  (b) and (c) revised........................................37327
113.50  (c), (d) and (e) revised...................................37327
117.4  Amended (OMB numbers).......................................29336
121.2  Revised.....................................................37328
121.3  Removed.....................................................37328
121.41  (a) and (c) revised........................................37328
121.42  Revised....................................................37328
121.45  Revised....................................................37328
121.47  (c) revised................................................37328
121.58  Revised....................................................37328
121.63  Heading revised............................................37328
121.65  Revised....................................................37328
121.66  Revised....................................................37328
121.67  Revised....................................................37329
121.69  Revised....................................................37329
121.70  Revised....................................................37329
121.71  Revised....................................................37329
121.72  Revised....................................................37329
121.74  Revised....................................................37329
121.76  Revised....................................................37329
121.79  Revised....................................................37329
121.85  Revised....................................................37329
121.87  Revised....................................................37329
121.88  Revised....................................................37329
121.89  (a) introductory text, and (1) and (b) revised.............37329
121.90  Revised....................................................37330
121.92  Revised....................................................37330
121.99  (c) added..................................................37330
121.102  Revised...................................................37330
121.107  (a), (b) and (c) revised; (d) added.......................37330
121.108  Revised...................................................37330
121.131  Revised...................................................37330
121.171  Revised...................................................37331
121.173  Revised...................................................37331
123.3  (c) revised.................................................37331
123.4  Heading and (a) revised.....................................37331
133.1  Revised.....................................................35148
133.32  Revised....................................................43965
133.34  Revised....................................................35148
    Corrected......................................................36096
135  Authority citation revised.............................29336, 35148
135.1  Amended (OMB numbers).......................................29336
135.2  Amended (OMB numbers).......................................29336
135.285  Revised...................................................35148
135.352  Revised...................................................35148
    Corrected......................................................36096
135.443  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................29336
135.484  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................29336
253.8  (b)(1) and (d) revised.......................................4019
    Technical correction............................................6364

                                  1990

35 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
101.13  (b) introductory text revised..............................11908
103.3  Nomenclature change.........................................11908

[[Page 301]]

103.4  (b) introductory text nomenclature change...................11908
103.6  (b)(1), (f)(2), and (j)(3) amended..........................11908
103.28  Nomenclature change........................................11908
103.34  Nomenclature change........................................11908
105.1  (b) nomenclature change.....................................11909
105.2  Introductory text, (b), and (c) nomenclature change.........11909
109.3  Revised.....................................................11909
109.6  (a) revised.................................................11909
111.6  (f) nomenclature change.....................................11909
111.13  (e) nomenclature change....................................11909
111.19  (f) and (g) amended........................................11909
111.38  (b) nomenclature change....................................11909
115  Authority citation revised  ..................................11909
115.2  (a)(2) amended..............................................11909
117  Authority citation revised....................................11909
117.5  Nomenclature change.........................................11909
119.221  Revised....................................................4837
    Regulation at 55 FR 4837 confirmed.............................15228
119.223  (c) revised; (d) added.....................................4837
    Regulation at 55 FR 4837 confirmed.............................15228
119.226  Added......................................................4837
    Regulation at 55 FR 4837 confirmed; (e) revised................15229

                                  1991

35 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
9  Authority citation revised......................................11373
9.16  Added; interim...............................................11373
    Regulation at 56 FR 11373 confirmed............................29179
60.1  (b)(8) revised; (b)(9) and (10) added........................59882
60.2  (b)(1) and (c) revised.......................................59882
60.3  (f)(3)(ii) revised...........................................59882
60.4  (a)(1) and (2) revised; (a)(3) added.........................59882
60.6  (d) introductory text revised................................59882
60.8  (b) and (m) intorductory text revised........................59882
60.9  (f) revised..................................................59882
60.10  (a), (d)(4)(i) and (e) revised..............................59883
60.11  (c) and (d) revised.........................................59883
60.12  (a), (d)(3) and (e) revised.................................59883
60.13  (b), (d) and (e)(1) revised.................................59883
60.14  (a) revised.................................................59884
60.15  Revised.....................................................59884
60.17  (b) and (c) revised; (d) added..............................59884
101.2  (a) and (b) revised.........................................55632
251.4  (g) revised; (h) added.......................................1923
    (h) revised....................................................40555
251.25  Revised....................................................40555
251.31  (a), (b) introductory text, (1) and (c) revised; (b)(4) 
        removed; (b)(5) redesignated as (b)(4) and revised; (e) 
        added......................................................40556
251.32  (b) revised; (d) added.....................................40556
253.8  (b) introductory text, (1), (c)(9) and (10) revised; (c)(8) 
        added.......................................................1924
    (b) introductory text and (d) revised..........................40556
253.41  Revised.....................................................1924
253.76--253.77 (Subpart D)  Added...................................1924
255  Removed.......................................................29180

                                  1992

35 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 1
133.1  Revised.....................................................37066
251.32  (b) designation corrected..................................28907

                                  1993

35 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
251.4  (a) amended; (i) added.......................................5616

                                  1994

35 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
7.9  Amended.......................................................26122
9.2  Amended.......................................................26122
9.4  Amended.......................................................26122
9.6  (a)(1) amended................................................26122
9.8  (b)(1) amended................................................26122

[[Page 302]]

9.11  (e) introductory text and (4) amended........................26122
10.5  (b)(1) amended...............................................26123
10.10  (b)(1) amended..............................................26123
10.12  (a) amended.................................................26123
10.14  (b)(1) amended..............................................26123
10.21  Revised......................................................9089
    Regulation  at 59 FR 9089 eff. date corrected to 2-25-94.......11659
10.22  Revised......................................................9090
    Regulation  at 59 FR 9090 eff. date corrected to 2-25-94.......11659
60.12  (a) and (d)(3) amended......................................26123
103  Authority citation revised....................................44929
103.8  (e) revised; OMB number.....................................44929
133  Authority citation revised....................................43254
133.1  Introductory text, (a) and (b) revised......................43254
133.31  Revised....................................................43254
133.32  Revised; OMB number........................................43254
133.33  Revised....................................................43254
135  Revised.......................................................43255
135.2  OMB number..................................................43255
135.3  OMB number..................................................43255
135.31  OMB number.................................................43265
135.42  (a)(2)(i) corrected........................................52862
135.443  Amended...................................................26123

                                  1995

                       (No regulations published)

                                  1996

35 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
61.155  (e) added..................................................36497
70  Authority citation revised.....................................16719
70.14  Removed; new 70.14 redesignated from 70.16 and amended......16719
70.15  Removed.....................................................16719
70.16  Redesignated as 70.14.......................................16719
123.4  (a) amended.................................................36498
133  Authority citation revised....................................60612
133.1  Revised.....................................................60612
135  Authority citation revised....................................60612
135.2  Amended.....................................................60612
135.3  Heading and (a) revised.....................................60612
135.13  (a) introductory text amended; (a)(10) and (11) added; (b) 
        revised....................................................60612
135.14  (d) added..................................................60612
135.15  (d) and (e) added..........................................60612
135.31  Amended....................................................60612
135.41  Amended....................................................60612
135.42  (c) added..................................................60612

                                  1997

    (Regulations published from January 1, 1997 through July 1, 1997)

35 CFR
                                                                   62 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
61.31--61.38 (Subpart B)  Removed..................................33748
61.61--61.69 (Subpart C)  Removed..................................33748
61.91--61.95 (Subpart D)  Removed..................................33748
61.121--61.281 (Subpart E)  Nomenclature change....................33748
61.121  Amended....................................................33748
61.122  Amended....................................................33748
61.152  Amended....................................................33748
61.154  (a) amended................................................33748
61.155  (e) correctly revised......................................12751
    (a)(1) and (d) revised.........................................33748
61.193  (a) and (b) amended........................................33748
61.195  (b) amended................................................33748
61.201  Amended....................................................33748
61.222  (d) and (e) amended........................................33748
61.223  (c) amended................................................33748
61.224  (c) amended................................................33748
61.225  Amended....................................................33748
61.227  Amended....................................................33748
61.242  (b) amended................................................33748
61.243  Amended....................................................33748
61.263  (a) revised; (b) amended...................................33748
61.264  Amended....................................................33748
103.8  Removed; interim............................................18276
103.9  Removed; interim......................................
</pre></body></html>
