<html><body><pre>
[Title 23 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - April 1, 2004 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]          


<R02>
          23

                         Revised as of April 1, 2004


          Highways
          
          <R03>


________________________

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of April 1, 2004
          With Ancillaries
                    Published by
                    Office of the Federal Register
                    National Archives and Records
                    Administration
                    A Special Edition of the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 2004



  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing 
                                  Office
  Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area 
                              (202) 512-1800
      Fax: (202) 512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001

[[Page iii]]

<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 23:
          Chapter I--Federal Highway Administration, 
          Department of Transportation                               3
          Chapter II--National Highway Traffic Safety 
          Administration and Federal Highway Administration, 
          Department of Transportation                             443
          Chapter III--National Highway Traffic Safety 
          Administration, Department of Transportation             487
  Finding Aids:
      Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference........     523
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     525
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     543
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     553


[[Page iv]]

                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus,  23 CFR 1.1 refers 
                       to title 23, part 1, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, April 1, 2004), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request. 

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB 
control numbers as amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These 
OMB numbers are placed as close as possible to the applicable 
recordkeeping or reporting requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in 11 separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I). A list of CFR titles, chapters, 
and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

[[Page vii]]


REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408 or e-mail 
fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll free, 
866-512-1800 or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to the Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 
371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO Customer Service call 202-
512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, The United States 
Government Manual, the Federal Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, 
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act 
Compilation are available in electronic format at www.gpoaccess.gov/
nara. For more information, contact Electronic Information Dissemination 
Services, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-
293-6498 (toll-free). E-mail, gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal--
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

April 1, 2004.


[[Page ix]]
                               THIS TITLE

    Title 23--Highways is composed of one volume. The contents of this 
volume represent the current regulations of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration and the Federal Highway Administration, Department 
of Transportation, issued under this title of the CFR as of April 1, 
2004.

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>


[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                           TITLE 23--HIGHWAYS


<R02>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
  Transportation............................................           1

chapter ii--National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
  and Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
  Transportation............................................        1200

chapter iii--National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
  Department of Transportation..............................        1313

Cross References: Regulations concerning construction and maintenance of 
  roads on Indian lands, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the 
  Interior: See Indians, 25 CFR part 170.

  Regulations of the Bureau of Land Management concerning rights-of-way 
for roads and highways: See Public Lands, Interior, 43 CFR part 2800.

  Employment and Training Administration, Department of Labor: See 
Employees' Benefits, 20 CFR chapter V.

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
 CHAPTER I--FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

           SUBCHAPTER A--GENERAL MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Part                                                                Page
1               General.....................................           7
                    SUBCHAPTER B--PAYMENT PROCEDURES
140             Reimbursement...............................          12
172             Administration of engineering and design 
                    related service contracts...............          19
180             Credit assistance for Surface Transportation 
                    projects................................          22
190             Incentive payments for controlling outdoor 
                    advertising on the interstate system....          22
192             Drug offender's driver's license suspension.          23
                       SUBCHAPTER C--CIVIL RIGHTS
200             Title VI program and related statutes--
                    implementation and review procedures....          27
230             External programs...........................          30
                SUBCHAPTER D--NATIONAL HIGHWAY INSTITUTE
260             Education and training programs.............          72
                   SUBCHAPTER E--PLANNING AND RESEARCH
420             Planning and research program administration          78
450             Planning assistance and standards...........          89
460             Public road mileage for apportionment of 
                    highway safety funds....................         116
470             Highway systems.............................         117
         SUBCHAPTER F--TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
500             Management and monitoring systems...........         124

[[Page 4]]

511             [Reserved]

            SUBCHAPTER G--ENGINEERING AND TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
620             Engineering.................................         132
625             Design standards for highways...............         134
626             Pavement policy.............................         137
627             Value engineering...........................         137
630             Preconstruction procedures..................         138
633             Required contract provisions................         145
635             Construction and maintenance................         159
636             Design-build contracting....................         183
637             Construction inspection and approval........         198
645             Utilities...................................         200
646             Railroads...................................         218
650             Bridges, structures, and hydraulics.........         227
652             Pedestrian and bicycle accommodations and 
                    projects................................         240
655             Traffic operations..........................         243
656             Carpool and vanpool projects................         249
657             Certification of size and weight enforcement         251
658             Truck size and weight, route designations--
                    length, width and weight limitations....         256
660             Special programs (Direct Federal)...........         316
661             Indian Reservation Road Bridge Program......         323
667             [Reserved]
668             Emergency relief program....................         327
669             Enforcement of heavy vehicle use tax........         335
               SUBCHAPTER H--RIGHT-OF-WAY AND ENVIRONMENT
710             Right-of-way and real estate................         338
750             Highway beautification......................         353
751             Junkyard control and acquisition............         371
752             Landscape and roadside development..........         376
771             Environmental impact and related procedures.         379
772             Procedures for abatement of highway traffic 
                    noise and construction noise............         396

[[Page 5]]

777             Mitigation of environmental impacts to 
                    privately owned wetlands................         402
                   SUBCHAPTER I--PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
810             Mass transit and special use highway 
                    projects................................         407
                      SUBCHAPTER J--HIGHWAY SAFETY
924             Highway safety improvement program..........         413
            SUBCHAPTER K--INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
940             Intelligent transportation system 
                    architecture and standards..............         416
                  SUBCHAPTER L--FEDERAL LANDS HIGHWAYS
970             National Park Service management systems....         419
971             Forest Service management systems...........         424
972             Fish and Wildlife Service management systems         430
973             Management systems pertaining to the Bureau 
                    of Indian Affairs and the Indian 
                    Reservation Roads Program...............         436

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
           SUBCHAPTER A_GENERAL MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION




<R03>
PART 1_GENERAL--Table of Contents




Sec.
1.1 Purpose.
1.2 Definitions.
1.3 Federal-State cooperation; authority of State highway departments.
1.5 Information furnished by State highway departments.
1.7 Urban area boundaries.
1.8 [Reserved]
1.9 Limitation on Federal participation.
1.11 Engineering services.
1.23 Rights-of-way.
1.27 Maintenance.
1.28 Diversion of highway revenues.
1.32 Issuance of directives.
1.33 Conflicts of interest.
1.35 Bonus program.
1.36 Compliance with Federal laws and regulations.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 25 FR 4162, May 11, 1960, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this part is to implement and 
carry out the provisions of Federal law relating to the administration 
of Federal aid for highways.


<R05>
Sec. 1.2  Definitions.

    (a) Terms defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a), shall have the same meaning 
where used in the regulations in this part, except as modified herein.
    (b) The following terms where used in the regulations in this part 
shall have the following meaning:
    Administrator. The Federal Highway Administrator.
    Advertising policy. The national policy relating to the regulation 
of outdoor advertising declared in title 23 U.S.C. 131.
    Advertising standards. The ``National Standards for Regulation by 
States of Outdoor Advertising Signs, Displays and Devices Adjacent to 
the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways'' promulgated by 
the Secretary (part 20 of this chapter).
    Federal laws. The provisions of title 23 U.S.C., and all other 
Federal laws, heretofore or hereafter enacted, relating to Federal aid 
for highways.
    Latest available Federal census. The latest available Federal 
decennial census, except for the establishment of urban area.
    Project. An undertaking by a State highway department for highway 
construction, including preliminary engineering, acquisition of rights-
of-way and actual construction, or for highway planning and research, or 
for any other work or activity to carry out the provisions of the 
Federal laws for the administration of Federal aid for highways.
    Secondary road plan. A plan for administration of Federal aid for 
highways on the Federal-aid secondary highway system pursuant to 23 
U.S.C. 117.
    Secretary. The Secretary of Transportation.
    State. Any State of the United States, the District of Columbia and 
Puerto Rico.
    Urban area. An area including and adjacent to a municipality or 
other urban place having a population of five thousand or more, as 
determined by the latest available published official Federal census, 
decennial or special, within boundaries to be fixed by a State highway 
department, subject to the approval of the Administrator.

[25 FR 4162, May 11, 1960, as amended at 35 FR 18719, Dec. 10, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 1.3  Federal-State cooperation; authority of State highway departments.

    The Administrator shall cooperate with the States, through their 
respective State highway departments, in the construction of Federal-aid 
highways. Each State highway department, maintained in conformity with 
23 U.S.C. 302, shall be authorized, by the laws of the State, to make 
final decisions for the State in all matters relating to, and to enter 
into, on behalf of the State, all contracts and agreements for projects 
and to take such other actions on behalf of the State as may be 
necessary

[[Page 8]]

to comply with the Federal laws and the regulations in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1.5  Information furnished by State highway departments.

    At the request of the Administrator the State highway department 
shall furnish to him such information as the Administrator shall deem 
desirable in administering the Federal-aid highway program.


<R05>
Sec. 1.7  Urban area boundaries.

    Boundaries of an urban area shall be submitted by the State highway 
department and be approved by the Administrator prior to the inclusion 
in a program of any project wholly or partly in such area involving 
funds authorized for and limited to urban areas.


<R05>
Sec. 1.8  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.9  Limitation on Federal participation.

    (a) Federal-aid funds shall not participate in any cost which is not 
incurred in conformity with applicable Federal and State law, the 
regulations in this title, and policies and procedures prescribed by the 
Administrator. Federal funds shall not be paid on account of any cost 
incurred prior to authorization by the Administrator to the State 
highway department to proceed with the project or part thereof involving 
such cost.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section 
the Administrator may, upon the request of a State highway department, 
approve the participation of Federal-aid funds in a previously incurred 
cost if he finds:
    (1) That his approval will not adversely affect the public,
    (2) That the State highway department has acted in good faith, and 
that there has been no willful violation of Federal requirements,
    (3) That there has been substantial compliance with all other 
requirements prescribed by the Administrator, and full compliance with 
requirements mandated by Federal statute,
    (4) That the cost to the United States will not be in excess of the 
cost which it would have incurred had there been full compliance, and
    (5) That the quality of work undertaken has not been impaired.
    (c) Any request submitted under paragraph (b) of this section shall 
be accompanied by a detailed description of the relevant circumstances 
and facts, and shall explain the necessity for incurring the costs in 
question.

[38 FR 18368, July 10, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.11  Engineering services.

    (a) Federal participation. Costs of engineering services performed 
by the State highway department or any instrumentality or entity 
referred to in paragraph (b) of this section may be eligible for Federal 
participation only to the extent that such costs are directly 
attributable and properly allocable to specific projects.
    (b) Governmental engineering organizations. The State highway 
department may utilize, under its supervision, the services of well-
qualified and suitably equipped engineering organizations of other 
governmental instrumentalities for making surveys, preparing plans, 
specifications and estimates, and for supervising the construction of 
any project.
    (c) Railroad and utility engineering organizations. The State 
highway department may utilize, under its supervision, the services of 
well-qualified and suitably equipped engineering organizations of the 
affected railroad companies for railway-highway crossing projects and of 
the affected utility companies for projects involving utility 
installations.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Responsibility of the State highway department. The State 
highway department is not relieved of its responsibilities under Federal 
law and the regulations in this part in the event it utilizes the 
services of any engineering organization under paragraphs (b), (c) or 
(d) of this section.

[25 FR 4162, May 11, 1960, as amended at 53 FR 18276, May 23, 1988; 57 
FR 60728, Dec. 22,1992; 66 FR 58666, Nov. 23, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 1.23  Rights-of-way.

    (a) Interest to be acquired. The State shall acquire rights-of-way 
of such nature and extent as are adequate for the

[[Page 9]]

construction, operation and maintenance of a project.
    (b) Use for highway purposes. Except as provided under paragraph (c) 
of this section, all real property, including air space, within the 
right-of-way boundaries of a project shall be devoted exclusively to 
public highway purposes. No project shall be accepted as complete until 
this requirement has been satisfied. The State highway department shall 
be responsible for preserving such right-of-way free of all public and 
private installations, facilities or encroachments, except (1) those 
approved under paragraph (c) of this section; (2) those which the 
Administrator approves as constituting a part of a highway or as 
necessary for its operation, use or maintenance for public highway 
purposes and (3) informational sites established and maintained in 
accordance with Sec. 1.35 of the regulations in this part.
    (c) Other use or occupancy. Subject to 23 U.S.C. 111, the temporary 
or permanent occupancy or use of right-of-way, including air space, for 
nonhighway purposes and the reservation of subsurface mineral rights 
within the boundaries of the rights-of-way of Federal-aid highways, may 
be approved by the Administrator, if he determines that such occupancy, 
use or reservation is in the public interest and will not impair the 
highway or interfere with the free and safe flow of traffic thereon.


<R05>
Sec. 1.27  Maintenance.

    The responsibility imposed upon the State highway department, 
pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 116, for the maintenance of projects shall be 
carried out in accordance with policies and procedures issued by the 
Administrator. The State highway department may provide for such 
maintenance by formal agreement with any adequately equipped county, 
municipality or other governmental instrumentality, but such an 
agreement shall not relieve the State highway department of its 
responsibility for such maintenance.


<R05>
Sec. 1.28  Diversion of highway revenues.

    (a) Reduction in apportionment. If the Secretary shall find that any 
State has diverted funds contrary to 23 U.S.C. 126, he shall take such 
action as he may deem necessary to comply with said provision of law by 
reducing the first Federal-aid apportionment of primary, secondary and 
urban funds made to the State after the date of such finding. In any 
such reduction, each of these funds shall be reduced in the same 
proportion.
    (b) Furnishing of information. The Administrator may require any 
State to submit to him such information as he may deem necessary to 
assist the Secretary in carrying out the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 126 and 
paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 1.32  Issuance of directives.

    (a) The Administrator shall promulgate and require the observance of 
policies and procedures, and may take other action as he deems 
appropriate or necessary for carrying out the provisions and purposes of 
Federal laws, the policies of the Federal Highway Administration, and 
the regulations of this part.
    (b) The Administrator or his delegated representative, as 
appropriate, is authorized to issue the following type of directives:
    (1) Federal Highway Administration Regulations are issued by the 
Administrator or his delegate, as necessary, to implement and carry out 
the provisions of title 23 U.S.C., relating to the administration of 
Federal aid for highways, direct Federal programs and State and 
community safety programs; and title 49 U.S.C., relating to motor 
carrier safety; and other applicable laws and programs under his 
jurisdiction.
    (2) Notices are temporary issuances transmitting one-time or short-
term instructions or information which is expected to remain in effect 
for less than 90 days or for a predetermined period of time normally not 
to exceed one year.
    (3) Orders are directives limited in volume and contain permanent or 
longlasting policy, instructions, and procedures. FHWA Orders are to be 
used primarily as internal FHWA directives.

[[Page 10]]

    (4) Joint Interagency Orders and Notices are used by FHWA and the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) to issue joint 
policies, procedures, and information pertaining to the joint 
administration of the State and Community Highway Safety Program. Where 
necessary, other joint directives may be issued with other modal 
administrations within the Department of Transportation.
    (5) Manuals are generally designed for use in issuing permanent or 
long-lasting detailed policy and procedure. Some of the major manuals 
recognized by the FHWA Directives System follow:
    (i) The Federal-Aid Highway Program Manual has been established to 
assemble and organize program material of the type previously contained 
in the Policy and Procedure and Instructional Memoranda which will 
continue in effect until specifically revoked or published in the new 
manual. Regulatory material is printed in italics in the manual and also 
appears in this code. Nonregulatory material is printed in delegate 
type.
    (ii) The Administrative Manual covers all internal FHWA 
administrative support functions.
    (iii) The Highway Planning Program Manual covers the methods and 
procedures necessary to conduct the highway planning functions.
    (iv) The Research and Development Manual series entitled, ``The 
Federally Coordinated Program of Research and Development in Highway 
Transportation'' describes the FHWA research and development program.
    (v) The External Audit Manual provides guidance to FHWA auditors in 
their review of State programs and processes.
    (vi) The Civil Rights and Equal Opportunity Manual provides guidance 
to FHWA and State Civil Rights and Equal Employment Opportunity 
Officers.
    (vii) The BMCS Operations Manual provides program guidance for all 
field employees assigned to the motor carrier safety program.
    (viii) The Highway Safety Program Manual, issued jointly by FHWA and 
NHTSA, contains volumes relating to the joint administration of the 
program.
    (6) Handbooks are internal operating instructions published in book 
form where, because of the program area covered, it is desirable to 
provide greater detail of administrative and technical instructions.
    (7) Transmittals identify and explain the original issuance or page 
change, provide background information, and provide filing instructions 
for insertion of new pages and removal of changed pages, or both.

(49 U.S.C. 1655)

[39 FR 1512, Jan. 10, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.33  Conflicts of interest.

    No official or employee of a State or any other governmental 
instrumentality who is authorized in his official capacity to negotiate, 
make, accept or approve, or to take part in negotiating, making, 
accepting or approving any contract or subcontract in connection with a 
project shall have, directly or indirectly, any financial or other 
personal interest in any such contract or subcontract. No engineer, 
attorney, appraiser, inspector or other person performing services for a 
State or a governmental instrumentality in connection with a project 
shall have, directly or indirectly, a financial or other personal 
interest, other than his employment or retention by a State or other 
governmental instrumentality, in any contract or subcontract in 
connection with such project. No officer or employee of such person 
retained by a State or other governmental instrumentality shall have, 
directly or indirectly, any financial or other personal interest in any 
real property acquired for a project unless such interest is openly 
disclosed upon the public records of the State highway department and of 
such other governmental instrumentality, and such officer, employee or 
person has not participated in such acquisition for and in behalf of the 
State. It shall be the responsibility of the State to enforce the 
requirements of this section.

[[Page 11]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.35  Bonus program.

    (a) Any agreement entered into by a State pursuant to the provisions 
of section 12 of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958, Pub. L. 85-381, 72 
Stat. 95, as amended, shall provide for the control or regulation of 
outdoor advertising, consistent with the advertising policy and 
standards promulgated by the Administrator, in areas adjacent to the 
entire mileage of the Interstate System within that State, except such 
segments as may be excluded from the application of such policy and 
standards by section 12.
    (b) Any such agreement for the control of advertising may provide 
for establishing publicly owned informational sites, whether publicly or 
privately operated, within the limits of or adjacent to the right-of-way 
of the Interstate System on condition that no such site shall be 
established or maintained except at locations and in accordance with 
plans, in furtherance of the advertising policy and standards, submitted 
to and approved by the Administrator.
    (c) No advertising right in the acquisition of which Federal funds 
participated shall be disposed of without the prior approval of the 
Administrator.

[39 FR 28628, Aug. 9, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.36  Compliance with Federal laws and regulations.

    If the Administrator determines that a State has violated or failed 
to comply with the Federal laws or the regulations in this part with 
respect to a project, he may withhold payment to the State of Federal 
funds on account of such project, withhold approval of further projects 
in the State, and take such other action that he deems appropriate under 
the circumstances, until compliance or remedial action has been 
accomplished by the State to the satisfaction of the Administrator.

[[Page 12]]


<R03>
                     SUBCHAPTER B_PAYMENT PROCEDURES




<R03>
PART 140_REIMBURSEMENT--Table of Contents




Subparts A-D [Reserved]

        Subpart E_Administrative Settlement Costs_Contract Claims

Sec.
140.501 Purpose.
140.503 Definition.
140.505 Reimbursable costs.

             Subpart F_Reimbursement for Bond Issue Projects

140.601 Purpose.
140.602 Requirements and conditions.
140.603 Programs.
140.604 Reimbursable schedule.
140.605 Approval actions.
140.606 Project agreements.
140.607 Construction.
140.608 Reimbursable bond interest costs of Interstate projects.
140.609 Progress and final vouchers.
140.610 Conversion from bond issue to funded project status.
140.611 Determination of bond retirement.
140.612 Cash management.

Appendix to Subpart F--Reimbursable Schedule for Converted ```E'' (Bond 
          Issue) Projects (Other Than Interstate Projects)

Subpart G [Reserved]

              Subpart H_State Highway Agency Audit Expense

140.801 Purpose.
140.803 Policy.
140.805 Definitions.
140.807 Reimbursable costs.

                Subpart I_Reimbursement for Railroad Work

140.900 Purpose.
140.902 Applicability.
140.904 Reimbursement basis.
140.906 Labor costs.
140.907 Overhead and indirect construction costs.
140.908 Materials and supplies.
140.910 Equipment.
140.912 Transportation.
140.914 Credits for improvements.
140.916 Protection.
140.918 Maintenance and extended construction.
140.920 Lump sum payments.
140.922 Billings.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101(e), 106, 109(e), 114(a), 120(g), 121, 122, 
130, and 315; and 49 CFR 1.48(b).

Subparts A-D [Reserved]


<R04>
        Subpart E_Administrative Settlement Costs_Contract Claims

    Source: 44 FR 59233, Oct. 15, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 140.501  Purpose.

    This regulation establishes the criteria for eligibility for 
reimbursement of administrative settlement costs in defense of contract 
claims on projects performed by a State under Federal-aid procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 140.503  Definition.

    Administrative settlement costs are costs related to the defense and 
settlement of contract claims including, but not limited to, salaries of 
a contracting officer or his/her authorized representative, attorneys, 
and/or members of State boards of arbitration, appeals boards, or 
similar tribunals, which are allocable to the findings and 
determinations of contract claims, but not including administrative or 
overhead costs.


<R05>
Sec. 140.505  Reimbursable costs.

    (a) Federal funds may participate in administrative settlement costs 
which are:
    (1) Incurred after notice of claim,
    (2) Properly supported,
    (3) Directly allocable to a specific Federal-aid or Federal project,
    (4) For employment of special counsel for review and defense of 
contract claims, when
    (i) Recommended by the State Attorney General or State Highway 
Agency (SHA) legal counsel and
    (ii) Approved in advance by the FHWA Division Administrator, with 
advice of FHWA Regional Counsel, and
    (5) For travel and transportation expenses, if in accord with 
established policy and practices.

[[Page 13]]

    (b) No reimbursement shall be made if it is determined by FHWA that 
there was negligence or wrongdoing of any kind by SHA officials with 
respect to the claim.


<R04>
             Subpart F_Reimbursement for Bond Issue Projects

    Source: 48 FR 54971, Dec. 8, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 140.601  Purpose.

    To prescribe policies and procedures for the use of Federal funds by 
State highway agencies (SHAs) to aid in the retirement of the principal 
and interest of bonds, pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 122 and the payment of 
interest on bonds of eligible Interstate projects.


<R05>
Sec. 140.602  Requirements and conditions.

    (a) An SHA that uses the proceeds of bonds issued by the State, a 
county, city or other political subdivision of the State, for the 
construction of projects on the Federal-aid primary or Interstate 
system, or extensions of any of the Federal-aid highway systems in urban 
areas, or for substitute highway projects approved under 23 U.S.C. 
103(e)(4), may claim payment of any portion of such sums apportioned to 
it for expenditures on such system to aid in the retirement of the 
principal of bonds at their maturities, to the the extent that the 
proceeds of bonds have actually been expended in the construction of 
projects.
    (b) Any interest earned and payable on bonds, the proceeds of which 
were expended on Interstate projects after November 6, 1978, is an 
eligible cost of construction. The amount of interest eligible for 
participation will be based on (1) the date the proceeds were expended 
on the project, (2) amount expended, and (3) the date of conversion to a 
regularly funded project. As provided for in section 115(c), Pub. L. 95-
599, November 6, 1978, interest on bonds issued in any fiscal year by a 
State after November 6, 1978, may be paid under the authority of 23 
U.S.C. 122 only if such SHA was eligible to obligate Interstate 
Discretionary funds under the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 118(b) during such 
fiscal year, and the Administrator certifies that such eligible SHA has 
utilized, or will utilize to the fullest extent possible during such 
fiscal year, its authority to obligate funds under 23 U.S.C. 118(b).
    (c) The Federal share payable at the time of conversion, as provided 
for in Sec. 140.610 shall be the legal pro rata in effect at the time 
of execution of the project agreement for the bond issue project.
    (d) The authorization of a bond issue project does not constitute a 
commitment of Federal funds until the project is converted to a regular 
Federal-aid project as provided for in Sec. 140.610.
    (e) Reimbursements for the redemption of bonds may not precede, by 
more than 60 days, the scheduled date of the retirement of the bonds.
    (f) Federal funds are not eligible for payment into sinking funds 
created and maintained for the subsequent retirement of bonds.


<R05>
Sec. 140.603  Programs.

    Programs covering projects to be financed from the proceeds of bonds 
shall be prepared and submitted to FHWA. Project designations shall be 
the same as for regular Federal-aid projects except that the prefix 
letter ``B'' for bond issue shall be used as the first letter of each 
project designation, e.g., ``BI'' for Bond Issue Projects--Interstate.


<R05>
Sec. 140.604  Reimbursable schedule.

    Projects to be financed from other than Interstate funds shall be 
subject to a 36-month reimbursable schedule upon conversion to regular 
Federal-aid financing (See appendix). FHWA will consider requests for 
waiver of this provision at the time of conversion action. Waivers are 
subject to the availability of liquidating cash.


<R05>
Sec. 140.605  Approval actions.

    (a) Authorization to proceed with preliminary engineering and 
acquisition of rights-of-way shall be issued in the same manner as for 
regularly financed Federal-aid projects.
    (b) Authorization of physical construction shall be given in the 
same manner as for regularly financed Federal-aid projects. The total 
cost and

[[Page 14]]

Federal funds required, including interest, shall be indicated in the 
plans, specifications, and estimates.
    (c) Projects subject to the reimbursable schedule shall be 
identified as an ``E'' project when the SHA is authorized to proceed 
with all or any phase of the work.
    (d) Concurrence in the award of contracts shall be given.


<R05>
Sec. 140.606  Project agreements.

    Project Agreements, Form PR-2, shall be prepared and executed. 
Agreement provision 8 on the reverse side of Form PR-2 \1\ shall apply 
for bond issue projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The text of FHWA Form PR-2 is found in 23 CFR part 630, subpart 
C, appendix A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 140.607  Construction.

    Construction shall be supervised by the SHA in the same manner as 
for regularly financed Federal-aid projects. The FHWA will make 
construction inspections and reports.


<R05>
Sec. 140.608  Reimbursable bond interest costs of Interstate projects.

    (a) Bond interest earned on bonds actually retired may be reimbursed 
on the Federal pro rata basis applicable to such projects in accordance 
with Sec. 140.602(b) and (c).
    (b) No interest will be reimbursed for bonds issued after November 
6, 1978, used to retire or otherwise refinance bonds issued prior to 
that date.


<R05>
Sec. 140.609  Progress and final vouchers.

    (a) Progress vouchers may be submitted for the Federal share of 
bonds retired or about to be retired, including eligible interest on 
Interstate Bond Issue Projects, the proceeds of which have actually been 
expended for the construction of the project.
    (b) Upon completion of a bond issue project, a final voucher shall 
be submitted by the SHA. After final review, the SHA will be advised as 
to the total cost and Federal fund participation for the project.


<R05>
Sec. 140.610  Conversion from bond issue to funded project status.

    (a) At such time as the SHA elects to apply available apportioned 
Federal-aid funds to the retirement of bonds, including eligible 
interest earned and payable on Interstate Bond Projects, subject to 
available obligational authority, its claim shall be supported by 
appropriate certifications as follows:

    I hereby certify that the following bonds, (list), the proceeds of 
which have been actually expended in the construction of bond issue 
projects authorized by title 23 U.S.C., section 122, (1) have been 
retired on ------, or (2) mature and are scheduled for retirement on --
----, which is ---- days in advance of the maturity date of ------.

    Eligible interest claimed on Interstate Bond Projects shall be shown 
for each bond and the certification shall include the statement:

    I also certify that interest earned and paid or payable for each 
bond listed has been determined from the date on and after which the 
respective bond proceeds were actually expended on the project.

    (b) The SHA's request for full conversion of a completed projects), 
or partial conversion of an active or completed project(s), may be made 
by letter, inclusive of the appropriate certification as described in 
Sec. 140.610(a) making reference to any progress payments received or 
the final voucher(s) previously submitted and approved in accordance 
with Sec. 140.609.
    (c) Approval of the conversion action shall be by the Division 
Administrator.
    (d) The SHA's request for partial conversion of an active or 
completed bond issue project shall provide for: (1) Conversion to funded 
project status of the portion to be financed out of the balance of 
currently available apportioned funds, and (2) retention of the unfunded 
portion of the project in the bond program.
    (e) Where the SHA's request involves the partial conversion of a 
completed bond issue project, payment of the Federal funds made 
available under the conversion action shall be accomplished through use 
of Form PR-20, Voucher for Work Performed under Provisions of the 
Federal-aid and Federal Highway Acts, prepared in the division office 
and appropriately cross-referenced to the Bond Issue Project final 
voucher previously submitted and approved. The final voucher will be 
reduced by the amount of the approved reimbursement.

[[Page 15]]


<R05>
Sec. 140.611  Determination of bond retirement.

    Division Administrators shall be responsible for the prompt review 
of the SHA's records to determine that bonds issued to finance the 
projects and for which reimbursement has been made, including eligible 
bond interest expense, have been retired pursuant to the State's 
certification required by Sec. 140.610(a), and that such action is 
documented in the project file.


<R05>
Sec. 140.612  Cash management.

    By July 1 of each year the SHA will provide FHWA with a schedule, 
including the anticipated claims for reimbursement, of bond projects to 
be converted during the next two fiscal years. The data will be used by 
FHWA in determining liquidating cash required to finance such 
conversions.

 Appendix to Subpart F to Part 140--Reimbursable Schedule for Converted 
      ``E'' (Bond Issue) Projects (other than Interstate Projects)

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Cumulative
                                                               amount
                                                            reimbursable
   Time in months following conversion from ``E'' (bond      (percent of
             issue) project to regular project                 Federal
                                                                funds
                                                             obligated)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.........................................................             1
2.........................................................             2
3.........................................................             5
4.........................................................             9
5.........................................................            13
6.........................................................            18
7.........................................................            23
8.........................................................            29
9.........................................................            34
10........................................................            39
11........................................................            44
12........................................................            49
13........................................................            54
14........................................................            58
15........................................................            61
16........................................................            64
17........................................................            67
18........................................................            70
19........................................................            73
20........................................................            75
21........................................................            77
22........................................................            79
23........................................................            81
24........................................................            83
25........................................................            85
26........................................................            87
27........................................................            89
28........................................................            91
29........................................................            93
30........................................................            94
31........................................................            95
32........................................................            96
34........................................................            97
35........................................................            99
36........................................................           100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Subpart G [Reserved]


<R04>
              Subpart H_State Highway Agency Audit Expense

    Source: 49 FR 45578, Nov. 19, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 140.801  Purpose.

    To establish the reimbursement criteria for Federal participation in 
project related audit expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 140.803  Policy.

    Project related audits performed in accordance with generally 
accepted auditing standards (as modified by the Comptroller General of 
the United States) and applicable Federal laws and regulations are 
eligible for Federal participation. The State highway agency (SHA) may 
use other State, local public agency, and Federal audit organizations as 
well as licensed or certified public accounting firms to augment its 
audit force.


<R05>
Sec. 140.805  Definitions.

    (a) Project related audits. Audits which directly benefit Federal-
aid highway projects. Audits performed in accordance with the 
requirements of 23 CFR part 12, audits of third party contract costs, 
and other audits providing assurance that a recipient has complied with 
FHWA regulations are all considered project related audits. Audits 
benefiting only nonfederal projects, those performed for SHA management 
use only, or those serving similar nonfederal purposes are not 
considered project related.
    (b) Third party contract costs. Project related costs incurred by 
railroads, utilities, consultants, governmental instrumentalities, 
universities, nonprofit

[[Page 16]]

organizations, construction contractors (force account work), and 
organizations engaged in right-of-way studies, planning, research, or 
related activities where the terms of a proposal or contract (including 
lump sum) necessitate an audit. Construction contracts (except force 
account work) are not included in this group.


<R05>
Sec. 140.807  Reimbursable costs.

    (a) Federal funds may be used to reimburse an SHA for the following 
types of project related audit costs:
    (1) Salaries, wages, and related costs paid to public employees in 
accordance with subpart G of this part,
    (2) Payments by the SHA to any Federal, State, or local public 
agency audit organization, and
    (3) Payments by the SHA to licensed or certified public accounting 
firms.
    (b) Audit costs incurred by an SHA shall be equitably distributed to 
all benefiting parties. The portion of these costs allocated to the 
Federal-Aid Highway Program which are not directly related to a specific 
project or projects shall be equitably distributed, as a minimum, to the 
major FHWA funding categories in that State.


<R04>
                Subpart I_Reimbursement for Railroad Work

    Source: 40 FR 16057, Apr. 9, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 140.900  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe policies and procedures 
on reimbursement to the States for railroad work done on projects 
undertaken pursuant to the provisions of 23 CFR part 646, subpart B.


<R05>
Sec. 140.902  Applicability.

    This subpart, and all references hereinafter made to ``projects,'' 
applies to Federal-aid projects involving railroad facilities, including 
projects for the elimination of hazards of railroad-highway crossings, 
and other projects which use railroad properties or which involve 
adjustments required by highway construction to either railroad 
facilities or facilities that are jointly owned or used by railroad and 
utility companies.


<R05>
Sec. 140.904  Reimbursement basis.

    (a) General. On projects involving the elimination of hazards of 
railroad-highway crossings, and on other projects where a railroad 
company is not obligated to move or to change its facilities at its own 
expense, reimbursement will be made for the costs incurred by the State 
in making changes to railroad facilities as required in connection with 
a Federal-aid highway project, in accordance with the provisions of this 
subpart.
    (b) Eligibility. To be eligible, the costs must be:
    (1) For work which is included in an approved statewide 
transportation improvement program.
    (2) Incurred subsequent to the date of authorization by the Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA),
    (3) Incurred in accordance with the provisions of 23 CFR, part 646, 
subpart B, and
    (4) Properly attributable to the project.

[40 FR 16057, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 53 FR 18276, May 23, 1988; 62 
FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 140.906  Labor costs.

    (a) General. (1) Salaries and wages, at actual or average rates, and 
related expenses paid by a company to individuals, for the time they are 
working on the project, are reimbursable when supported by adequate 
records. This shall include labor costs associated with preliminary 
engineering, construction engineering, right-of-way, and force account 
construction.
    (2) Salaries and expenses paid to individuals who are normally part 
of the overhead organization of the company may be reimbursed for the 
time they are working directly on the project, such as for accounting 
and bill preparation, when supported by adequate records and when the 
work performed by such individuals is essential to the project and could 
not have been accomplished as economically by employees outside the 
overhead organization.
    (3) Amounts paid to engineers, architects and others for services 
directly related to projects may be reimbursed.

[[Page 17]]

    (b) Labor surcharges. (1) Labor surcharges include worker 
compensation insurance, public liability and property damage insurance, 
and such fringe benefits as the company has established for the benefit 
of its employees. The cost of labor surcharges will be reimbursed at 
actual cost to the company or a company may, at its option, use an 
additive rate or other similar technique in lieu of actual costs 
provided that (i) the rate is based on historical cost data of the 
company, (ii) such rate is representative of actual costs incurred, 
(iii) the rate is adjusted at least annually taking into consideration 
known anticipated changes and correcting for any over or under applied 
costs for the preceding period, and (iv) the rate is approved by the SHA 
and FHWA.
    (2) Where the company is a self-insurer there may be reimbursement:
    (i) At experience rates properly developed from actual costs, not to 
exceed the rates of a regular insurance company for the class of 
employment covered, or
    (ii) At the option of the company, a fixed rate of 8 percent of 
direct labor costs for worker compensation and public liability and 
property damage insurance together.

[40 FR 16057, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982; 56 
FR 56578, Nov. 6, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 140.907  Overhead and indirect construction costs.

    (a) A State may elect to reimburse the railroad company for its 
overhead and indirect construction costs.
    (b) The FHWA will participate in these costs provided that:
    (1) The costs are distributed to all applicable work orders and 
other functions on an equitable and uniform basis in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles;
    (2) The costs included in the distribution are limited to costs 
actually incurred by the railroad;
    (3) The costs are eligible in accordance with the Federal 
Acquisition Regulation (48 CFR), part 31, Contract Cost Principles and 
Procedures, relating to contracts with commercial organizations;
    (4) The costs are considered reasonable;
    (5) Records are readily available at a single location which 
adequately support the costs included in the distribution, the method 
used for distributing the costs, and the basis for determining additive 
rates;
    (6) The rates are adjusted at least annually taking into 
consideration any overrecovery or underrecovery of costs; and
    (7) The railroad maintains written procedures which assure proper 
control and distribution of the overhead and indirect construction 
costs.

[53 FR 18276, May 23, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 140.908  Materials and supplies.

    (a) Procurement. Materials and supplies, if available, are to be 
furnished from company stock, except they may be obtained from other 
sources near the project site when available at less cost. Where not 
available from company stock, they may be purchased either under 
competitive bids or existing continuing contracts, under which the 
lowest available prices are developed. Minor quantities and proprietary 
products are excluded from these requirements. The company shall not be 
required to change its existing standards for materials used in 
permanent changes to its facilities.
    (b) Costs. (1) Materials and supplies furnished from company stock 
shall be billed at current stock price of such new or used material at 
time of issue.
    (2) Materials and supplies not furnished from company stock shall be 
billed at actual costs to the company delivered to the point of entry on 
the railroad company's line nearest the source of procurement.
    (3) A reasonable cost of plant inspection and testing may be 
included in the costs of materials and supplies where such expense has 
been incurred. The computation of actual costs of materials and supplies 
shall include the deduction of all offered discounts, rebates and 
allowances.
    (c) Materials recovered. (1) Materials recovered from temporary use 
and accepted for reuse by the company shall be credited to the project 
at prices charged to the job, less a consideration for loss in service 
life at 10 percent for

[[Page 18]]

rails, angle bars, tie plates and metal turnout materials and 15 percent 
for all other materials. Materials recovered from the permanent facility 
of the company that are accepted by the company for return to stock 
shall be credited to the project at current stock prices of such used 
material.
    (2) Materials recovered and not accepted for reuse by the company, 
if determined to have a net sale value, shall be sold by the State or 
railroad following an opportunity for State inspection and appropriate 
solicitation for bids, to the highest bidder; or if the company 
practices a system of periodic disposal by sale, credit to the project 
shall be at the going prices supported by the records of the company. 
Where applicable, credit for materials recovered from the permanent 
facility in length or quantities in excess of that being placed should 
be reduced to reflect any increased cost of railroad operation resulting 
from the adjustment.
    (d) Removal costs. Federal participation in the costs of removing, 
salvaging, transporting, and handling recovered materials will be 
limited to the value of materials recovered, except where FHWA approves 
additional measures for restoration of affected areas as required by the 
physical construction or by reason of safety or aesthetics.
    (e) Handling costs. The actual and direct costs of handling and 
loading out of materials and supplies at and from company stores or 
material yards and of unloading and handling of recovered materials 
accepted by the company at its stores or material yards, are 
reimbursable. At the option of the company, 5 percent of the amounts 
billed for the materials and supplies which are issued from company 
stores and material yards will be reimbursable in lieu of actual costs.
    (f) Credit losses. On projects where a company actually suffers loss 
by application of credits, the company shall have the opportunity of 
submitting a detailed statement of such loss as a basis for further 
adjustment.


<R05>
Sec. 140.910  Equipment.

    (a) Company owned equipment. Cost of company-owned equipment may be 
reimbursed for the average or actual cost of operation, light and 
running repairs, and depreciation, or at industry rates representative 
of actual costs as agreed to by the railroad, SHA, and FHWA. 
Reimbursement for company-owned vehicles may be made at average or 
actual costs or at rates of recorded use per mile which are 
representative of actual costs and agreed to by the company, SHA, and 
FHWA.
    (b) Other equipment. Where company owned equipment is not available, 
reimbursement will be limited to the amount of rental paid (1) to the 
lowest qualified bidder, (2) under existing continuing contracts at 
reasonable cost, or (3) as an exception, by negotiation where (b) (1) 
and (2) are impractical due to project location or schedule.

[40 FR 16057, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 140.912  Transportation.

    (a) Employees. The company's cost of necessary employee 
transportation and subsistence directly attributable to the project, 
which is consistent with overall policy of the company, is reimbursable.
    (b) Materials, supplies, and equipment. The most economical movement 
of materials, supplies and equipment to the project and necessary return 
to storage, including the associated costs of loading and unloading 
equipment, is reimbursable. Transportation by a railroad company over 
its own lines in a revenue train is reimbursable at average or actual 
costs, at rates which are representative of actual costs, or at rates 
which the company charges its customers for similar shipments provided 
the rate structure is documented and available to the public. These 
rates are to be agreed to by the company, SHA, and FHWA. No charge will 
be made for transportation by work train other than the operating 
expenses of the work train. When it is more practicable or more 
economical to move equipment on its own wheels, reimbursement may be 
made at average or actual costs or at rates which are representative of 
actual costs and are agreed to by the railroad, SHA, and FHWA.

[40 FR 16057, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982]

[[Page 19]]


<R05>
Sec. 140.914  Credits for improvements.

    (a) Credit shall be made to the proj ect for additions or 
improvements which provide for higher quality or increased service 
capability of the operating facility and which are provided solely for 
the benefit of the company.
    (b) Where buildings and other depreciable structures of a company 
which are integral to operation of rail traffic must be replaced, credit 
shall be made to the project as set forth in 23 CFR 646.216(c)(2).
    (c) No credit is required for additions or improvements which are:
    (1) Necessitated by the requirements of the highway project.
    (2) Replacements which, although not identical, are of equivalent 
standard.
    (3) Replacements of devices or materials no longer regularly 
manufactured and the next highest grade or size is used.
    (4) Required by governmental and appropriate regulatory commission 
requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 140.916  Protection.

    The cost of essential protective services which, in the opinion of a 
railroad company, are required to ensure safety to railroad operations 
during certain periods of the construction of a project, is reimbursable 
provided an item for such services is incorporated in the State-railroad 
agreement or in a work order issued by the State and approved by FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 140.918  Maintenance and extended construction.

    The cost of maintenance and extended construction is reimbursable to 
the extent provided for in 23 CFR 646.216(f)(4), and where included in 
the State-Railroad Agreement or otherwise approved by the State and 
FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 140.920  Lump sum payments.

    Where approved by FHWA, pursuant to 23 CFR 646.216(d)(3), 
reimbursement may be made as a lump sum payment, in lieu of actual 
costs.


<R05>
Sec. 140.922  Billings.

    (a) After the executed State-Railroad Agreement has been approved by 
FHWA, the company may be reimbursed on progress billings of incurred 
costs. Costs for materials stockpiled at the project site or 
specifically purchased and delivered to the company for use on the 
project may be reimbursed on progress billings following approval of the 
executed State-Railroad Agreement or the written agreement under 23 CFR 
646.218(c).
    (b) The company shall provide one final and complete billing of all 
incurred costs, or of the agreed-to lump sum, within one year following 
completion of the reimbursable railroad work. Otherwise, previous 
payments to the company may be considered final, except as agreed to 
between the SHA and the railroad.
    (c) All company cost records and accounts relating to the project 
are subject to audit by representatives of the State and/or the Federal 
Government for a period of three years from the date final payment has 
been received by the company.
    (d) A railroad company must advise the State promptly of any 
outstanding obligation of the State's contractor for services furnished 
by the company such as protective services.

[40 FR 16057, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 40 FR 29712, July 15, 1975; 62 
FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R03>
PART 172_ADMINISTRATION OF ENGINEERING AND DESIGN RELATED SERVICE 
CONTRACTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
172.1 Purpose and applicability.
172.3 Definitions.
172.5 Methods of procurement.
172.7 Audits.
172.9 Approvals.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 112, 114(a), 302, 315, and 402; 40 U.S.C. 541 
et seq.; sec.1205(a), Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107 (1998); sec. 307, 
Pub. L. 104-59, 109 Stat. 568 (1995); sec. 1060, Pub. L. 102-240, 105 
Stat. 1914, 2003 (1991); 48 CFR 12 and 31; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and 18.

    Source: 67 FR 40155, June 12, 2002, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 172.1  Purpose and applicability.

    This part prescribes policies and procedures for the administration 
of engineering and design related service contracts under 23 U.S.C. 112 
as supplemented by the common grant rule, 49

[[Page 20]]

CFR part 18. It is not the intent of this part to release the grantee 
from the requirements of the common grant rule. The policies and 
procedures involve federally funded contracts for engineering and design 
related services for projects subject to the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 
112(a) and are issued to ensure that a qualified consultant is obtained 
through an equitable selection process, that prescribed work is properly 
accomplished in a timely manner, and at fair and reasonable cost. 
Recipients of Federal funds shall ensure that their subrecipients comply 
with this part.


<R05>
Sec. 172.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Audit means a review to test the contractor's compliance with the 
requirements of the cost principles contained in 48 CFR part 31.
    Cognizant agency means any Federal or State agency that has 
conducted and issued an audit report of the consultant's indirect cost 
rate that has been developed in accordance with the requirements of the 
cost principles contained in 48 CFR part 31.
    Competitive negotiation means any form of negotiation that utilizes 
the following:
    (1) Qualifications-based procedures complying with title IX of the 
Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (Public Law 92-
582, 86 Stat. 1278 (1972));
    (2) Equivalent State qualifications-based procedures; or
    (3) A formal procedure permitted by State statute that was enacted 
into State law prior to the enactment of Public Law 105-178 (TEA-21) on 
June 9, 1998.
    Consultant means the individual or firm providing engineering and 
design related services as a party to the contract.
    Contracting agencies means State Departments of Transportation 
(State DOTs) or local governmental agencies that are responsible for the 
procurement of engineering and design related services.
    Engineering and design related services means program management, 
construction management, feasibility studies, preliminary engineering, 
design, engineering, surveying, mapping, or architectural related 
services with respect to a construction project subject to 23 U.S.C. 
112(a).
    One-year applicable accounting period means the annual accounting 
period for which financial statements are regularly prepared for the 
consultant.


<R05>
Sec. 172.5  Methods of procurement.

    (a) Procurement. The procurement of Federal-aid highway contracts 
for engineering and design related services shall be evaluated and 
ranked by the contracting agency using one of the following procedures:
    (1) Competitive negotiation. Contracting agencies shall use 
competitive negotiation for the procurement of engineering and design 
related services when Federal-aid highway funds are involved in the 
contract. These contracts shall use qualifications-based selection 
procedures in the same manner as a contract for architectural and 
engineering services is negotiated under title IX of the Federal 
Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 541-544) or 
equivalent State qualifications-based requirements. The proposal 
solicitation (project, task, or service) process shall be by public 
announcement, advertisement, or any other method that assures qualified 
in-State and out-of-State consultants are given a fair opportunity to be 
considered for award of the contract. Price shall not be used as a 
factor in the analysis and selection phase. Alternatively, a formal 
procedure adopted by State Statute enacted into law prior to June 9, 
1998 is also permitted under paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (2) Small purchases. Small purchase procedures are those relatively 
simple and informal procurement methods where an adequate number of 
qualified sources are reviewed and the total contract costs do not 
exceed the simplified acquisition threshold fixed in 41 U.S.C. 403(11). 
Contract requirements should not be broken down into smaller components 
merely to permit the use of small purchase requirements. States and 
subrecipients of States may use the State's small purchase procedures 
for the procurement of engineering and design related services provided 
the total contract costs do not exceed the

[[Page 21]]

simplified acquisition threshold fixed in 41 U.S.C. 403(11).
    (3) Noncompetitive negotiation. Noncompetitive negotiation may be 
used to procure engineering and design related services on Federal-aid 
participating contracts when it is not feasible to award the contract 
using competitive negotiation, equivalent State qualifications-based 
procedures, or small purchase procedures. Contracting agencies shall 
submit justification and receive approval from the FHWA before using 
this form of contracting. Circumstances under which a contract may be 
awarded by noncompetitive negotiation are limited to the following:
    (i) The service is available only from a single source;
    (ii) There is an emergency which will not permit the time necessary 
to conduct competitive negotiations; or
    (iii) After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is 
determined to be inadequate.
    (4) State statutory procedures. Contracting agencies may procure 
engineering and design related services using an alternate selection 
procedure established in State statute enacted into law before June 9, 
1998.
    (b) Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) program. The contracting 
agency shall give consideration to DBE consultants in the procurement of 
engineering and design related service contracts subject to 23 U.S.C. 
112(b)(2) in accordance with 49 CFR part 26.
    (c) Compensation. The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage 
of construction cost methods of compensation shall not be used.


<R05>
Sec. 172.7  Audits.

    (a) Performance of audits. When State procedures call for audits of 
contracts or subcontracts for engineering design services, the audit 
shall be performed to test compliance with the requirements of the cost 
principles contained in 48 CFR part 31. Other procedures may be used if 
permitted by State statutes that were enacted into law prior to June 9, 
1998.
    (b) Audits for indirect cost rate. Contracting agencies shall use 
the indirect cost rate established by a cognizant agency audit for the 
cost principles contained in 48 CFR part 31 for the consultant, if such 
rates are not under dispute. A lower indirect cost rate may be used if 
submitted by the consultant firm, however the consultant's offer of a 
lower indirect cost rate shall not be a condition of contract award. The 
contracting agencies shall apply these indirect cost rates for the 
purposes of contract estimation, negotiation, administration, reporting, 
and contract payment and the indirect cost rates shall not be limited by 
any administrative or de facto ceilings. The consultant's indirect cost 
rates for its one-year applicable accounting period shall be applied to 
the contract, however once an indirect cost rate is established for a 
contract it may be extended beyond the one year applicable accounting 
period provided all concerned parties agree. Agreement to the extension 
of the one-year applicable period shall not be a condition of contract 
award. Other procedures may be used if permitted by State statutes that 
were enacted into law prior to June 9, 1998.
    (c) Disputed audits. If the indirect cost rate(s) as established by 
the cognizant audit in paragraph (b) of this section are in dispute, the 
parties of any proposed new contract must negotiate a provisional 
indirect cost rate or perform an independent audit to establish a rate 
for the specific contract. Only the consultant and the parties involved 
in performing the indirect cost audit may dispute the established 
indirect cost rate. If an error is discovered in the established 
indirect cost rate, the rate may be disputed by any prospective user.
    (d) Prenotification; confidentiality of data. The FHWA and 
recipients and subrecipients of Federal-aid highway funds may share the 
audit information in complying with the State or subrecpient's 
acceptance of a consultant's overhead rates pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 112 
and this part provided that the consultant is given notice of each use 
and transfer. Audit information shall not be provided to other 
consultants or any other government agency not sharing the cost data, or 
to any firm or government agency for purposes other than complying with 
the State or subrecpient's acceptance of a consultant's overhead rates 
pursuant

[[Page 22]]

to 23 U.S.C. 112 and this part without the written permission of the 
affected consultants. If prohibited by law, such cost and rate data 
shall not be disclosed under any circumstance, however should a release 
be required by law or court order, such release shall make note of the 
confidential nature of the data.


<R05>
Sec. 172.9  Approvals.

    (a) Written procedures. The contracting agency shall prepare written 
procedures for each method of procurement it proposes to utilize. These 
written procedures and all revisions shall be approved by the FHWA for 
recipients of federal funds. Recipients shall approve the written 
procedures and all revisions for their subrecipients. These procedures 
shall, as appropriate to the particular method of procurement, cover the 
following steps:
    (1) In preparing a scope of work, evaluation factors and cost 
estimate for selecting a consultant;
    (2) In soliciting proposals from prospective consultants;
    (3) In the evaluation of proposals and the ranking/selection of a 
consultant;
    (4) In negotiation of the reimbursement to be paid to the selected 
consultant;
    (5) In monitoring the consultant's work and in preparing a 
consultant's performance evaluation when completed; and
    (6) In determining the extent to which the consultant, who is 
responsible for the professional quality, technical accuracy, and 
coordination of services, may be reasonably liable for costs resulting 
from errors or deficiencies in design furnished under its contract.
    (b) Contracts. Contracts and contract settlements involving design 
services for projects that have not been delegated to the State under 23 
U.S.C. 106(c), that do not fall under the small purchase procedures in 
Sec. 172.5(a)(2), shall be subject to the prior approval by FHWA, 
unless an alternate approval procedure has been approved by FHWA.
    (c) Major projects. Any contract, revision of a contract or 
settlement of a contract for design services for a project that is 
expected to fall under 23 U.S.C. 106(h) shall be submitted to the FHWA 
for approval.
    (d) Consultant services in management roles. When Federal-aid 
highway funds participate in the contract, the contracting agency shall 
receive approval from the FHWA before hiring a consultant to act in a 
management role for the contracting agency.


<R03>
PART 180_CREDIT ASSISTANCE FOR SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS--Table of Contents




    Authority: Secs. 1501 et seq., Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107, 241, 
as amended; 23 U.S.C. 181-189 and 315; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 64 FR 29750, June 2, 1999, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 180.1  Cross-reference to credit assistance.

    The regulations in 49 CFR part 80 shall be followed in complying 
with the requirements of this part. Title 49 CFR part 80 implements the 
Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 1998, secs. 
1501 et seq., Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107, 241.


<R03>
PART 190_INCENTIVE PAYMENTS FOR CONTROLLING OUTDOOR ADVERTISING ON 
THE INTERSTATE SYSTEM--Table of Contents




Sec.
190.1 Purpose.
190.3 Agreement to control advertising.
190.5 Bonus project claims.
190.7 Processing of claims.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 131(j) and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 43 FR 42742, Sept. 21, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 190.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe project procedures 
for making the incentive payments authorized by 23 U.S.C. 131(j).


<R05>
Sec. 190.3  Agreement to control advertising.

    To qualify for the bonus payment, a State must have entered into an 
agreement with the Secretary to control outdoor advertising. It must 
fulfill, and must continue to fulfill its obligations

[[Page 23]]

under such agreement consistent with 23 CFR 750.101.


<R05>
Sec. 190.5  Bonus project claims.

    (a) The State may claim payment by submitting a form PR-20 voucher, 
supported by strip maps which identify advertising control limits and 
areas excluded from the claim and form FHWA-1175, for the one-half 
percent bonus claim.
    (b) The bonus payment computation is based on projects or portions 
thereof for which (1) the section of highway on which the project is 
located has been opened to traffic, and (2) final payment has been made. 
A bonus project may cover an individual proj ect, a part thereof, or a 
combination of projects, on a section of an Interstate route.
    (c) The eligible system mileage to be shown for a bonus project is 
that on which advertising controls are in effect. The eligible system 
mileage reported in subsequent projects on the same Interstate route 
section should cover only the additional system mileage not previously 
reported. Eligible project cost is the total participating cost (State 
and Federal share of approved preliminary engineering (PE), right-of-way 
(R-O-W), and construction) exclusive of any ineligible costs. The amount 
of the bonus payment is to be based on the eligible total costs of the 
supporting projects included in each claim.
    (d) Progress vouchers for route sections on which additional one-
half percent bonus payments are to be claimed are to be so identified, 
and the final claim for each route section is to be identified as the 
final voucher.


<R05>
Sec. 190.7  Processing of claims.

    Audited and approved PR-20 vouchers with form FHWA-1175 shall be 
forwarded to the regional office for submission to the Finance Division, 
Washington Headquarters, for payment. The associated strip maps shall be 
retained with the division office copies of the PR-20 vouchers.


<R03>
PART 192_DRUG OFFENDER'S DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION--Table of Contents




Sec.
192.1 Scope.
192.2 Purpose.
192.3 Definitions.
192.4 Adoption of drug offender's driver's license suspension.
192.5 Certification requirements.
192.6 Period of availability of withheld funds.
192.7 Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.
192.8 Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.
192.9 Effect of noncompliance.
192.10 Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 159 and 315.

    Source: 57 FR 35999, Aug. 12, 1992, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated at 60 FR 50100, Sept. 28, 1995.


<R05>
Sec. 192.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement 23 
U.S.C. Sec. 159, which encourages States to enact and enforce drug 
offender's driver's license suspensions.


<R05>
Sec. 192.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the steps that States must 
take in order to avoid the withholding of Federal-aid highway funds for 
noncompliance with 23 U.S.C. 159.


<R05>
Sec. 192.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Convicted includes adjudicated under juvenile proceedings.
    (b) Driver's license means a license issued by a State to any 
individual that authorizes the individual to operate a motor vehicle on 
highways.
    (c) Drug offense means:
    (1) The possession, distribution, manufacture, cultivation, sale, 
transfer, or the attempt or conspiracy to possess, distribute, 
manufacture, cultivate, sell, or transfer any substance the possession 
of which is prohibited under the Controlled Substances Act, or
    (2) The operation of a motor vehicle under the influence of such a 
substance.
    (d) Substance the possession of which is prohibited under the 
Controlled Substances Act or substance means a controlled or counterfeit 
chemical, as those terms are defined in subsections 102 (6) and (7) of 
the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control

[[Page 24]]

Act of 1970 (21 U.S.C. 802 (6) and (7) and listed in 21 CFR 1308.11-.15.

[57 FR 35999, Aug. 12, 1992; 58 FR 62415, Nov. 26, 1993; 59 FR 39256, 
Aug. 2, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 192.4  Adoption of drug offender's driver's license suspension.

    (a) The Secretary shall withhold five percent of the amount required 
to be apportioned to any State under each of sections 104(b)(1), 
104(b)(3), and 104(b)(5) of title 23 of the United States Code on the 
first day of fiscal years 1994 and 1995 if the States does not meet the 
requirements of this section on that date.
    (b) The Secretary shall withhold ten percent of the amount required 
to be apportioned to any State under each of sections 104(b)(1), 
104(b)(3), and 104(b)(5) of title 23 of the United States Code on the 
first day of fiscal year 1996 and any subsequent fiscal year if the 
State does not meet the requirements of this section on that date.
    (c) A State meets the requirements of this section if:
    (1) The State has enacted and is enforcing a law that requires in 
all circumstances, or requires in the absence of compelling 
circumstances warranting an exception:
    (i) The revocation, or suspension for at least 6 months, of the 
driver's license of any individual who is convicted, after the enactment 
of such law, of
    (A) Any violation of the Controlled Substances Act, or
    (B) Any drug offense, and
    (ii) A delay in the issuance or reinstatement of a driver's license 
to such an individual for at least 6 months after the individual 
otherwise would have been eligible to have a driver's license issued or 
reinstated if the individual does not have a driver's license, or the 
driver's license of the individual is suspended, at the time the 
individual is so convicted, or
    (2) The Governor of the State:
    (i) Submits to the Secretary no earlier than the adjournment sine 
die of the first regularly scheduled session of the State's legislature 
which begins after November 5, 1990, a written certification stating 
that he or she is opposed to the enactment or enforcement in the State 
of a law described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section relating to the 
revocation, suspension, issuance, or reinstatement of driver's licenses 
to convicted drug offenders; and
    (ii) Submits to the Secretary a written certification that the 
legislature (including both Houses where applicable) has adopted a 
resolution expressing its opposition to a law described in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section.
    (d) A State that makes exceptions for compelling circumstances must 
do so in accordance with a State law, regulation, binding policy 
directive or Statewide published guidelines establishing the conditions 
for making such exceptions and in exceptional circumstances specific to 
the offender.


<R05>
Sec. 192.5  Certification requirements.

    (a) Each State shall certify to the Secretary of Transportation by 
April 1, 1993 and by January 1 of each subsequent year that it meets the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 159 and this regulation.
    (b) If the State believes it meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 159 
and this regulation on the basis that it has enacted and is enforcing a 
law that suspends or revokes the driver's license of drug offenders, the 
certification shall contain:
    (1) A statement by the Governor of the State that the State has 
enacted and is enforcing a Drug Offender's Driver's License Suspension 
law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 159(a)(3)(A). The certifying statement 
may be worded as follows: I, (Name of Governor), Governor of the (State 
or Commonwealth) of ------------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------------, has enacted is enforcing a Drug 
Offender's Driver's License Suspension law that conforms to section 23 
U.S. C. 159(a)(3)(A).
    (2) Until a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 159 and this regulation, the certification 
shall include also:
    (i) A copy of the State law, regulation, or binding policy directive 
implementing or interpreting such law or regulation relating to the 
suspension, revocation, issuance or reinstatement or driver's licenses 
of drug offenders, and

[[Page 25]]

    (ii) A statement describing the steps the State is taking to enforce 
its law with regard to within State convictions, out-of-State 
convictions, Federal convictions and juvenile adjudications. The 
statement shall demonstrate that, upon receiving notification that a 
State driver has been convicted of a within State, out-of-State or 
Federal conviction or juvenile adjudication, the State is revoking, 
suspending or delaying the issuance of that drug offender's driver's 
license; and that, when the State convicts an individual of a drug 
offense, it is notifying the appropriate State office or, if the 
offender is a non-resident driver, the appropriate office in the 
driver's home State. If the State is not yet making these notifications, 
the State may satisfy this element by submitting a plan describing the 
steps it is taking to establish notification procedures.
    (c) If the State believes it meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 
159(a)(3)(B) on the basis that it opposes a law that requires the 
suspension, revocation or delay in issuance or reinstatement of the 
driver's license of drug offenders that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 
159(a)(3)(A), the certification shall contain:
    (1) A statement by the Governor of the State that he or she is 
opposed to the enactment or enforcement of a law that conforms to 23 
U.S.C. 159(a)(3)(A) and that the State legislature has adopted a 
resolution expressing its opposition to such a law. The certifying 
statement may be worded as follows: I, (Name of Governor), Governor of 
the (State or Commonwealth of ------------, do hereby certify that I am 
opposed to the enactment or enforcement of a law that conforms to 23 
U.S.C. 159(a)(3)(A) and that the legislature of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------------, has adopted a resolution expressing its 
opposition to such a law.
    (2) Until a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 159(a)(3)(B) and this regulation, the 
certification shall include a copy of the resolution.
    (d) The Governor each year shall submit the original and three 
copies of the certification to the local FHWA Division Administrator. 
The FHWA Division Administrator shall retain the original and forward 
one copy each to the FHWA Regional Administrator, FHWA Chief Counsel, 
and the Director of the Office of Highway Safety.
    (e) Any changes to the original certification or supplemental 
information necessitated by the review of the certifications as they are 
forwarded, State legislative changes or changes in State enforcement 
activity (including failure to make progress in a plan previously 
submitted) shall be submitted in the same manner as the original.

[57 FR 35999, Aug. 12, 1992. Redesignated and amended at 60 FR 50100, 
Sept. 28, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 192.6  Period of availability of withheld funds.

    (a) Funds withheld under Sec. 1212.4 from apportionment to any 
State on or before September 30, 1995, will remain available for 
apportionment as follows:
    (1) If the funds would have been apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 
104(b)(5)(A) but for this section, the funds will remain available until 
the end of the fiscal year for which the funds are authorized to be 
appropriated.
    (2) If the funds would have been apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 
104(b)(5)(B) but for this section, the funds will remain available until 
the end of the second fiscal year following the fiscal year for which 
the funds are authorized to be appropriated.
    (3) If the funds would have been apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 
104(b)(1) or 104(b)(3) but for this section, the funds will remain 
available until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal 
year for which the funds are authorized to be appropriated.
    (b) Funds withheld under Sec. 1212.4 from apportionment to any 
State after September 30, 1995 will not be available for apportionment 
to the State.


<R05>
Sec. 192.7  Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.

    Funds withheld under Sec. 1212.4 from apportionment, which remain 
available for apportionment under Sec. 1212.6(a), will be made 
available to any State that conforms to the requirements of Sec. 1212.4 
before the last day of the period of availability as defined in Sec. 
1212.6(a).

[57 FR 35999, Aug. 12, 1992, as amended at 59 FR 39256, Aug. 2, 1994]

[[Page 26]]


<R05>
Sec. 192.8  Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.

    (a) Funds apportioned pursuant to Sec. 1212.7 will remain available 
for expenditure as follows:
    (1) Funds originally apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5)(A) will 
remain available until the end of the fiscal year succeeding the fiscal 
year in which the funds are apportioned.
    (2) Funds originally apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(1), 
104(b)(2), 104(b)(5)(B), or 104(b)(6) will remain available until the 
end of the third fiscal year succeeding the fiscal year in which the 
funds are apportioned.
    (b) Sums apportioned to a State pursuant to Sec. 1212.7 and not 
obligated at the end of the periods defined in Sec. 1212.8(a), shall 
lapse or, in the case of funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5), 
shall lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in 
accordance with 23 U.S.C. 118(b).


<R05>
Sec. 192.9  Effect of noncompliance.

    If a State has not met the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 159(a)(3) at 
the end of the period for which funds withheld under Sec. 1212.4 are 
available for apportionment to a State under Sec. 1212.6, then such 
funds shall lapse or, in the case of funds withheld from apportionment 
under 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5), shall lapse and be made available by the 
Secretary for projects in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 118(b).


<R05>
Sec. 192.10  Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    (a) Each fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 159, based on FHWA's preliminary review of its statutes, 
will be advised of the funds expected to be withheld under Sec. 1212.4 
from apportionment, as part of the advance notice of apportionments 
required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), normally not later than ninety days 
prior to final apportionment.
    (b) If FHWA determines that the State is not in compliance with 23 
U.S.C. 159 based on the agencies' preliminary review, the State may, 
within 30 days of its receipt of the advance notice of apportionments, 
submit documentation showing why it is in compliance. Documentation 
shall be submitted to the Federal Highway Administration, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (c) Each fiscal year, each State determined not to be in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 159(a)(3), based on FHWA's final determination, will 
receive notice of the funds being withheld under Sec. 1212.4 from 
apportionment, as part of the certification of apportionments required 
under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), which normally occurs on October 1 of each 
fiscal year.

[57 FR 35999, Aug. 12, 1992. Redesignated and amended at 60 FR 50100, 
Sept. 28, 1995]

[[Page 27]]


<R03>
                        SUBCHAPTER C_CIVIL RIGHTS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 200_TITLE VI PROGRAM AND RELATED STATUTES_IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW 
PROCEDURES--Table of Contents




Sec.
200.1 Purpose.
200.3 Application of this part.
200.5 Definitions.
200.7 FHWA Title VI policy.
200.9 State highway agency responsibilities.
200.11 Procedures for processing Title VI reviews.

    Authority: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d 
to 2000d-4; Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. 3601-
3619; 42 U.S.C. 4601 to 4655; 23 U.S.C. 109(h); 23 U.S.C. 324.

    Source: 41 FR 53982, Dec. 10, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 200.1  Purpose.

    To provide guidelines for: (a) Implementing the Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) Title VI compliance program under Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and related civil rights laws and regulations, 
and (b) Conducting Title VI program compliance reviews relative to the 
Federal-aid highway program.


<R05>
Sec. 200.3  Application of this part.

    The provisions of this part are applicable to all elements of FHWA 
and provide requirements and guidelines for State highway agencies to 
implement the Title VI Program requirements. The related civil rights 
laws and regulations are listed under Sec. 200.5(p) of this part. Title 
VI requirements for 23 U.S.C. 402 will be covered under a joint FHWA/
NHTSA agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 200.5  Definitions.

    The following definitions shall apply for the purpose of this part:
    (a) Affirmative action. A good faith effort to eliminate past and 
present discrimination in all federally assisted programs, and to ensure 
future nondiscriminatory practices.
    (b) Beneficiary. Any person or group of persons (other than States) 
entitled to receive benefits, directly or indirectly, from any federally 
assisted program, i.e., relocatees, impacted citizens, communities, etc.
    (c) Citizen participation. An open process in which the rights of 
the community to be informed, to provide comments to the Government and 
to receive a response from the Government are met through a full 
opportunity to be involved and to express needs and goals.
    (d) Compliance. That satisfactory condition existing when a 
recipient has effectively implemented all of the Title VI requirements 
or can demonstrate that every good faith effort toward achieving this 
end has been made.
    (e) Deficiency status. The interim period during which the recipient 
State has been notified of deficiencies, has not voluntarily complied 
with Title VI Program guidelines, but has not been declared in 
noncompliance by the Secretary of Transportation.
    (f) Discrimination. That act (or action) whether intentional or 
unintentional, through which a person in the United States, solely 
because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, has been 
otherwise subjected to unequal treatment under any program or activity 
receiving financial assistance from the Federal Highway Administration 
under title 23 U.S.C.
    (g) Facility. Includes all, or any part of, structures, equipment or 
other real or personal property, or interests therein, and the provision 
of facilities includes the construction, expansion, renovation, 
remodeling, alternation or acquisition of facilities.
    (h) Federal assistance. Includes:
    (1) Grants and loans of Federal funds,
    (2) The grant or donation of Federal property and interests in 
property,
    (3) The detail of Federal personnel,
    (4) The sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than 
a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such 
property without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a 
consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the 
recipient, or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such 
sale or lease to the recipient, and

[[Page 28]]

    (5) Any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has, 
as one of its purposes, the provision of assistance.
    (i) Noncompliance. A recipient has failed to meet prescribed 
requirements and has shown an apparent lack of good faith effort in 
implementing all of the Title VI requirements.
    (j) Persons. Where designation of persons by race, color, or 
national origin is required, the following designations ordinarily may 
be used: ``White not of Hispanic origin'', ``Black not of Hispanic 
origin'', ``Hispanic'', ``Asian or Pacific Islander'', ``American Indian 
or Alaskan Native.'' Additional subcategories based on national origin 
or primary language spoken may be used, where appropriate, on either a 
national or a regional basis.
    (k) Program. Includes any highway, project, or activity for the 
provision of services, financial aid, or other benefits to individuals. 
This includes education or training, work opportunities, health, 
welfare, rehabilitation, housing, or other services, whether provided 
directly by the recipient of Federal financial assistance or provided by 
others through contracts or other arrangements with the recipient.
    (l) State highway agency. That department, commission, board, or 
official of any State charged by its laws with the responsibility for 
highway construction. The term State would be considered equivalent to 
State highway agency if the context so implies.
    (m) Program area officials. The officials in FHWA who are 
responsible for carrying out technical program responsibilities.
    (n) Recipient. Any State, territory, possession, the District of 
Columbia, Puerto Rico, or any political subdivision, or instrumentality 
thereof, or any public or private agency, institution, or organization, 
or other entity, or any individual, in any State, territory, possession, 
the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico, to whom Federal assistance is 
extended, either directly or through another recipient, for any program. 
Recipient includes any successor, assignee, or transferee thereof. The 
term recipient does not include any ultimate beneficiary under any such 
program.
    (o) Secretary. The Secretary of Transportation as set forth in 49 
CFR 21.17(g)(3) or the Federal Highway Administrator to whom the 
Secretary has delegated his authority in specific cases.
    (p) Title VI Program. The system of requirements developed to 
implement Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. References in this 
part to Title VI requirements and regulations shall not be limited to 
only Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Where appropriate, this 
term also refers to the civil rights provisions of other Federal 
statutes to the extent that they prohibit discrimination on the grounds 
of race, color, sex, or national origin in programs receiving Federal 
financial assistance of the type subject to Title VI itself. These 
Federal statutes are:
    (1) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-d4 (49 
CFR part 21; the standard DOT Title VI assurances signed by each State 
pursuant to DOT Order 1050.2; Executive Order 11764; 28 CFR 50.3);
    (2) Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition 
Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4601-4655) (49 CFR part 25; Pub. L. 91-
646);
    (3) Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, amended 1974 (42 
U.S.C. 3601- 3619);
    (4) 23 U.S.C. 109(h);
    (5) 23 U.S.C. 324;
    (6) Subsequent Federal-Aid Highway Acts and related statutes.


<R05>
Sec. 200.7  FHWA Title VI policy.

    It is the policy of the FHWA to ensure compliance with Title VI of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964; 49 CFR part 21; and related statutes and 
regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 200.9  State highway agency responsibilities.

    (a) State assurances in accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964.
    (1) Title 49, CFR part 21 (Department of Transportation Regulations 
for the implementation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964) 
requires assurances from States that no person in the United States 
shall, on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be excluded 
from participation in, be denied

[[Page 29]]

the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any 
program or activity for which the recipient receives Federal assistance 
from the Department of Transportation, including the Federal Highway 
Administration.
    (2) Section 162a of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973 (section 
324, title 23 U.S.C.) requires that there be no discrimination on the 
ground of sex. The FHWA considers all assurances heretofore received to 
have been amended to include a prohibition against discrimination on the 
ground of sex. These assurances were signed by the 50 States, the 
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and 
American Samoa. The State highway agency shall submit a certification to 
the FHWA indicating that the requirements of section 162a of the 
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973 have been added to its assurances.
    (3) The State highway agency shall take affirmative action to 
correct any deficiencies found by the FHWA within a reasonable time 
period, not to exceed 90 days, in order to implement Title VI compliance 
in accordance with State-signed assurances and required guidelines. The 
head of the State highway agency shall be held responsible for 
implementing Title VI requirements.
    (4) The State program area officials and Title VI Specialist shall 
conduct annual reviews of all pertinent program areas to determine the 
effectiveness of program area activities at all levels.
    (b) State actions. (1) Establish a civil rights unit and designate a 
coordinator who has a responsible position in the organization and easy 
access to the head of the State highway agency. This unit shall contain 
a Title VI Equal Employment Opportunity Coordinator or a Title VI 
Specialist, who shall be responsible for initiating and monitoring Title 
VI activities and preparing required reports.
    (2) Adequately staff the civil rights unit to effectively implement 
the State civil rights requirements.
    (3) Develop procedures for prompt processing and disposition of 
Title VI and Title VIII complaints received directly by the State and 
not by FHWA. Complaints shall be investigated by State civil rights 
personnel trained in compliance investigations. Identify each 
complainant by race, color, sex, or national origin; the recipient; the 
nature of the complaint; the dates the complaint was filed and the 
investigation completed; the disposition; the date of the disposition; 
and other pertinent information. Each recipient (State) processing Title 
VI complaints shall be required to maintain a similar log. A copy of the 
complaint, together with a copy of the State's report of investigation, 
shall be forwarded to the FHWA division office within 60 days of the 
date the complaint was received by the State.
    (4) Develop procedures for the collection of statistical data (race, 
color, religion, sex, and national origin) of participants in, and 
beneficiaries of State highway programs, i.e., relocatees, impacted 
citizens and affected communities.
    (5) Develop a program to conduct Title VI reviews of program areas.
    (6) Conduct annual reviews of special emphasis program areas to 
determine the effectiveness or program area activities at all levels.
    (7) Conduct Title VI reviews of cities, counties, consultant 
contractors, suppliers, universities, colleges, planning agencies, and 
other recipients of Federal-aid highway funds.
    (8) Review State program directives in coordination with State 
program officials and, where applicable, include Title VI and related 
requirements.
    (9) The State highway agency Title VI designee shall be responsible 
for conducting training programs on Title VI and related statutes for 
State program and civil rights officials.
    (10) Prepare a yearly report of Title VI accomplishments for the 
past year and goals for the next year.
    (11) Beginning October 1, 1976, each State highway agency shall 
annually submit an updated Title VI implementing plan to the Regional 
Federal Highway Administrator for approval or disapproval.
    (12) Develop Title VI information for dissemination to the general 
public and, where appropriate, in languages other than English.

[[Page 30]]

    (13) Establishing procedures for pregrant and postgrant approval 
reviews of State programs and applicants for compliance with Title VI 
requirements; i.e., highway location, design and relocation, and persons 
seeking contracts with the State.
    (14) Establish procedures to identify and eliminate discrimination 
when found to exist.
    (15) Establishing procedures for promptly resolving deficiency 
status and reducing to writing the remedial action agreed to be 
necessary, all within a period not to exceed 90 days.


<R05>
Sec. 200.11  Procedures for processing Title VI reviews.

    (a) If the regional Title VI review report contains deficiencies and 
recommended actions, the report shall be forwarded by the Regional 
Federal Highway Administrator to the Division Administrator, who will 
forward it with a cover letter to the State highway agency for 
corrective action.
    (b) The division office, in coordination with the Regional Civil 
Rights Officer, shall schedule a meeting with the recipient, to be held 
not later than 30 days from receipt of the deficiency report.
    (c) Recipients placed in a deficiency status shall be given a 
reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days after receipt of the deficiency 
letter, to voluntarily correct deficiencies.
    (d) The Division Administrator shall seek the cooperation of the 
recipient in correcting deficiencies found during the review. The FHWA 
officials shall also provide the technical assistance and guidance 
needed to aid the recipient to comply voluntarily.
    (e) When a recipient fails or refuses to voluntarily comply with 
requirements within the time frame allotted, the Division Administrator 
shall submit to the Regional Administrator two copies of the case file 
and a recommendation that the State be found in noncompliance.
    (f) The Office of Civil Rights shall review the case file for a 
determination of concurrence or noncurrence with a recommendation to the 
Federal Highway Administrator. Should the Federal Highway Administrator 
concur with the recommendation, the file is referred to the Department 
of Transportation, Office of the Secretary, for appropriate action in 
accordance with 49 CFR.


<R03>
PART 230_EXTERNAL PROGRAMS--Table of Contents




   Subpart A_Equal Employment Opportunity on Federal and Federal-Aid 
         Construction Contracts (Including Supportive Services)

Sec.
230.101 Purpose.
230.103 Definitions.
230.105 Applicability.
230.107 Policy.
230.109 Implementation of specific Equal Employment Opportunity 
          requirements.
230.111 Implementation of special requirements for the provision of on-
          the-job training.
230.113 Implementation of supportive services.
230.115 Special contract requirements for ``Hometown'' or ``Imposed'' 
          Plan areas.
230.117 Reimbursement procedures (Federal-aid highway construction 
          projects only).
230.119 Monitoring of supportive services.
230.121 Reports.

Appendix A to Subpart A--Special Provisions
Appendix B to Subpart A--Training Special Provisions
Appendix C to Subpart A--Federal-Aid Highway Contractors Annual EEO 
          Report (Form PR-1391)
Appendix D to Subpart A--Federal-Aid Highway Construction Summary of 
          Employment Data (Form PR-1392)
Appendixes E-F to Subpart A [Reserved]
Appendix G to Subpart A--Special Reporting Requirements for ``Hometown'' 
          or ``Imposed'' Plan Areas

  Subpart B_Supportive Services for Minority, Disadvantaged, and Women 
                          Business Enterprises

230.201 Purpose.
230.202 Definitions.
230.203 Policy.
230.204 Implementation of supportive services.
230.205 Supportive services funds obligation.
230.206 Monitoring supportive services.
230.207 Sources of assistance.

  Subpart C_State Highway Agency Equal Employment Opportunity Programs

230.301 Purpose.
230.303 Applicability.
230.305 Definitions.
230.307 Policy.

[[Page 31]]

230.309 Program format.
230.311 State responsibilities.
230.313 Approval procedure.

Appendix A to Subpart C--State Highway Agency Equal Employment 
          Opportunity Programs

 Subpart D_Construction Contract Equal Opportunity Compliance Procedures

230.401 Purpose.
230.403 Applicability.
230.405 Administrative responsibilities.
230.407 Definitions.
230.409 Contract compliance review procedures.
230.411 Guidance for conducting reviews.
230.413 Review reports.
230.415 Consolidated compliance reviews.

Appendix A to Subpart D--Sample Show Cause Notice
Appendix B to Subpart D--Sample Corrective Action Plan
Appendix C to Subpart D--Sample Show Cause Rescission
Appendix D to Subpart D--Equal Opportunity Compliance Review Process 
          Flow Chart

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101, 140, and 315; 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.; 49 
CFR 1.48 and 60-1.

    Source: 40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
   Subpart A_Equal Employment Opportunity on Federal and Federal-Aid 
         Construction Contracts (Including Supportive Services)


<R05>
Sec. 230.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subpart is to prescribe the 
policies, procedures, and guides relative to the implementation of an 
equal employment opportunity program on Federal and Federal-aid highway 
construction contracts, except for those contracts awarded under 23 
U.S.C. 117, and to the preparation and submission of reports pursuant 
thereto.


<R05>
Sec. 230.103  Definitions.

    For purposes of this subpart--
    Administrator means the Federal Highway Administrator.
    Areawide Plan means an affirmative action plan to increase minority 
utilization of crafts in a specified geographical area pursuant to 
Executive Order 11246, and taking the form of either a ``Hometown'' or 
an ``Imposed'' plan.
    Bid conditions means contract requirements which have been issued by 
OFCC for purposes of implementing a Hometown Plan.
    Division Administrator means the chief Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) official assigned to conduct FHWA business in a 
particular State, the District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico.
    Division Equal Opportunity Officer means an individual with staff 
level responsibilities and necessary authority by which to operate as an 
Equal Opportunity Officer in a Division office. Normally the Equal 
Opportunity Officer will be a full-time civil rights specialist serving 
as staff assistant to the Division Administrator.
    Hometown Plan means a voluntary areawide plan which was developed by 
representatives of affected groups (usually labor unions, minority 
organizations, and contractors), and subsequently approved by the Office 
of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC), for purposes of implementing the 
equal employment opportunity requirements pursuant to Executive Order 
11246, as amended.
    Imposed Plan means an affirmative action requirement for a specified 
geographical area made mandatory by OFCC and, in some areas, by the 
courts.
    Journeyman means a person who is capable of performing all the 
duties within a given job classification or craft.
    State highway agency means that department, commission, board, or 
official of any State charged by its laws with the responsibility for 
highway construction. The term State should be considered equivalent to 
State highway agency.
    Suggested minimum annual training goals means goals which have been 
assigned to each State highway agency annually for the purpose of 
specifying training positions on selected Federal-aid highway 
construction projects.
    Supportive services means those services provided in connection with 
approved on-the-job training programs for highway construction workers 
and

[[Page 32]]

highway contractors which are designed to increase the overall 
effectiveness of training programs through the performance of functions 
determined to be necessary in connection with such programs, but which 
are not generally considered as comprising part of actual on-the-job 
craft training.
    Trainee means a person who received on-the-job training, whether 
through an apprenticeship program or other programs approved or accepted 
by the FHWA.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 3080, Jan. 21, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 230.105  Applicability.

    (a) Federal-aid highway construction projects. This subpart applies 
to all Federal-aid highway construction projects and to Appalachian 
highway construction projects and other State supervised cooperative 
highway construction projects except:
    (1) Federal-aided highway construction projects being constructed 
pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 117; and
    (2) Those projects located in areas where the Office of Federal 
Contract Compliance has implemented an ``Imposed'' or a ``Hometown'' 
Plan, except for those requirements pertaining to specific provisions 
involving on-the-job training and those provisions pertaining to 
supportive services and reporting requirements.
    (b) Direct Federal highway construction projects. This subpart 
applies to all direct Federal highway construction projects except:
    (1) For those provisions relating to the special requirements for 
the provision of supportive services; and
    (2) For those provisions relating to implementation of specific 
equal employment opportunity requirements in areas where the Office of 
Federal Contract Compliance has implemented an ``Imposed'' or 
``Hometown'' plan.


<R05>
Sec. 230.107  Policy.

    (a) Direct Federal and Federal-aid highway construction projects. It 
is the policy of the FHWA to require that all direct Federal and 
Federal-aid highway construction contracts include the same specific 
equal employment opportunity requirements. It is also the policy to 
require that all direct Federal and Federal-aid highway construction 
subcontracts of $10,000 or more (not including contracts for supplying 
materials) include these same requirements.
    (b) Federal-aid highway construction projects. It is the policy of 
the FHWA to require full utilization of all available training and 
skill-improvement opportunities to assure the increased participation of 
minority groups and disadvantaged persons and women in all phases of the 
highway construction industry. Moreover, it is the policy of the Federal 
Highway Administration to encourage the provision of supportive services 
which will increase the effectiveness of approved on-the-job training 
programs conducted in connection with Federal-aid highway construction 
projects.


<R05>
Sec. 230.109  Implementation of specific Equal Employment Opportunity 
requirements.

    (a) Federal-aid highway construction projects. The special 
provisions set forth in appendix A shall be included in the advertised 
bidding proposal and made part of the contract for each contract and 
each covered Federal-aid highway construction subcontract.
    (b) Direct Federal highway construction projects. Advertising, award 
and contract administration procedures for direct Federal highway 
construction contracts shall be as set forth in Federal Acquisition 
Regulations (48 CFR, chapter 1, section 22.803(c)). In order to obtain 
information required by 48 CFR, chapter 1, Sec. 22.804-2(c), the 
following requirement shall be included at the end of the bid schedule 
in the proposal and contract assembly:

    I expect to employ the following firms as subcontractors on this 
project: (Naming subcontractors at this time does not constitute a 
binding commitment on the bidder to retain such subcontractors, nor will 
failure to enter names affect the contract award):

Name____________________________________________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________________
Name____________________________________________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________________

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975, as amended at 51 FR 22800, June 23, 1986]

[[Page 33]]


<R05>
Sec. 230.111  Implementation of special requirements for the provision 
of on-the-job training.

    (a) The State highway agency shall determine which Federal-aid 
highway construction contracts shall include the ``Training Special 
Provisions'' (appendix B) and the minimum number of trainees to be 
specified therein after giving appropriate consideration to the 
guidelines set forth in Sec. 230.111(c). The ``Training Special 
Provisions'' shall supersede section 7(b) of the Special Provisions 
(appendix A) entitled ``Specific Equal Employment Opportunity 
Responsibilities.'' Minor wording revisions will be required to the 
``Training Special Provisions'' in areas having ``Hometown'' or 
``Imposed Plan'' requirements.
    (b) The Washington Headquarters shall establish and publish annually 
suggested minimum training goals. These goals will be based on the 
Federal-aid apportioned amounts and the minority population. A State 
will have achieved its goal if the total number of training slots on 
selected federally aided highway construction contracts which have been 
awarded during each 12-month period equals or exceeds the State's 
suggested minimum annual goal. In the event a State highway agency does 
not attain its goal during a calendar year, the State highway agency at 
the end of the calendar year shall inform the Administrator of the 
reasons for its inability to meet the suggested minimum number of 
training slots and the steps to be taken to achieve the goal during the 
next calendar year. The information is to be submitted not later than 30 
days from the end of the calendar year and should be factual, and should 
not only indicate the situations occurring during the year but show the 
project conditions at least through the coming year. The final 
determination will be made on what training goals are considered to be 
realistic based on the information submitted by a State.
    (c) The following guidelines shall be utilized by the State highway 
agency in selecting projects and determining the number of trainees to 
be provided training therein:
    (1) Availability of minorities, women, and disadvantaged for 
training.
    (2) The potential for effective training.
    (3) Duration of the contract.
    (4) Dollar value of the contract.
    (5) Total normal work force that the average bidder could be 
expected to use.
    (6) Geographic location.
    (7) Type of work.
    (8) The need for additional journeymen in the area.
    (9) Recognition of the suggested minimum goal for the State.
    (10) A satisfactory ratio of trainees to journeymen expected to be 
on the contractor's work force during normal operations (considered to 
fall between 1:10 and 1:4).
    (d) Training programs which are established shall be approved only 
if they meet the standards set forth in appendix B with regard to:
    (1) The primary objectives of training and upgrading minority group 
workers, women and disadvantaged persons.
    (2) The development of full journeymen.
    (3) The minimum length and type of training.
    (4) The minimum wages of trainees.
    (5) Trainees certifications.
    (6) Keeping records and furnishing reports.
    (e)(1) Training programs considered by a State highway agency to 
meet the standards under this directive shall be submitted to the FHWA 
division Administrator with a recommendation for approval.
    (2) Employment pursuant to training programs approved by the FHWA 
division Administrator will be exempt from the minimum wage rate 
provisions of section 113 of title 23 U.S.C. Approval, however, shall 
not be given to training programs which provide for employment of 
trainees at wages less than those required by the Special Training 
Provisions. (Appendix B.)
    (f)(1) Apprenticeship programs approved by the U.S. Department of 
Labor as of the date of proposed use by a Federal-aid highway contractor 
or subcontractor need not be formally approved by the State highway 
agency or the FHWA division Administrator. Such programs, including 
their minimum wage provisions, are acceptable for use, provided they are 
administered

[[Page 34]]

in a manner reasonably calculated to meet the equal employment 
opportunity obligations of the contractor.
    (2) Other training programs approved by the U.S. Department of Labor 
as of the date of proposed use by a Federal-aid highway contractor or 
subcontractor are also acceptable for use without the formal approval of 
the State highway agency or the division Administrator provided:
    (i) The U.S. Department of Labor has clearly approved the program 
aspects relating to equal employment opportunity and the payment of 
trainee wage rates in lieu of prevailing wage rates.
    (ii) They are reasonably calculated to qualify the average trainees 
for journeyman status in the classification concerned by the end of the 
training period.
    (iii) They are administered in a manner calculated to meet the equal 
employment obligations of the contractors.
    (g) The State highway agencies have the option of permitting 
Federal-aid highway construction contractors to bid on training to be 
given under this directive. The following procedures are to be utilized 
by those State highway agencies that elect to provide a bid item for 
training:
    (1) The number of training positions shall continue to be specified 
in the Special Training Provisions. Furthermore, this number should be 
converted into an estimated number of hours of training which is to be 
used in arriving at the total bid price for the training item. Increases 
and decreases from the estimated amounts would be handled as overruns or 
underruns;
    (2) A section concerning the method of payment should be included in 
the Special Training Provisions. Some offsite training is permissible as 
long as the training is an integral part of an approved training program 
and does not comprise a substantial part of the overall training. 
Furthermore, the trainee must be concurrently employed on a federally 
aided highway construction project subject to the Special Training 
Provisions attached to this directive. Reimbursement for offsite 
training may only be made to the contractor where he does one or more of 
the following: Contributes to the cost of the training, provides the 
instruction to the trainee, or pays the trainee's wages during the 
offsite training period;
    (3) A State highway agency may modify the special provisions to 
specify the numbers to be trained in specific job classifications;
    (4) A State highway agency can specify training standards provided 
any prospective bidder can use them, the training standards are made 
known in the advertised specifications, and such standards are found 
acceptable by FHWA.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975; 40 FR 57358, Dec. 9, 1975, as amended at 41 
FR 3080, Jan. 21, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 230.113  Implementation of supportive services.

    (a) The State highway agency shall establish procedures, subject to 
the availability of funds under 23 U.S.C. 140(b), for the provision of 
supportive services in support of training programs approved under this 
directive. Funds made available to implement this paragraph shall not be 
used to finance the training of State highway agency employees or to 
provide services in support of such training. State highway agencies are 
not required to match funds allocated to them under this section.
    (b) In determining the types of supportive services to be provided 
which will increase the effectiveness of approved training programs. 
State highway agencies shall give preference to the following types of 
services in the order listed:
    (1) Services related to recruiting, counseling, transportation, 
physical examinations, remedial training, with special emphasis upon 
increasing training opportunities for members of minority groups and 
women;
    (2) Services in connection with the administration of on-the-job 
training programs being sponsored by individual or groups of contractors 
and/or minority groups and women's groups;
    (3) Services designed to develop the capabilities of prospective 
trainees for undertaking on-the-job training;
    (4) Services in connection with providing a continuation of training 
during periods of seasonal shutdown;

[[Page 35]]

    (5) Followup services to ascertain outcome of training being 
provided.
    (c) State highway agencies which desire to provide or obtain 
supportive services other than those listed above shall submit their 
proposals to the Federal Highway Administration for approval. The 
proposal, together with recommendations of the division and regional 
offices shall be submitted to the Administrator for appropriate action.
    (d) When the State highway agency provides supportive services by 
contract, formal advertising is not required by the FHWA, however, the 
State highway agency shall solicit proposals from such qualified sources 
as will assure the competitive nature of the procurement. The evaluation 
of proposals by the State highway agency must include consideration of 
the proposer's ability to effect a productive relationship with 
contractors, unions (if appropriate), minority and women groups, 
minority and women trainees, and other persons or organizations whose 
cooperation and assistance will contribute to the successful performance 
of the contract work.
    (e) In the selection of contractors to provide supportive services, 
State highway agencies shall make conscientious efforts to search out 
and utilize the services of qualified minority or women organizations, 
or minority or women business enterprises.
    (f) As a minimum, State highway agency contracts to obtain 
supportive services shall include the following provisions:
    (1) A statement that a primary purpose of the supportive services is 
to increase the effectiveness of approved on-the-job training programs, 
particularly their effectiveness in providing meaningful training 
opportunities for minorities, women, and the disadvantaged on Federal-
aid highway projects;
    (2) A clear and complete statement of the services to be provided 
under the contract, such as services to construction contractors, 
subcontractors, and trainees, for recruiting, counseling, remedial 
educational training, assistance in the acquisition of tools, special 
equipment and transportation, followup procedures, etc.;
    (3) The nondiscrimination provisions required by Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 as set forth in FHWA Form PR-1273, and a 
statement of nondiscrimination in employment because of race, color, 
religion, national origin or sex;
    (4) The establishment of a definite perriod of contract performance 
together with, if appropriate, a schedule stating when specific 
supportive services are to be provided;
    (5) Reporting requirements pursuant to which the State highway 
agency will receive monthly or quarterly reports containing sufficient 
statistical data and narrative content to enable evaluation of both 
progress and problems;
    (6) A requirement that the contractor keep track of trainees 
receiving training on Federal-aid highway construction projects for up 
to 6 months during periods when their training is interrupted. Such 
contracts shall also require the contractor to conduct a 6 month 
followup review of the employment status of each graduate who completes 
an on-the-job training program on a Federal-aid highway construction 
project subsequent to the effective date of the contract for supportive 
services.
    (7) The basis of payment;
    (8) An estimated schedule for expenditures;
    (9) The right of access to contractor and subcontractor records and 
the right to audit shall be granted to authorize State highway agency 
and FHWA officials;
    (10) Noncollusion certification;
    (11) A requirement that the contractor provide all information 
necessary to support progress payments if such are provided for in the 
contract;
    (12) A termination clause.
    (g) The State highway agency is to furnish copies of the reports 
received under paragraph (b)(5) of this section, to the division office.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 3080, Jan. 21, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 230.115  Special contract requirements for ``Hometown'' or ``Imposed'' 
Plan areas.

    Direct Federal and Federal-aid contracts to be performed in 
``Hometown''

[[Page 36]]

or ``Imposed'' Plan areas will incorporate the special provision set 
forth in appendix G.


<R05>
Sec. 230.117  Reimbursement procedures (Federal-aid highway construction 
projects only).

    (a) On-the-job special training provisions. State highway agencies 
will be reimbursed on the same pro-rata basis as the construction costs 
of the Federal-aid project.
    (b) Supportive services. (1) The State highway agency must keep a 
separate account of supportive services funds since they cannot be 
interchanged with regular Federal-aid funds. In addition, these funds 
may not be expended in a manner that would provide for duplicate payment 
of Federal or Federal-aid funds for the same service.
    (2) Where a State highway agency does not obligate all its funds 
within the time specified in the particular year's allocation directive, 
the funds shall revert to the FHWA Headquarters Office to be made 
available for use by other State highway agencies, taking into 
consideration each State's need for and ability to use such funds.


<R05>
Sec. 230.119  Monitoring of supportive services.

    Supportive services procured by a State highway agency shall be 
monitored by both the State highway agency and the division office.


<R05>
Sec. 230.121  Reports.

    (a) Employment reports on Federal-aid highway construction contracts 
not subject to ``Hometown'' or ``Imposed'' plan requirements.
    (1) Paragraph 10c of the special provisions (appendix A) sets forth 
specific reporting requirements. FHWA Form PR-1391, Federal-Aid Highway 
Construction Contractors Annual EEO Report, (appendix C) and FHWA Form 
PR 1392, Federal-Aid Highway Construction Summary of Employment Data 
(including minority breakdown) for all Federal-Aid Highway Projects for 
month ending July 31st, 19--, (appendix D) are to be used to fulfill 
these reporting requirements.
    (2) Form PR 1391 is to be completed by each contractor and each 
subcontractor subject to this part for every month of July during which 
work is performed, and submitted to the State highway agency. A separate 
report is to be completed for each covered contract or subcontract. The 
employment data entered should reflect the work force on board during 
all or any part of the last payroll period preceding the end of the 
month. The State highway agency is to forward a single copy of each 
report to the FHWA division office.
    (3) Form PR 1392 is to be completed by the State highway agencies, 
summarizing the reports on PR 1391 for the month of July received from 
all active contractors and subcontractors. Three (3) copies of completed 
Forms PR 1392 are to be forwarded to the division office.
    (b) Employment reports on direct Federal highway construction 
contracts not subject to ``Hometown'' or ``Imposed'' plan requirements. 
Forms PR 1391 (appendix C) and PR 1392 (appendix D) shall be used for 
reporting purposes as prescribed in Sec. 230.121(a).
    (c) Employment reports on direct Federal and Federal-aid highway 
construction contracts subject to ``Hometown'' or ``Imposed'' plan 
requirements.
    (1) Reporting requirements for direct Federal and Federal-aid 
highway construction projects located in areas where ``Hometown'' or 
``Imposed'' plans are in effect shall be in accordance with those issued 
by the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance.
    (2) In order that we may comply with the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Public Works' request that the Federal Highway Administration submit a 
report annually on the status of the equal employment opportunity 
program, Form PR 1391 is to be completed annually by each contractor and 
each subcontractor holding contracts or subcontracts exceeding $10,000 
except as otherwise provided for under 23 U.S.C. 117. The employment 
data entered should reflect the work force on board during all or any 
part of the last payroll period preceding the end of the month of July.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Reports on supportive services contracts. The State highway 
agency is

[[Page 37]]

to furnish copies of the reports received from supportive services 
contractors to the FHWA division office which will furnish a copy to the 
regional office.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975, as amended at 43 FR 19386, May 5, 1978; 61 
FR 14616, Apr. 3, 1996]

         Appendix A to Subpart A of Part 230--Special Provisions

         specific equal employment opportunity responsibilities

    1. General. a. Equal employment opportunity requirements not to 
discriminate and to take affirmative action to assure equal employment 
opportunity as required by Executive Order 11246 and Executive Order 
11375 are set forth in Required Contract, Provisions (Form PR-1273 or 
1316, as appropriate) and these Special Provisions which are imposed 
pursuant to section 140 of title 23 U.S.C., as established by section 22 
of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968. The requirements set forth in 
these Special Provisions shall constitute the specific affirmative 
action requirements for project activities under this contract and 
supplement the equal employment opportunity requirements set forth in 
the Required Contract Provisions.
    b. The contractor will work with the State highway agencies and the 
Federal Government in carrying out equal employment opportunity 
obligations and in their review of his/her activities under the 
contract.
    c. The contractor and all his/her subcontractors holding 
subcontracts not including material suppliers, of $10,000 or more, will 
comply with the following minimum specific requirement activities of 
equal employment opportunity: (The equal employment opportunity 
requirements of Executive Order 11246, as set forth in volume 6, chapter 
4, section 1, subsection 1 of the Federal-Aid Highway Program Manual, 
are applicable to material suppliers as well as contractors and 
subcontractors.) The contractor will include these requirements in every 
subcontract of $10,000 or more with such modification of language as is 
necessary to make them binding on the subcontractor.
    2. Equal Employment Opportunity Policy. The contractor will accept 
as his operating policy the following statement which is designed to 
further the provision of equal employment opportunity to all persons 
without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, 
and to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity 
through a positive continuing program:
    It is the policy of this Company to assure that applicants are 
employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without 
regard to their race, religion, sex, color, or national origin. Such 
action shall include: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer; 
recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of 
pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training, 
including apprenticeship, preapprenticeship, and/or on-the-job training.
    3. Equal Employment Opportunity Officer. The contractor will 
designate and make known to the State highway agency contracting 
officers and equal employment opportunity officer (hereinafter referred 
to as the EEO Officer) who will have the responsibility for and must be 
capable of effectively administering and promoting an active contractor 
program of equal employment opportunity and who must be assigned 
adequate authority and responsibility to do so.
    4. Dissemination of Policy. a. All members of the contractor's staff 
who are authorized to hire, supervise, promote, and discharge employees, 
or who recommend such action, or who are substantially involved in such 
action, will be made fully cognizant of, and will implement, the 
contractor's equal employment opportunity policy and contractual 
responsibilities to provide equal employment opportunity in each grade 
and classification of employment. To ensure that the above agreement 
will be met, the following actions will be taken as a minimum:
    (1) Periodic meetings of supervisory and personnel office employees 
will be conducted before the start of work and then not less often than 
once every six months, at which time the contractor's equal employment 
opportunity policy and its implementation will be reviewed and 
explained. The meetings will be conducted by the EEO Officer or other 
knowledgeable company official.
    (2) All new supervisory or personnel office employees will be given 
a thorough indoctrination by the EEO Officer or other knowledgeable 
company official, covering all major aspects of the contractor's equal 
employment opportunity obligations within thirty days following their 
reporting for duty with the contractor.
    (3) All personnel who are engaged in direct recruitment for the 
project will be instructed by the EEO Officer or appropriate company 
official in the contractor's procedures for locating and hiring minority 
group employees.
    b. In order to make the contractor's equal employment opportunity 
policy known to all employees, prospective employees and potential 
sources of employees, i.e., schools, employment agencies, labor unions 
(where appropriate), college placement officers, etc., the contractor 
will take the following actions:
    (1) Notices and posters setting forth the contractor's equal 
employment opportunity

[[Page 38]]

policy will be placed in areas readily accessible to employees, 
applicants for employment and potential employees.
    (2) The contractor's equal employment opportunity policy and the 
procedures to implement such policy will be brought to the attention of 
employees by means of meetings, employee handbooks, or other appropriate 
means.
    5. Recruitment. a. When advertising for employees, the contractor 
will include in all advertisements for employees the notation: ``An 
Equal Opportunity Employer.'' All such advertisements will be published 
in newspapers or other publications having a large circulation among 
minority groups in the area from which the project work force would 
normally be derived.
    b. The contractor will, unless precluded by a valid bargaining 
agreement, conduct systematic and direct recruitment through public and 
private employee referral sources likely to yield qualified minority 
group applicants, including, but not limited to, State employment 
agencies, schools, colleges and minority group organizations. To meet 
this requirement, the contractor will, through his EEO Officer, identify 
sources of potential minority group employees, and establish with such 
identified sources procedures whereby minority group applicants may be 
referred to the contractor for employment consideration.
    In the event the contractor has a valid bargaining agreement 
providing for exclusive hiring hall referrals, he is expected to observe 
the provisions of that agreement to the extent that the system permits 
the contractor's compliance with equal employment opportunity contract 
provisions. (The U.S. Department of Labor has held that where 
implementation of such agreements have the effect of discriminating 
against minorities or women, or obligates the contractor to do the same, 
such implementation violates Executive Order 11246, as amended.)
    c. The contractor will encourage his present employees to refer 
minority group applicants for employment by posting appropriate notices 
or bulletins in areas accessible to all such employees. In addition, 
information and procedures with regard to referring minority group 
applicants will be discussed with employees.
    6. Personnel Actions. Wages, working conditions, and employee 
benefits shall be established and administered, and personnel actions of 
every type, including hiring, upgrading, promotion, transfer, demotion, 
layoff, and termination, shall be taken without regard to race, color, 
religion, sex, or national origin. The following procedures shall be 
followed:
    a. The contractor will conduct periodic inspections of project sites 
to insure that working conditions and employee facilities do not 
indicate discriminatory treatment of project site personnel.
    b. The contractor will periodically evaluate the spread of wages 
paid within each classification to determine any evidence of 
discriminatory wage practices.
    c. The contractor will periodically review selected personnel 
actions in depth to determine whether there is evidence of 
discrimination. Where evidence is found, the contractor will promptly 
take corrective action. If the review indicates that the discrimination 
may extend beyond the actions reviewed, such corrective action shall 
include all affected persons.
    d. The contractor will promptly investigate all complaints of 
alleged discrimination made to the contractor in connection with his 
obligations under this contract, will attempt to resolve such 
complaints, and will take appropriate corrective action within a 
reasonable time. If the investigation indicates that the discrimination 
may affect persons other than the complainant, such corrective action 
shall include such other persons. Upon completion of each investigation, 
the contractor will inform every complainant of all of his avenues of 
appeal.
    7. Training and Promotion. a. The contractor will assist in 
locating, qualifying, and increasing the skills of minority group and 
women employees, and applicants for employment.
    b. Consistent with the contractor's work force requirements and as 
permissible under Federal and State regulations, the contractor shall 
make full use of training programs, i.e., apprenticeship, and on-the-job 
training programs for the geographical area of contract performance. 
Where feasible, 25 percent of apprentices or trainees in each occupation 
shall be in their first year of apprenticeship or training. In the event 
the Training Special Provision is provided under this contract, this 
subparagraph will be superseded as indicated in Attachment 2.
    c. The contractor will advise employees and applicants for 
employment of available training programs and entrance requirements for 
each.
    d. The contractor will periodically review the training and 
promotion potential of minority group and women employees and will 
encourage eligible employees to apply for such training and promotion.
    8. Unions. If the contractor relies in whole or in part upon unions 
as a source of employees, the contractor will use his/her best efforts 
to obtain the cooperation of such unions to increase opportunities for 
minority groups and women within the unions, and to effect referrals by 
such unions of minority and female employees. Actions by the contractor 
either directly or through a contractor's association acting as agent 
will include the procedures set forth below:

[[Page 39]]

    a. The contractor will use best efforts to develop, in cooperation 
with the unions, joint training programs aimed toward qualifying more 
minority group members and women for membership in the unions and 
increasing the skills of minority group employees and women so that they 
may qualify for higher paying employment.
    b. The contractor will use best efforts to incorporate an equal 
employment opportunity clause into each union agreement to the end that 
such union will be contractually bound to refer applicants without 
regard to their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
    c. The contractor is to obtain information as to the referral 
practices and policies of the labor union except that to the extent such 
information is within the exclusive possession of the labor union and 
such labor union refuses to furnish such information to the contractor, 
the contractor shall so certify to the State highway department and 
shall set forth what efforts have been made to obtain such information.
    d. In the event the union is unable to provide the contractor with a 
reasonable flow of minority and women referrals within the time limit 
set forth in the collective bargaining agreement, the contractor will, 
through independent recruitment efforts, fill the employment vacancies 
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; making 
full efforts to obtain qualified and/or qualifiable minority group 
persons and women. (The U.S. Department of Labor has held that it shall 
be no excuse that the union with which the contractor has a collective 
bargaining agreement providing for exclusive referral failed to refer 
minority employees.) In the event the union referral practice prevents 
the contractor from meeting the obligations pursuant to Executive Order 
11246, as amended, and these special provisions, such contractor shall 
immediately notify the State highway agency.
    9. Subcontracting. a. The contractor will use his best efforts to 
solicit bids from and to utilize minority group subcontractors or 
subcontractors with meaningful minority group and female representation 
among their employees. Contractors shall obtain lists of minority-owned 
construction firms from State highway agency personnel.
    b. The contractor will use his best efforts to ensure subcontractor 
compliance with their equal employment opportunity obligations.
    10. Records and Reports. a. The contractor will keep such records as 
are necessary to determine compliance with the contractor's equal 
employment opportunity obligations. The records kept by the contractor 
will be designed to indicate:
    (1) The number of minority and nonminority group members and women 
employed in each work classification on the project.
    (2) The progress and efforts being made in cooperation with unions 
to increase employment opportunities for minorities and women 
(applicable only to contractors who rely in whole or in part on unions 
as a source of their work force),
    (3) The progress and efforts being made in locating, hiring, 
training, qualifying, and upgrading minority and female employees, and
    (4) The progress and efforts being made in securing the services of 
minority group subcontractors or subcontractors with meaningful minority 
and female representation among their employees.
    b. All such records must be retained for a period of three years 
following completion of the contract work and shall be available at 
reasonable times and places for inspection by authorized representatives 
of the State highway agency and the Federal Highway Administration.
    c. The contractors will submit an annual report to the State highway 
agency each July for the duration of the project, indicating the number 
of minority, women, and non-minority group employees currently engaged 
in each work classification required by the contract work. This 
information is to be reported on Form PR 1391. If on-the-job training is 
being required by ``Training Special Provision'', the contractor will be 
required to furnish Form FHWA 1409.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975, as amended at 43 FR 19386, May 5, 1978. 
Correctly redesignated at 46 FR 21156, Apr. 9, 1981]

    Appendix B to Subpart A of Part 230--Training Special Provisions

    This Training Special Provision supersedes subparagraph 7b of the 
Special Provision entitled ``Specific Equal Employment Opportunity 
Responsibilities,'' (Attachment 1), and is in implementation of 23 
U.S.C. 140(a).
    As part of the contractor's equal employment opportunity affirmative 
action program training shall be provided as follows:
    The contractor shall provide on-the-job training aimed at developing 
full journeymen in the type of trade or job classification involved.
    The number of trainees to be trained under the special provisions 
will be -------- (amount to be filled in by State highway department).
    In the event that a contractor subcontracts a portion of the 
contract work, he shall determine how many, if any, of the trainees are 
to be trained by the subcontractor, provided, however, that the 
contractor shall retain the primary responsibility for meeting the 
training requirements imposed by this special provision. The contractor 
shall also insure that this training

[[Page 40]]

special provision is made applicable to such subcontract. Where 
feasible, 25 percent of apprentices or trainees in each occupation shall 
be in their first year of apprenticeship or training.
    The number of trainees shall be distributed among the work 
classifications on the basis of the contractor's needs and the 
availability of journeymen in the various classifications within a 
reasonable area of recruitment. Prior to commencing construction, the 
contractor shall submit to the State highway agency for approval the 
number of trainees to be trained in each selected classification and 
training program to be used. Furthermore, the contractor shall specify 
the starting time for training in each of the classifications. The 
contractor will be credited for each trainee employed by him on the 
contract work who is currently enrolled or becomes enrolled in an 
approved program and will be reimbursed for such trainees as provided 
hereinafter.
    Training and upgrading of minorities and women toward journeymen 
status is a primary objective of this Training Special Provision. 
Accordingly, the contractor shall make every effort to enroll minority 
trainees and women (e.g., by conducting systematic and direct 
recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority 
and women trainees) to the extent that such persons are available within 
a reasonable area of recruitment. The contractor will be responsible for 
demonstrating the steps that he has taken in pursuance thereof, prior to 
a determination as to whether the contractor is in compliance with this 
Training Special Provision. This training commitment is not intended, 
and shall not be used, to discriminate against any applicant for 
training, whether a member of a minority group or not.
    No employee shall be employed as a trainee in any classification in 
which he has successfully completed a training course leading to 
journeyman status or in which he has been employed as a journeyman. The 
contractor should satisfy this requirement by including appropriate 
questions in the employee application or by other suitable means. 
Regardless of the method used the contractor's records should document 
the findings in each case.
    The minimum length and type of training for each classification will 
be as established in the training program selected by the contractor and 
approved by the State highway agency and the Federal Highway 
Administration. The State highway agency and the Federal Highway 
Administration shall approve a program if it is reasonably calculated to 
meet the equal employment opportunity obligations of the contractor and 
to qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in the 
classification concerned by the end of the training period. Furthermore, 
apprenticeship programs registered with the U.S. Department of Labor, 
Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, or with a State apprenticeship 
agency recognized by the Bureau and training programs approved but not 
necessarily sponsored by the U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower 
Administration, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training shall also be 
considered acceptable provided it is being administered in a manner 
consistent with the equal employment obligations of Federal-aid highway 
construction contracts. Approval or acceptance of a training program 
shall be obtained from the State prior to commencing work on the 
classification covered by the program. It is the intention of these 
provisions that training is to be provided in the construction crafts 
rather than clerk-typists or secretarial-type positions. Training is 
permissible in lower level management positions such as office 
engineers, estimators, timekeepers, etc., where the training is oriented 
toward construction applications. Training in the laborer classification 
may be permitted provided that significant and meaningful training is 
provided and approved by the division office. Some offsite training is 
permissible as long as the training is an integral part of an approved 
training program and does not comprise a significant part of the overall 
training.
    Except as otherwise noted below, the contractor will be reimbursed 
80 cents per hour of training given an employee on this contract in 
accordance with an approved training program. As approved by the 
engineer, reimbursement will be made for training persons in excess of 
the number specified herein. This reimbursement will be made even though 
the contractor receives additional training program funds from other 
sources, provided such other does not specifically prohibit the 
contractor from receiving other reimbursement. Reimbursement for offsite 
training indicated above may only be made to the contractor where he 
does one or more of the following and the trainees are concurrently 
employed on a Federal-aid project; contributes to the cost of the 
training, provides the instruction to the trainee or pays the trainee's 
wages during the offsite training period.
    No payment shall be made to the contractor if either the failure to 
provide the required training, or the failure to hire the trainee as a 
journeyman, is caused by the contractor and evidences a lack of good 
faith on the part of the contractor in meeting the requirements of this 
Training Special Provision. It is normally expected that a trainee will 
begin his training on the project as soon as feasible after start of 
work utilizing the skill involved and remain on the proj ect as long as 
training opportunities exist in his work classification or until he has 
completed his training program. It is not required that all trainees be 
on board for the entire length

[[Page 41]]

of the contract. A contractor will have fulfilled his responsibilities 
under this Training Special Provision if he has provided acceptable 
training to the number of trainees specified. The number trained shall 
be determined on the basis of the total number enrolled on the contract 
for a significant period.
    Trainees will be paid at least 60 percent of the appropriate minimum 
journeyman's rate specified in the contract for the first half of the 
training period, 75 percent for the third quarter of the training 
period, and 90 percent for the last quarter of the training period, 
unless apprentices or trainees in an approved existing program are 
enrolled as trainees on this project. In that case, the appropriate 
rates approved by the Departments of Labor or Transportation in 
connection with the existing program shall apply to all trainees being 
trained for the same classification who are covered by this Training 
Special Provision.
    The contractor shall furnish the trainee a copy of the program he 
will follow in providing the training. The contractor shall provide each 
trainee with a certification showing the type and length of training 
satisfactorily completed.
    The contractor will provide for the maintenance of records and 
furnish periodic reports documenting his performance under this Training 
Special Provision.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975. Correctly redesignated at 46 FR 21156, Apr. 
9, 1981]

[[Page 42]]

                   Appendix C to Subpart A of Part 230
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.000


[[Page 43]]



                   Appendix D to Subpart A of Part 230
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.001

                  General Information and Instructions

    This form is to be developed from the ``Contractor's Annual EEO 
Report.'' This data is to be compiled by the State and submitted 
annually. It should reflect the total employment on all Federal-Aid 
Highway Projects in the State as of July 31st. The staffing figures to 
be reported should represent the project work force on board in all or 
any part of the last payroll period preceding the end of July.

[[Page 44]]

The staffing figures to be reported in Table A should include journey-
level men and women, apprentices, and on-the-job trainees. Staffing 
figures to be reported in Table B should include only apprentices and 
on-the-job trainees as indicated.
    Entries made for ``Job Categories'' are to be confined to the 
listing shown. Miscellaneous job classifications are to be incorporated 
in the most appropriate category listed on the form. All employees on 
projects should thus be accounted for.
    This information will be useful in complying with the U.S. Senate 
Committee on Public Works request that the Federal Highway 
Administration submit a report annually on the status of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Program, its effectiveness, and progress made by 
the States and the Administration in carrying out section 22(A) of the 
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968. In addition, the form should be used as 
a valuable tool for States to evaluate their own programs for ensuring 
equal opportunity.
    It is requested that States submit this information annually to the 
FHWA Divisions no later than September 25.
    Line 01--State & Region Code. Enter the 4-digit code from the list 
below.

Alabama.....................     01-04  Montana...............     30-08
Alaska......................     02-10  Nebraska..............     31-07
Arizona.....................     04-09  Nevada................     32-09
Arkansas....................     05-06  New Hampshire.........     33-01
California..................     06-09  New Jersey............     34-01
Colorado....................     08-08  New Mexico............     35-06
Delaware....................     10-03  North Carolina........     37-04
District of Columbia........     11-03  North Dakota..........     38-08
Florida.....................     12-04  Ohio..................     39-05
Georgia.....................     13-04  Oklahoma..............     40-06
Hawaii......................     15-09  Oregon................     41-10
Idaho.......................     16-10  Pennsylvania..........     42-03
Illinois....................     17-05  Puerto Rico...........     43-01
Iowa........................     19-07  South Carolina........     45-04
Kansas......................     20-07  South Dakota..........     46-08
Kentucky....................     21-04  Tennessee.............     47-04
Louisiana...................     22-06  Texas.................     48-06
Maine.......................     23-01  Utah..................     49-08
Maryland....................     24-03  Vermont...............     50-01
Massachusetts...............     25-01  Virginia..............     51-03
Michigan....................     26-05  Washington............     53-10
Minnesota...................     27-05  West Virginia.........     54-03
Mississippi.................     28-04  Wisconsin.............     55-05
Missouri....................     29-07  Wyoming...............     56-08
 


(23 U.S.C. sec. 140(a), 315, 49 CFR 1.48(b))

[44 FR 46832, Aug. 8, 1979. Correctly redesignated at 46 FR 21156, Apr. 
9, 1981, and amended at 56 FR 4721, Feb. 6, 1991]

           Appendixes E-F to Subpart A of Part 230 [Reserved]

Appendix G to Subpart A of Part 230--Special Reporting Requirements for 
                 ``Hometown'' or ``Imposed'' Plan Areas

    In addition to the reporting requirements set forth elsewhere in 
this contract the contractor and the subcontractors holding 
subcontracts, not including material suppliers, of $10,000 or more, 
shall submit for every month of July during which work is performed, 
employment data as contained under Form PR-1391 (appendix C to 23 CFR 
part 230) and in accordance with the instructions included thereon.

[40 FR 28053, July 3, 1975. Correctly redesignated at 46 FR 21156, Apr. 
9, 1981]


<R04>
  Subpart B_Supportive Services for Minority, Disadvantaged, and Women 
                          Business Enterprises

    Source: 50 FR 51243, Dec. 16, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 230.201  Purpose.

    To prescribe the policies, procedures, and guidance to develop, 
conduct, and administer supportive services assistance programs for 
minority, disadvantaged, and women business enterprises.


<R05>
Sec. 230.202  Definitions.

    (a) Minority Business Enterprise, as used in this subpart, refers to 
all small businesses which participate in the

[[Page 45]]

Federal-aid highway program as a minority business enterprise (MBE), 
women business enterprise (WBE), or disadvantaged business enterprise 
(DBE), all defined under 49 CFR part 23. This expanded definition is 
used only in this subpart as a simplified way of defining the firms 
eligible to benefit from this supportive services program.
    (b) Supportive Services means those services and activities provided 
in connection with minority business enterprise programs which are 
designed to increase the total number of minority businesses active in 
the highway program and contribute to the growth and eventual self-
sufficiency of individual minority businesses so that such businesses 
may achieve proficiency to compete, on an equal basis, for contracts and 
subcontracts.
    (c) State highway agency means that department, commission, board, 
or official of any State charged by its laws with the responsibility for 
highway construction. The term State is considered equivalent to State 
highway agency if the context so implies.


<R05>
Sec. 230.203  Policy.

    Based on the provisions of Pub. L. 97-424, dated January 6, 1983, it 
is the policy of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) to promote 
increased participation of minority business enterprises in Federal-aid 
highway contracts in part through the development and implementation of 
cost effective supportive services programs through the State highway 
agencies.


<R05>
Sec. 230.204  Implementation of supportive services.

    (a) Subject to the availability of funds under 23 U.S.C. 140(c), the 
State highway agency shall establish procedures to develop, conduct, and 
administer minority business enterprise training and assistance programs 
specifically for the benefit of women and minority businesses. 
Supportive services funds allocated to the States shall not be used to 
finance the training of State highway agency employees or to provide 
services in support of such training. State highway agencies are not 
required to match funds allocated to them under this section. Individual 
States are encouraged to be actively involved in the provision of 
supportive services. Such involvement can take the form of staff, 
funding, and/or direct assistance to augment the supportive services 
efforts financed by Federal-aid funds.
    (b) State highway agencies shall give preference to the following 
types of services:
    (1) Services relating to identification, prequalification, and 
certification assistance, with emphasis on increasing the total number 
of legitimate minority business enterprises participating in the 
Federal-aid highway program;
    (2) Services in connection with estimating, bidding, and technical 
assistance designed to develop and improve the capabilities of minority 
businesses and assist them in achieving proficiency in the technical 
skills involved in highway construction;
    (3) Services designed to develop and improve the immediate and long-
term business management, recordkeeping, and financial accounting 
capabilities;
    (4) Services to assist minority business enterprises to become 
eligible for and to obtain bonding and financial assistance;
    (5) Services relating to verification procedures to ensure that only 
bona fide minority business enterprises are certified as eligible for 
participation in the Federal-aid highway program;
    (6) Follow-up services to ascertain the outcome of training and 
assistance being provided; and
    (7) Other services which contribute to long-term development, 
increased opportunities, and eventual self-sufficiency of minority 
business enterprises.
    (c) A detailed work statement of the supportive services which the 
State highway agency considers to meet the guidance under this 
regulation and a program plan for meeting the requirements of paragraph 
(b) of this section and accomplishing other objectives shall be 
submitted to the FHWA for approval.
    (d) State highway agencies which desire to provide or obtain 
services other than those listed in paragraph (b) of this section shall 
submit their proposals to the FHWA for approval.

[[Page 46]]

    (e) When the State highway agency provides supportive services by 
contract, formal advertising is not required by FHWA; however, the State 
highway agency shall solicit proposals from such qualified sources as 
will assure the competitive nature of the procurement. The evaluation of 
proposals by the State highway agency must include consideration of the 
proposer's ability to effect a productive relationship with majority and 
minority contractors, contractors' associations, minority groups, and 
other persons or organizations whose cooperation and assistance will 
increase the opportunities for minority business enterprises to compete 
for and perform contracts and subcontracts.
    (f) In the selection of contractors to perform supportive services, 
State highway agencies shall make conscientious efforts to search out, 
and utilize the services of qualified minority or women organizations, 
or minority or women enterprises.
    (g) As a minimum, State highway agency contracts to obtain 
supportive services shall include the following provisions:
    (1) A statement that a primary purpose of the supportive services is 
to increase the total number of minority firms participating in the 
Federal-aid highway program and to contribute to the growth and eventual 
self-sufficiency of minority firms;
    (2) A statement that supportive services shall be provided only to 
those minority business enterprises determined to be eligible for 
participation in the Federal-aid highway program in accordance with 49 
CFR part 23 and have a work specialty related to the highway 
construction industry;
    (3) A clear and complete statement of the services to be provided 
under the contract, such as technical assistance, managerial assistance, 
counseling, certification assistance, and follow-up procedures as set 
forth in Sec. 230.204(b) of this part;
    (4) The nondiscrimination provisions required by Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 as set forth in Form FHWA-1273, Required 
Contract Provisions, Federal-Aid Construction Contracts, \1\ and a 
statement of nondiscrimination in employment because of race, color, 
religion, sex, or national origin;
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Form FHWA-1273 is available for inspection and copying at the 
locations given in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D, under Document Inspection 
Facilities, and at all State highway agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) The establishment of a definite period of contract performance 
together with, if appropriate, a schedule stating when specific 
supportive services are to be provided;
    (6) Monthly or quarterly reports to the State highway agency 
containing sufficient data and narrative content to enable evaluation of 
both progress and problems;
    (7) The basis of payment;
    (8) An estimated schedule for expenditures;
    (9) The right of access to records and the right to audit shall be 
granted to authorize State highway agency and FHWA officials;
    (10) Noncollusion certification;
    (11) A requirement that the contractor provide all information 
necessary to support progress payments if such are provided for in the 
contract; and
    (12) A termination clause.
    (h) The State highway agency is to furnish copies of the reports 
received under paragraph(g)(6) of this section to the FHWA division 
office.

[50 FR 51243, Dec. 16, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 36922, Oct. 2, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 230.205  Supportive services funds obligation.

    Supportive services funds shall be obligated in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in Sec. 230.117(b) of this part. The point of 
obligation is defined as that time when the FHWA has approved a detailed 
work statement for the supportive services.


<R05>
Sec. 230.206  Monitoring supportive services.

    Supportive services programs shall be continually monitored and 
evaluated by the State highway agency so that needed improvements can be 
identified and instituted. This requires the documentation of valid 
effectiveness

[[Page 47]]

measures by which the results of program efforts may be accurately 
assessed.


<R05>
Sec. 230.207  Sources of assistance.

    It is the policy of the FHWA that all potential sources of 
assistance to minority business enterprises be utilized. The State 
highway agency shall take actions to ensure that supportive services 
contracts reflect the availability of all sources of assistance in order 
to maximize resource utilization and avoid unnecessary duplication.


<R04>
  Subpart C_State Highway Agency Equal Employment Opportunity Programs

    Source: 41 FR 28270, July 9, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 230.301  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subpart is to set forth 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Federal-aid policy and FHWA and 
State responsibilities relative to a State highway agency's internal 
equal employment opportunity program and for assuring compliance with 
the equal employment opportunity requirements of federally-assisted 
highway construction contracts.


<R05>
Sec. 230.303  Applicability.

    The provisions of this subpart are applicable to all States that 
receive Federal financial assistance in connection with the Federal-aid 
highway program.


<R05>
Sec. 230.305  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Affirmative Action Plan means:
    (1) With regard to State highway agency work forces, a written 
document detailing the positive action steps the State highway agency 
will take to assure internal equal employment opportunity (internal 
plan).
    (2) With regard to Federal-aid construction contract work forces, 
the Federal equal employment opportunity bid conditions, to be enforced 
by a State highway agency in the plan areas established by the Secretary 
of Labor and FHWA special provisions in nonplan areas (external plan).
    (b) Equal employment opportunity program means the total State 
highway agency program, including the affirmative action plans, for 
ensuring compliance with Federal requirements both in State highway 
agency internal employment and in employment on Federal-aid construction 
projects.
    (c) Minority groups. An employee may be included in the minority 
group to which he or she appears to belong, or is regarded in the 
community as belonging. As defined by U.S. Federal agencies for 
employment purposes, minority group persons in the U.S. are identified 
as Blacks (not of Hispanic origin), Hispanics, Asian or Pacific 
Islanders, and American Indians or Alaskan Natives.
    (d) Racial/ethnic identification. For the purpose of this regulation 
and any accompanying report requirements, an employee may be included in 
the group to which he or she appears to belong, identifies with, or is 
regarded in the community as belonging. However, no person should be 
counted in more than one racial/ethnic category. The following group 
categories will be used:
    (1) The category White (not of Hispanic origin): All persons having 
origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, North Africa, the 
Middle East, or the Indian Subcontinent.
    (2) The category Black (not of Hispanic origin): All persons having 
origins in any of the Black racial groups.
    (3) The category Hispanic: All persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, 
Cuban, Central or South American, or other Spanish culture or origin, 
regardless of race.
    (4) The category Asian or Pacific Islanders: All persons having 
origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, 
or the Pacific Islands. This area includes, for example, China, Japan, 
Korea, the Philippine Islands, and Samoa.
    (5) The category American Indian or Alaskan Native: All persons 
having origins in any of the original peoples of North America.
    (e) State means any of the 50 States of the United States, the 
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American 
Samoa, and the Virgin Islands.

[[Page 48]]

    (f) State highway agency means that department, commission, board, 
or official of any State charged by its laws with the responsibility for 
highway construction. The term State should be considered equivalent to 
State highway agency if the context so implies.

[41 FR 28270, July 9, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 46293, Oct. 20, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 230.307  Policy.

    Every employee and representative of State highway agencies shall 
perform all official equal employment opportunity actions in an 
affirmative manner, and in full accord with applicable statutes, 
executive orders, regulations, and policies enunciated thereunder, to 
assure the equality of employment opportunity, without regard to race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin both in its own work force and 
in the work forces of contractors, subcontractors, and material 
suppliers engaged in the performance of Federal-aid highway construction 
contracts.


<R05>
Sec. 230.309  Program format.

    It is essential that a standardized Federal approach be taken in 
assisting the States in development and implementation of EEO programs. 
The format set forth in appendix A provides that standardized approach. 
State equal employment opportunity programs that meet or exceed the 
prescribed standards will comply with basic FHWA requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 230.311  State responsibilities.

    (a) Each State highway agency shall prepare and submit an updated 
equal employment opportunity program, one year from the date of approval 
of the preceding program by the Federal Highway Administrator, over the 
signature of the head of the State highway agency, to the Federal 
Highway Administrator through the FHWA Division Administrator. The 
program shall consist of the following elements:
    (1) The collection and analysis of internal employment data for its 
entire work force in the manner prescribed in part II, paragraph III of 
appendix A; and
    (2) The equal employment opportunity program, including the internal 
affirmative action plan, in the format and manner set forth in appendix 
A.
    (b) In preparation of the program required by Sec. 230.311(a), the 
State highway agency shall consider and respond to written comments from 
FHWA regarding the preceding program.


<R05>
Sec. 230.313  Approval procedure.

    After reviewing the State highway agency equal employment 
opportunity program and the summary analysis and recommendations from 
the FHWA regional office, the Washington Headquarters Office of Civil 
Rights staff will recommend approval or disapproval of the program to 
the Federal Highway Administrator. The State highway agency will be 
advised of the Administrator's decision. Each program approval is 
effective for a period of one year from date of approval.

    Appendix A to Subpart C of Part 230--State Highway Agency Equal 
                     Employment Opportunity Programs

    Each State highway agency's (SHA) equal employment opportunity (EEO) 
program shall be in the format set forth herein and shall address 
Contractor Compliance (part I) and SHA Internal Employment (part II), 
including the organizational structure of the SHA total EEO Program 
(internal and external).

                      part i--contractor compliance

    I. Organization and structure. A. Statehighway agency EEO 
Coordinator (External) and staff support. 1. Describe the organizational 
location and responsibilities of the State highway agency EEO 
Coordinator. (Provided organization charts of the State highway agency 
and of the EEO staff.)
    2. Indicate whether full or part-time; if part-time, indicate 
percentage of time devoted to EEO.
    3. Indicate length of time in position, civil rights experience and 
training, and supervision.
    4. Indicate whether compliance program is centralized or 
decentralized.
    5. Identify EEO Coordinator's staff support (full- and part-time) by 
job title and indicate areas of their responsibilities.
    6. Identify any other individuals in the central office having a 
responsibility for the implementation of this program and describe their 
respective roles and training received in program area.
    B. District or division personnel. 1. Describe the responsibilities 
and duties of any district

[[Page 49]]

EEO personnel. Identify to whom they report.
    2. Explain whether district EEO personnel are full-time or have 
other responsibilities such as labor compliance or engineering.
    3. Describe training provided for personnel having EEO compliance 
responsibility.
    C. Project personnel. Describe the EEO role of project personnel.
    II. Compliance procedures. A. Applicable directives. 1. FHWA 
Contract Compliance Procedures.
    2. EEO Special Provisions (FHWA Federal-Aid Highway Program Manual, 
vol. 6, chap. 4, sec. 1, subsec. 2, Attachment 1) \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The Federal-Aid Highway Program Manual is available for 
inspection and copying at the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), 400 
7th St., SW., Washington, DC 20590, or at FHWA offices listed in 49 CFR 
part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    3. Training Special Provisions (FHWA Federal-Aid Highway Program 
Manual, vol. 6, chap. 4, sec. 1, subsec. 2, Attachment 2) \1\
    4. FHWA Federal-Aid Highway Program Manual, vol. 6, chap. 4, sec. 1, 
subsec. 6 (Contract Procedures), and subsec. 8 (Minority Business 
Enterprise). \1\
    B. Implementation. 1. Describe process (methods) of incorporating 
the above FHWA directives into the SHA compliance program.
    2. Describe the methods used by the State to familiarize State 
compliance personnel with all FHWA contract compliance directives. 
Indicate frequency of work shops, training sessions, etc.
    3. Describe the procedure for advising the contractor of the EEO 
contract requirements at any preconstruction conference held in 
connection with a Federal-aid contract.
    III. Accomplishments. Describe accomplishments in the construction 
EEO compliance program during the past fiscal year.
    A. Regular project compliance review program. This number should 
include at least all of the following items:
    1. Number of compliance reviews conducted.
    2. Number of contractors reviewed.
    3. Number of contractors found in compliance.
    4. Number of contractors found in noncompliance.
    5. Number of show cause notices issued.
    6. Number of show cause notices rescinded.
    7. Number of show cause actions still under conciliation and 
unresolved.
    8. Number of followup reviews conducted.
    (Note: In addition to information requested in items 4-8 above, 
include a brief summary of total show cause and followup activities--
findings and achievements.)
    B. Consolidated compliance reviews. 1. Identify the target areas 
that have been reviewed since the inception of the consolidated 
compliance program. Briefly summarize total findings.
    2. Identify any significant impact or effect of this program on 
contractor compliance.
    C. Home office reviews. If the State conducts home office reviews, 
describe briefly the procedures followed by State.
    D. Major problems encountered. Describe major problems encountered 
in connection with any review activities during the past fiscal year.
    E. Major breakthroughs. Comment briefly on any major breakthrough or 
other accomplishment significant to the compliance review program.
    IV. Areawide plans/Hometown and Imposed (if applicable). A. Provide 
overall analysis of the effectiveness of each areawide plan in the 
State.
    B. Indicate by job titles the number of State personnel involved in 
the collection, consolidation, preparation, copying, reviewing, 
analysis, and transmittal of area plan reports (Contracting Activity and 
Post Contract Implementation). Estimate the amount of time (number of 
hours) spent collectively on this activity each month. How does the 
State use the plan report data?
    C. Identify Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) 
area plan audits or compliance checks in which State personnel 
participated during the last fiscal year. On the average, how many hours 
have been spent on these audits and/or checks during the past fiscal 
year?
    D. Describe the working relationship of State EEO compliance 
personnel with representatives of plan administrative committee(s).
    E. Provide recommendations for improving the areawide plan program 
and the reporting system.
    V. Contract sanctions. A. Describe the procedures used by the State 
to impose contract sanctions or institute legal proceedings.
    B. Indicate the State or Federal laws which are applicable.
    C. Does the State withhold a contractor's progress payments for 
failure to comply with EEO requirements? If so, identify contractors 
involved in such actions during the past fiscal year. If not, identify 
other actions taken.
    VI. Complaints. A. Describe the State's procedures for handling 
discrimination complaints against contractors.
    B. If complaints are referred to a State fair employment agency or 
similar agency, describe the referral procedure.
    C. Identify the Federal-aid highway contractors that have had 
discrimination complaints filed against them during the past fiscal year 
and provide current status.
    VII. External training programs, including supportive services. A. 
Describe the State's process for reviewing the work classifications of 
trainees to determine that there is a

[[Page 50]]

proper and reasonable distribution among appropriate craft.
    B. Describe the State's procedures for identifying the number of 
minorities and women who have completed training programs.
    C. Describe the extent of participation by women in construction 
training programs.
    D. Describe the efforts made by the State to locate and use the 
services of qualified minority and female supportive service 
consultants. Indicate if the State's supportive service contractor is a 
minority or female owned enterprise.
    E. Describe the extent to which reports from the supportive service 
contractors provide sufficient data to evaluate the status of training 
programs, with particular reference to minorities and women.
    VIII. Minority business enterprise program. FHPM 6-4-1-8 sets forth 
the FHWA policy regarding the minority business enterprise program. The 
implementation of this program should be explained by responding to the 
following:
    A. Describe the method used for listing of minority contractors 
capable of, or interested in, highway construction contracting or 
subcontracting. Describe the process used to circulate names of 
appropriate minority firms and associations to contractors obtaining 
contract proposals.
    B. Describe the State's procedure for insuring that contractors take 
action to affirmatively solicit the interest, capability, and prices of 
potential minority subcontractors.
    C. Describe the State's procedure for insuring that contractors have 
designated liaison officers to administer the minority business 
enterprise program in an effective manner. Specify resource material, 
including contracts, which the State provides to liaison officers.
    D. Describe the action the State has taken to meet its goals for 
prequalification or licensing of minority business. Include dollar goals 
established for the year, and describe what criteria or formula the 
State has adopted for setting such goals. If it is different from the 
previous year, describe in detail.
    E. Outline the State's procedure for evaluating its 
prequalification/licensing requirements.
    F. Identify instances where the State has waived prequalification 
for subcontractors on Federal-aid construction work or for prime 
contractors on Federal-aid contracts with an estimated dollar value 
lower than $100,000.
    G. Describe the State's methods of monitoring the progress and 
results of its minority business enterprise efforts.
    IX. Liaison. Describe the liaison established by the State between 
public (State, county, and municpal) agencies and private organizations 
involved in EEO programs. How is the liaison maintained on a continuing 
basis?
    X. Innovative programs. Identify any innovative EEO programs or 
management procedures initiated by the State and not previously covered.

                part ii--state highway agency employment

    I. General. The State highway agency's (SHA) internal program is an 
integral part of the agency's total activities. It should include the 
involvement, commitment and support of executives, managers, supervisors 
and all other employees. For effective administration and implementation 
of the EEO Program, an affirmative action plan (AAP) is required. The 
scope of an EEO program and an AAP must be comprehensive, covering all 
elements of the agency's personnel management policies and practices. 
The major part of an AAP must be recognition and removal of any barriers 
to equal employment opportunity, identification of problem areas and of 
persons unfairly excluded or held back and action enabling them to 
compete for jobs on an equal basis. An effective AAP not only benefits 
those who have been denied equal employment opportunity but will also 
greatly benefit the organization which often has overlooked, screened 
out or underutilized the great reservoir of untapped human resources and 
skills, especially among women and minority groups.
    Set forth are general guidelines designed to assist the State 
highway agencies in implementing internal programs, including the 
development and implementation of AAP's to ensure fair and equal 
treatment for all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, sex or 
national origin in all employment practices.
    II. Administration and implementation. The head of each State 
highway agency is responsible for the overall administration of the 
internal EEO program, including the total integration of equal 
opportunity into all facets of personnel management. However, specific 
program responsibilities should be assigned for carrying out the program 
at all management levels.
    To ensure effectiveness in the implementation of the internal EEO 
program, a specific and realistic AAP should be developed. It should 
include both short and long-range objectives, with priorities and target 
dates for achieving goals and measuring progress, according to the 
agency's individual need to overcome existing problems.
    A. State Highway Agency Affirmative Action Officer (internal). 1. 
Appointment of Affirmative Action Officer. The head of the SHA should 
appoint a qualified Affirmative Action (AA) Officer (Internal EEO 
Officer) with responsibility and authority to implement the internal EEO 
program. In making the selection, the following factors should be 
considered:

[[Page 51]]

    a. The person appointed should have proven ability to accomplish 
major program goals.
    b. Managing the internal EEO program requires a major time 
commitment; it cannot be added on to an existing full-time job.
    c. Appointing qualified minority and/or female employees to head or 
staff the program may offer good role models for present and potential 
employees and add credibility to the programs involved. However, the 
most essential requirements for such position(s) are sensitivity to 
varied ways in which discrimination limits job opportunities, commitment 
to program goals and sufficient status and ability to work with others 
in the agency to achieve them.
    2. Responsibilities of the Affirmative Action Officer. The 
responsibilities of the AA Officer should include, but not necessarily 
be limited to:
    a. Developing the written AAP.
    b. Publicizing its content internally and externally.
    c. Assisting managers and supervisors in collecting and analyzing 
employment data, identifying problem areas, setting goals and timetables 
and developing programs to achieve goals. Programs should include 
specific remedies to eliminate any discriminatory practices discovered 
in the employment system.
    d. Handling and processing formal discrimination complaints.
    e. Designing, implementing and monitoring internal audit and 
reporting systems to measure program effectiveness and to determine 
where progress has been made and where further action is needed.
    f. Reporting, at least quarterly, to the head of the SHA on progress 
and deficiencies of each unit in relation to agency goals.
    g. In addition, consider the creation of:
    (1) An EEO Advisory Committee, whose membership would include top 
management officials,
    (2) An EEO Employee Committee, whose membership would include rank 
and file employees, with minority and female representatives from 
various job levels and departments to meet regularly with the AA 
officer, and
    (3) An EEO Counseling Program to attempt informal resolution of 
discrimination complaints.
    B. Contents of an affirmative action plan. The Affirmative Action 
Plan (AAP) is an integral part of the SHA's EEO program. Although the 
style and format of AAP's may vary from one SHA to another, the basic 
substance will generally be the same. The essence of the AAP should 
include, but not necessarily be limited to:
    1. Inclusion of a strong agency policy statement of commitment to 
EEO.
    2. Assignment of responsibility and authority for program to a 
qualified individual.
    3. A survey of the labor market area in terms of population makeup, 
skills, and availability for employment.
    4. Analyzing the present work force to identify jobs, departments 
and units where minorities and females are underutilized.
    5. Setting specific, measurable, attainable hiring and promotion 
goals, with target dates, in each area of underutilization.
    6. Making every manager and supervisor responsible and accountable 
for meeting these goals.
    7. Reevaluating job descriptions and hiring criteria to assure that 
they reflect actual job needs.
    8. Finding minorities and females who are qualified or qualifiable 
to fill jobs.
    9. Getting minorities and females into upward mobility and relevant 
training programs where they have not had previous access.
    10. Developing systems to monitor and measure progress regularly. If 
results are not satisfactory to meet goals, determine the reasons and 
make necessary changes.
    11. Developing a procedure whereby employees and applicants may 
process allegations of discrimination to an impartial body without fear 
of reprisal.
    C. Implementation of an affirmative action plan. The written AAP is 
the framework and management tool to be used at all organizational 
levels to actively implement, measure and evaluate program progress on 
the specific action items which represent EEO program problems or 
deficiencies. The presence of a written plan alone does not constitute 
an EEO program, nor is it, in itself, evidence of an ongoing program. As 
a minimum, the following specific actions should be taken.
    1. Issue written equal employment opportunity policy statement and 
affirmative action commitment. To be effective, EEO policy provisions 
must be enforced by top management, and all employees must be made aware 
that EEO is basic agency policy. The head of the SHA (1) should issue a 
firm statement of personal commitment, legal obligation and the 
importance of EEO as an agency goal, and (2) assign specific 
responsibility and accountability to each executive, manager and 
supervisor.
    The statement should include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following elements:
    a. EEO for all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, sex or 
national origin as a fundamental agency policy.
    b. Personal commitment to and support of EEO by the head of the SHA.
    c. The requirement that special affirmative action be taken 
throughout the agency to overcome the effects of past discrimination.
    d. The requirement that the EEO program be a goal setting program 
with measurement

[[Page 52]]

and evaluation factors similar to other major agency programs.
    e. Equal opportunity in all employment practices, including (but not 
limited to) recruiting, hiring, transfers, promotions, training, 
compensation, benefits, recognition (awards), layoffs, and other 
terminations.
    f. Responsibility for positive affirmative action in the discharge 
of EEO programs, including performance evaluations of managers and 
supervisors in such functions, will be expected of and shared by all 
management personnel.
    g. Accountability for action or inaction in the area of EEO by 
management personnel.
    2. Publicize the affirmative action plan. a. Internally: (1) 
Distribute written communications from the head of the SHA.
    (2) Include the AAP and the EEO policy statement in agency 
operations manual.
    (3) Hold individual meetings with managers and supervisors to 
discuss the program, their individual responsibilities and to review 
progress.
    (4) Place Federal and State EEO posters on bulletin boards, near 
time clocks and in personnel offices.
    (5) Publicize the AAP in the agency newsletters and other 
publications.
    (6) Present and discuss the AAP as a part of employee orientation 
and all training programs.
    (7) Invite employee organization representatives to cooperate and 
assist in developing and implementing the AAP.
    b. Externally: Distribute the AAP to minority groups and women's 
organizations, community action groups, appropriate State agencies, 
professional organizations, etc.
    3. Develop and implement specific programs to eliminate 
discriminatory barriers and achieve goals. a. Job structuring and upward 
mobility: The AAP should include specific provisions for:
    (1) Periodic classification plan reviews to correct inaccurate 
position descriptions and to ensure that positions are allocated to the 
appropriate classification.
    (2) Plans to ensure that all qualification requirements are closely 
job related.
    (3) Efforts to restructure jobs and establish entry level and 
trainee positions to facilitate progression within occupational areas.
    (4) Career counseling and guidance to employees.
    (5) Creating career development plans for lower grade employees who 
are underutilized or who demonstrate potential for advancement.
    (6) Widely publicizing upward mobility programs and opportunities 
within each work unit and within the total organizational structure.
    b. Recruitment and placement. The AAP should include specific 
provisions for, but not necessarily limited to:
    (1) Active recruitment efforts to support and supplement those of 
the central personnel agency or department, reaching all appropriate 
sources to obtain qualified employees on a nondiscriminatory basis.
    (2) Maintaining contracts with organizations representing minority 
groups, women, professional societies, and other sources of candidates 
for technical, professional and management level positions.
    (3) Ensuring that recruitment literature is relevant to all 
employees, including minority groups and women.
    (4) Reviewing and monitoring recruitment and placement procedures so 
as to assure that no discriminatory practices exist.
    (5) Cooperating with management and the central personnel agency on 
the review and validation of written tests and other selection devices.
    (6) Analyzing the flow of applicants through the selection and 
appointment process, including an analytical review of reasons for 
rejections.
    (7) Monitoring the placement of employees to ensure the assignment 
of work and workplace on a nondiscriminatory basis.
    c. Promotions. The AAP should include specific provisions for, but 
not necessarily limited to:
    1. Establishing an agency-wide merit promotion program, including a 
merit promotion plan, to provide equal opportunity for all persons based 
on merit and without regard to race, color, religion, sex or national 
origin.
    2. Monitoring the operation of the merit promotion program, 
including a review of promotion actions, to assure that requirements 
procedures and practices support EEO program objectives and do not have 
a discriminatory impact in actual operation.
    3. Establishing skills banks to match employee skills with available 
job advancement opportunities.
    4. Evaluating promotion criteria (supervisory evaluations, oral 
interviews, written tests, qualification standards, etc.) and their use 
by selecting officials to identify and eliminate factors which may lead 
to improper ``selection out'' of employees or applicants, particularly 
minorities and women, who traditionally have not had access to better 
jobs. It may be appropriate to require selecting officials to submit a 
written justification when well qualified persons are passed over for 
upgrading or promotion.
    5. Assuring that all job vacancies are posted conspicuously and that 
all employees are encouraged to bid on all jobs for which they feel they 
are qualified.
    6. Publicizing the agency merit promotion program by highlighting 
breakthrough promotions, i.e. advancement of minorities and women to key 
jobs, new career heights, etc.

[[Page 53]]

    d. Training. The AAP should include specific provisions for, but not 
necessarily limited to:
    (1) Requiring managers and supervisors to participate in EEO 
seminars covering the AAP, the overall EEO program and the 
administration of the policies and procedures incorporated therein, and 
on Federal, State and local laws relating to EEO.
    (2) Training in proper interviewing techniques of employees who 
conduct employment selection interviews.
    (3) Training and education programs designed to provide 
opportunities for employees to advance in relation to the present and 
projected manpower needs of the agency and the employees' career goals.
    (4) The review of profiles of training course participants to ensure 
that training opportunities are being offered to all eligible employees 
on an equal basis and to correct any inequities discovered.
    e. Layoffs, recalls, discharges, demotions, and disciplinary 
actions. The standards for deciding when a person shall be terminated, 
demoted, disciplined, laid off or recalled should be the same for all 
employees, including minorities and females. Seemingly neutral practices 
should be reexamined to see if they have a disparate effect on such 
groups. For example, if more minorities and females are being laid off 
because they were the last hired, then, adjustments should be made to 
assure that the minority and female ratios do not decrease because of 
these actions.
    (1) When employees, particularly minorities and females, are 
disciplined, laid off, discharged or downgraded, it is advisable that 
the actions be reviewed by the AA Officer before they become final.
    (2) Any punitive action (i.e. harassment, terminations, demotions), 
taken as a result of employees filing discrimination complaints, is 
illegal.
    (3) The following records should be kept to monitor this area of the 
internal EEO program:
    On all terminations, including layoffs and discharges: indicate 
total number, name, (home address and phone number), employment date, 
termination date, recall rights, sex, racial/ethnic identification (by 
job category), type of termination and reason for termination.
    On all demotions: indicate total number, name, (home address and 
phone number), demotion date, sex, racial/ethnic identification (by job 
category), and reason for demotion.
    On all recalls: indicate total number, name, (home address and phone 
number) recall date, sex, and racial/ethnic identification (by job 
category).
    Exit interviews should be conducted with employees who leave the 
employment of the SHA.
    f. Other personnel actions. The AAP should include specific 
provisions for, but not necessarily limited to:
    (1) Assuring that information on EEO counseling and grievance 
procedures is easily available to all employees.
    (2) A system for processing complaints alleging discrimination 
because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin to an impartial 
body.
    (3) A system for processing grievances and appeals (i.e. 
disciplinary actions, adverse actions, adverse action appeals, etc).
    (4) Including in the performance appraisal system a factor to rate 
manager's and supervisors' performance in discharging the EEO program 
responsibilities assigned to them.
    (5) Reviewing and monitoring the performance appraisal program 
periodically to determine its objectivity and effectiveness.
    (6) Ensuring the equal availability of employee benefits to all 
employees.
    4. Program evaluation. An internal reporting system to continually 
audit, monitor and evaluate programs is essential for a successful AAP. 
Therefore, a system providing for EEO goals, timetables, and periodic 
evaluations needs to be established and implemented. Consideration 
should be given to the following actions:
    a. Defining the major objectives of EEO program evaluation.
    b. The evaluation should be directed toward results accomplished, 
not only at efforts made.
    c. The evaluation should focus attention on assessing the adequacy 
of problem identification in the AAP and the extent to which the 
specific action steps in the plan provide solutions.
    d. The AAP should be reviewed and evaluated at least annually. The 
review and evaluation procedures should include, but not be limited to, 
the following:
    (1) Each bureau, division or other major component of the agency 
should make annual and such other periodic reports as are needed to 
provide an accurate review of the operations of the AAP in that 
component.
    (2) The AA Officer should make an annual report to the head of the 
SHA, containing the overall status of the program, results achieved 
toward established objectives, identity of any particular problems 
encountered and recommendations for corrective actions needed.
    e. Specific, numerical goals and objectives should be established 
for the ensuing year. Goals should be developed for the SHA as a whole, 
as well as for each unit and each job category.
    III. Employment statistical data. A. As a minimum, furnish the most 
recent data on the following:
    1. The total population in the State,

[[Page 54]]

    2. The total labor market in State, with a breakdown by racial/
ethnic identification and sex, and
    3. An analysis of (1) and (2) above, in connection with the 
availability of personnel and jobs within SHA's.
    B. State highway agencies shall use the EEO-4 Form in providing 
current work force data. This data shall reflect only State department 
of transportation/State highway department employment.

[[Page 55]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.002


[[Page 56]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.003


[41 FR 28270, July 9, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 46294, Oct. 20, 1976]

[[Page 57]]


<R04>
 Subpart D_Construction Contract Equal Opportunity Compliance Procedures

    Source: 41 FR 34239, Aug. 13, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 230.401  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subpart is to prescribe 
policies and procedures to standardize the implementation of the equal 
opportunity contract compliance program, including compliance reviews, 
consolidated compliance reviews, and the administration of areawide 
plans.


<R05>
Sec. 230.403  Applicability.

    The procedures set forth hereinafter apply to all nonexempt direct 
Federal and Federal-aid highway construction contracts and subcontracts, 
unless otherwise specified.


<R05>
Sec. 230.405  Administrative responsibilities.

    (a) Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) responsibilities. (1) The 
FHWA has the responsibility to ensure that contractors meet contractural 
equal opportunity requirements under E.O. 11246, as amended, and title 
23 U.S.C., and to provide guidance and direction to States in the 
development and implementation of a program to assure compliance with 
equal opportunity requirements.
    (2) The Federal Highway Administrator or a designee may inquire into 
the status of any matter affecting the FHWA equal opportunity program 
and, when considered necessary, assume jurisdiction over the matter, 
proceeding in coordination with the State concerned. This is without 
derogation of the authority of the Secretary of Transportation, 
Department of Transportation (DOT), the Director, DOT Departmental 
Office of Civil Rights (OCR) or the Director, Office of Federal Contract 
Compliance Programs (OFCCP), Department of Labor.
    (3) Failure of the State highway agency (SHA) to discharge the 
responsibilities stated in Sec. 230.405(b)(1) may result in DOT's 
taking any or all of the following actions (see appendix A to 23 CFR 
part 630, subpart C ``Federal-aid project agreement''):
    (i) Cancel, terminate, or suspend the Federal-aid project agreement 
in whole or in part;
    (ii) Refrain from extending any further assistance to the SHA under 
the program with respect to which the failure or refusal occurred until 
satisfactory assurance of future compliance has been received from the 
SHA; and
    (iii) Refer the case to an appropriate Federal agency for legal 
proceedings.
    (4) Action by the DOT, with respect to noncompliant contractors, 
shall not relieve a SHA of its responsibilities in connection with these 
same matters; nor is such action by DOT a substitute for corrective 
action utilized by a State under applicable State laws or regulations.
    (b) State responsibilities. (1) The SHA's, as contracting agencies, 
have a responsibility to assure compliance by contractors with the 
requirements of Federal-aid construction contracts, including the equal 
opportunity requirements, and to assist in and cooperate with FHWA 
programs to assure equal opportunity.
    (2) The corrective action procedures outlined herein do not preclude 
normal contract administration procedures by the States to ensure the 
contractor's completion of specific contract equal opportunity 
requirements, as long as such procedures support, and sustain the 
objectives of E.O. 11246, as amended. The State shall inform FHWA of any 
actions taken against a contractor under normal State contract 
administration procedures, if that action is precipitated in whole or in 
part by noncompliance with equal opportunity contract requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 230.407  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this subpart, the following definitions shall 
apply, unless the context requires otherwise:
    (a) Actions, identified by letter and number, shall refer to those 
items identified in the process flow chart. (Appendix D);
    (b) Affirmative Action Plan means a written positive management tool 
of a total equal opportunity program indicating the action steps for all 
organizational levels of a contractor to initiate

[[Page 58]]

and measure equal opportunity program progress and effectiveness. (The 
Special Provisions [23 CFR part 230 A, appendix A] and areawide plans 
are Affirmative Action Plans.);
    (c) Affirmative Actions means the efforts exerted towards achieving 
equal opportunity through positive, aggressive, and continuous result-
oriented measures to correct past and present discriminatory practices 
and their effects on the conditions and privileges of employment. These 
measures include, but are not limited to, recruitment, hiring, 
promotion, upgrading, demotion, transfer, termination, compensation, and 
training;
    (d) Areawide Plan means an Affirmative Action Plan approved by the 
Department of Labor to increase minority and female utilization in 
crafts of the construction industry in a specified geographical area 
pursuant to E.O. 11246, as amended, and taking the form of either a 
``Hometown'' or an ``Imposed'' Plan.
    (1) Hometown Plan means a voluntary areawide agreement usually 
developed by representatives of labor unions, minority organizations, 
and contractors, and approved by the OFCCP for the purpose of 
implementing the equal employment opportunity requirements pursuant to 
E.O. 11246, as amended;
    (2) Imposed Plan means mandatory affirmative action requirements for 
a specified geographical area issued by OFCCP and, in some areas, by the 
courts;
    (e) Compliance Specialist means a Federal or State employee 
regularly employed and experienced in civil rights policies, practices, 
procedures, and equal opportunity compliance review and evaluation 
functions;
    (f) Consolidated Compliance Review means a review and evaluation of 
all significant construction employment in a specific geographical 
(target) area;
    (g) Construction shall have the meanings set forth in 41 CFR 60-
1.3(e) and 23 U.S.C. 101(a). References in both definitions to expenses 
or functions incidental to construction shall include preliminary 
engineering work in project development or engineering services 
performed by or for a SHA;
    (h) Corrective Action Plan means a contractor's unequivocal written 
and signed commitment outlining actions taken or proposed, with time 
limits and goals, where appropriate to correct, compensate for, and 
remedy each violation of the equal opportunity requirements as specified 
in a list of deficiencies. (Sometimes called a conciliation agreement or 
a letter of commitment.);
    (i) Contractor means, any person, corporation, partnership, or 
unincorporated association that holds a FHWA direct or federally 
assisted construction contract or subcontract regardless of tier;
    (j) Days shall mean calendar days;
    (k) Discrimination means a distinction in treatment based on race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin;
    (l) Equal Employment Opportunity means the absence of partiality or 
distinction in employment treatment, so that the right of all persons to 
work and advance on the basis of merit, ability, and potential is 
maintained;
    (m) Equal Opportunity Compliance Review means an evaluation and 
determination of a nonexempt direct Federal or Federal-aid contractor's 
or subcontractor's compliance with equal opportunity requirements based 
on:
    (1) Project work force--employees at the physical location of the 
construction activity;
    (2) Area work force--employees at all Federal-aid, Federal, and non-
Federal projects in a specific geographical area as determined under 
Sec. 230.409 (b)(9); or
    (3) Home office work force--employees at the physical location of 
the corporate, company, or other ownership headquarters or regional 
managerial, offices, including ``white collar'' personnel (managers, 
professionals, technicians, and clericals) and any maintenance or 
service personnel connected thereto;
    (n) Equal Opportunity Requirements is a general term used throughout 
this document to mean all contract provisions relative to equal 
employment opportunity (EEO), subcontracting, and training;
    (o) Good Faith Effort means affirmative action measures designed to 
implement the established objectives of an Affirmative Action Plan;
    (p) Show Cause Notice means a written notification to a contractor 
based

[[Page 59]]

on the determination of the reviewer (or in appropriate cases by higher 
level authority) to be in noncompliance with the equal opportunity 
requirements. The notice informs the contractor of the specific basis 
for the determination and provides the opportunity, within 30 days from 
receipt, to present an explanation why sanctions should not be imposed;
    (q) State highway agency (SHA) means that department, commission, 
board, or official of any State charged by its laws with the 
responsibility for highway construction. The term State should be 
considered equivalent to State highway agency. With regard to direct 
Federal contracts, references herein to SHA's shall be considered to 
refer to FHWA regional offices, as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 230.409  Contract compliance review procedures.

    (a) General. A compliance review consists of the following elements:
    (1) Review Scheduling (Actions R-1 and R-2).
    (2) Contractor Notification (Action R-3).
    (3) Preliminary Analysis (Phase I) (Action R-4).
    (4) Onsite Verification and Interviews (Phase II) (Action R-5).
    (5) Exit Conference (Action R-6).
    (6) Compliance Determination and Formal Notification (Actions R-8, 
R-9, R-10, R-11, R-12).

The compliance review procedure, as described herein and in appendix D 
provides for continual monitoring of the employment process. Monitoring 
officials at all levels shall analyze submissions from field offices to 
ensure proper completion of procedural requirements and to ascertain the 
effectiveness of program implementation.
    (b) Review scheduling. (Actions R-1 and R-2). Because construction 
work forces are not constant, particular attention should be paid to the 
proper scheduling of equal opportunity compliance reviews. Priority in 
scheduling equal opportunity compliance reviews shall be given to 
reviewing those contractor's work forces:
    (1) Which hold the greatest potential for employment and promotion 
of minorities and women (particularly in higher skilled crafts or 
occupations);
    (2) Working in areas which have significant minority and female 
labor forces within a reasonable recruitment area;
    (3) Working on projects that include special training provisions; 
and
    (4) Where compliance with equal opportunity requirements is 
questionable. (Based on previous PR-1391's (23 CFR part 230, subpart A, 
appendix C) Review Reports and Hometown Plan Reports).

In addition, the following considerations shall apply:
    (5) Reviews specifically requested by the Washington Headquarters 
shall receive priority scheduling;
    (6) Compliance Reviews in geographical areas covered by areawide 
plans would normally be reviewed under the Consolidated Compliance 
Review Procedures set forth in Sec. 230.415.
    (7) Reviews shall be conducted prior to or during peak employment 
periods.
    (8) No compliance review shall be conducted that is based on a home 
office work force of less than 15 employees unless requested or approved 
by Washington Headquarters; and
    (9) For compliance reviews based on an area work force (outside of 
areawide plan coverage), the Compliance Specialist shall define the 
applicable geographical area by considering:
    (i) Union geographical boundaries;
    (ii) The geographical area from which the contractor recruits 
employees, i.e. reasonable recruitment area;
    (iii) Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA) or census 
tracts; and
    (iv) The county in which the Federal or Federal-aid project(s) is 
located and adjacent counties.
    (c) Contractor notification (Action R-3). (1) The Compliance 
Specialist should usually provide written notification to the contractor 
of the pending compliance review at least 2 weeks prior to the onsite 
verification and interviews. This notification shall include the 
scheduled date(s), an outline of the mechanics and basis of the review, 
requisite interviews, and documents required.
    (2) The contractor shall be requested to provide a meeting place on 
the day

[[Page 60]]

of the visit either at the local office of the contractor or at the 
jobsite.
    (3) The contractor shall be requested to supply all of the following 
information to the Compliance Specialist prior to the onsite 
verification and interviews.
    (i) Current Form PR-1391 developed from the most recent payroll;
    (ii) Copies of all current bargaining agreements;
    (iii) Copies of purchase orders and subcontracts containing the EEO 
clause;
    (iv) A list of recruitment sources available and utilized;
    (v) A statement of the status of any action pertaining to employment 
practices taken by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) or 
other Federal, State, or local agency regarding the contractor or any 
source of employees;
    (vi) A list of promotions made during the past 6 months, to include 
race, national origin, and sex of employee, previous job held, job 
promoted into; and corresponding wage rates;
    (vii) An annotated payroll to show job classification, race, 
national origin and sex;
    (viii) A list of minority- or female-owned companies contacted as 
possible subcontractors, vendors, material suppliers, etc.; and
    (ix) Any other necessary documents or statements requested by the 
Compliance Specialist for review prior to the actual onsite visit.
    (4) For a project review, the prime contractor shall be held 
responsible for ensuring that all active subcontractors are present at 
the meeting and have supplied the documentation listed in Sec. 
230.409(c)(3).
    (d) Preliminary analysis (Phase I) (Action R-4). Before the onsite 
verification and interviews, the Compliance Specialist shall analyze the 
employment patterns, policies, practices, and programs of the contractor 
to determine whether or not problems exist by reviewing information 
relative to:
    (1) The contractor's current work force;
    (2) The contractor's relationship with referral sources, e.g., 
unions, employment agencies, community action agencies, minority and 
female organizations, etc.;
    (3) The minority and female representation of sources;
    (4) The availability of minorities and females with requisite skills 
in a reasonable recruitment area;
    (5) Any pending EEOC or Department of Justice cases or local or 
State Fair Employment Agency cases which are relevant to the contractor 
and/or the referral sources; and
    (6) The related projects (and/or contractor) files of FHWA regional 
or division and State Coordinator's offices to obtain current 
information relating to the status of the contractor's project(s), 
value, scheduled duration, written corrective action plans, PR-1391 or 
Manpower Utilization Reports, training requirements, previous compliance 
reviews, and other pertinent correspondence and/or reports.
    (e) Onsite verification and interviews (Phase II) (Action R-5). (1) 
Phase II of the review consists of the construction or home office site 
visit(s). During the initial meeting with the contractor, the following 
topics shall be discussed:
    (i) Objectives of the visit;
    (ii) The material submitted by the contractor, including the actual 
implementation of the employee referral source system and any 
discrepancies found in the material; and
    (iii) Arrangements for the site tour(s) and employee interviews.
    (2) The Compliance Specialist shall make a physical tour of the 
employment site(s) to determine that:
    (i) EEO posters are displayed in conspicuous places in a legible 
fashion;
    (ii) Facilities are provided on a nonsegregated basis (e.g. work 
areas, washroom, timeclocks, locker rooms, storage areas, parking lots, 
and drinking fountains);
    (iii) Supervisory personnel have been oriented to the contractor's 
EEO commitments;
    (iv) The employee referral source system is being implemented;
    (v) Reported employment data is accurate;
    (vi) Meetings have been held with employees to discuss EEO policy, 
particularly new employees; and

[[Page 61]]

    (vii) Employees are aware of their right to file complaints of 
discrimination.
    (3) The Compliance Specialist should interview at least one 
minority, one nonminority, and one woman in each trade, classification, 
or occupation. The contractor's superintendent or home office manager 
should also be interviewed.
    (4) The Compliance Specialist shall, on a sample basis, determine 
the union membership status of union employees on the site (e.g. whether 
they have permits, membership cards, or books, and in what category they 
are classified [e.g., A, B, or C]).
    (5) The Compliance Specialist shall also determine the method 
utilized to place employees on the job and whether equal opportunity 
requirements have been followed.
    (6) The Compliance Specialist shall determine, and the report shall 
indicate the following:
    (i) Is there reasonable representation and utilization of minorities 
and women in each craft, classification or occupation? If not, what has 
the contractor done to increase recruitment, hiring, upgrading, and 
training of minorities and women?
    (ii) What action is the contractor taking to meet the contractual 
requirement to provide equal employment opportunity?
    (iii) Are the actions taken by the contractor acceptable? Could they 
reasonably be expected to result in increased utilization of minorities 
and women?
    (iv) Is there impartiality in treatment of minorities and women?
    (v) Are affirmative action measures of an isolated nature or are 
they continuing?
    (vi) Have the contractor's efforts produced results?
    (f) Exit conference (Action R-6). (1) During the exit conference 
with the contractor, the following topics shall be discussed:
    (i) Any preliminary findings that, if not corrected immediately or 
not corrected by the adoption of an acceptable voluntary corrective 
action plan, would necessitate a determination of noncompliance;
    (ii) The process and time in which the contractor shall be informed 
of the final determination (15 days following the onsite verification 
and interviews); and
    (iii) Any other matters that would best be resolved before 
concluding the onsite portion of the review.
    (2) Voluntary corrective action plans may be negotiated at the exit 
conference, so that within 15 days following the exit portion of the 
review, the Compliance Specialist shall prepare the review report and 
make a determination of either:
    (i) Compliance, and so notify the contractor; or
    (ii) Noncompliance, and issue a 30-day show cause notice.

The acceptance of a voluntary corrective action plan at the exit 
conference does not preclude a determination of noncompliance, 
particularly if deficiencies not addressed by the plan are uncovered 
during the final analysis and report writing. (Action R-7) A voluntary 
corrective action plan should be accepted with the understanding that it 
only address those problems uncovered prior to the exit conference.
    (g) Compliance determinations (Action R-8). (1) The evidence 
obtained at the compliance review shall constitute a sufficient basis 
for an objective determination by the Compliance Specialist conducting 
the review of the contractor's compliance or noncompliance with 
contractual provisions pursuant to E.O. 11246, as amended, and FHWA EEO 
Special Provisions implementing the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968, 
where applicable.
    (2) Compliance determinations on contractors working in a Hometown 
Plan Area shall reflect the status of those crafts covered by part II of 
the plan bid conditions. Findings regarding part I crafts shall be 
transmitted through channels to the Washington Headquarters, Office of 
Civil Rights.
    (3) The compliance status of the contractor will usually be 
reflected by positive efforts in the following areas:
    (i) The contractor's equal employment opportunity (EEO) policy;
    (ii) Dissemination of the policy and education of supervisory 
employees concerning their responsibilities in implementing the EEO 
policy;

[[Page 62]]

    (iii) The authority and responsibilities of the EEO officer;
    (iv) The contractor's recruitment activities, especially 
establishing minority and female recruitment and referral procedures;
    (v) The extent of participation and minority and female utilization 
in FHWA training programs;
    (vi) The contractor's review of personnel actions to ensure equal 
opportunities;
    (vii) The contractor's participation in apprenticeship or other 
training;
    (viii) The contractor's relationship (if any) with unions and 
minority and female union membership;
    (ix) Effective measures to assure nonsegregated facilities, as 
required by contract provisions;
    (x) The contractor's procedures for monitoring subcontractors and 
utilization of minority and female subcontractors and/or subcontractors 
with substantial minority and female employment; and
    (xi) The adequacy of the contractor's records and reports.
    (4) A contractor shall be considered to be in compliance (Action R-
9) when the equal opportunity requirements have been effectively 
implemented, or there is evidence that every good faith effort has been 
made toward achieving this end. Efforts to acheive this goal shall be 
result-oriented, initiated and maintained in good faith, and emphasized 
as any other vital management function.
    (5) A contractor shall be considered to be in noncompliance (Action 
R-10) when:
    (i) The contractor has discriminated against applicants or employees 
with respect to the conditions or privileges of employment; or
    (ii) The contractor fails to provide evidence of every good faith 
effort to provide equal opportunity.
    (h) Show cause procedures--(1) General. Once the onsite verification 
and exit conference (Action R-5) have been completed and a compliance 
determination made, (Action R-8), the contractor shall be notified in 
writing of the compliance determination. (Action R-11 or R-12) This 
written notification shall be sent to the contractor within 15 days 
following the completion of the onsite verification and exit conference. 
If a contractor is found in noncompliance (Action R-10), action efforts 
to bring the contractor into compliance shall be initiated through the 
issuance of a show cause notice (Action R-12). The notice shall advise 
the contractor to show cause within 30 days why sanctions should not be 
imposed.
    (2) When a show cause notice is required. A show cause notice shall 
be issued when a determination of noncompliance is made based upon:
    (i) The findings of a compliance review;
    (ii) The results of an investigation which verifies the existence of 
discrimination; or
    (iii) Areawide plan reports that show an underutilization of 
minorities (based on criteria of U.S. Department of Labor's Optional 
Form 66 ``Manpower Utilization Report'') throughout the contractor's 
work force covered by part II of the plan bid conditions.
    (3) Responsibility for issuance. (i) Show cause notices will 
normally be issued by SHA's to federally assisted contractors when the 
State has made a determination of noncompliance, or when FHWA has made 
such a determination and has requested the State to issue the notice.
    (ii) When circumstances warrant, the Regional Federal Highway 
Administrator or a designee may exercise primary compliance 
responsibility by issuing the notice directly to the contractor.
    (iii) The Regional Federal Highway Administrators in Regions 8, 10, 
and the Regional Engineer in Region 15, shall issue show cause notices 
to direct Federal contractors found in noncompliance.
    (4) Content of show cause notice. The show cause notice must: (See 
sample--appendix A of this subpart)
    (i) Notify the contractor of the determination of noncompliance;
    (ii) Provide the basis for the determination of noncompliance;
    (iii) Notify the contractor of the obligation to show cause within 
30 days why formal proceedings should not be instituted;

[[Page 63]]

    (iv) Schedule (date, time, and place) a compliance conference to be 
held approximately 15 days from the contractor's receipt of the notice;
    (v) Advise the contractor that the conference will be held to 
receive and discuss the acceptability of any proposed corrective action 
plan and/or correction of deficiencies; and
    (vi) Advise the contractor of the availability and willingness of 
the Compliance Specialist to conciliate within the time limits of the 
show cause notice.
    (5) Preparing and processing the show cause notice. (i) The State or 
FHWA official who conducted the investigation or review shall develop 
complete background data for the issuance of the show cause notice and 
submit the recommendation to the head of the SHA or the Regional Federal 
Highway Administrator, as appropriate.
    (ii) The recommendation, background data, and final draft notice 
shall be reviewed by appropriate State or FHWA legal counsel.
    (iii) Show cause notices issued by the SHA shall be issued by the 
head of that agency or a designee.
    (iv) The notice shall be personally served to the contractor or 
delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a 
certificate of service or the return receipt filed with the case record.
    (v) The date of the contractor's receipt of the show cause notice 
shall begin the 30-day show cause period. (Action R-13).
    (vi) The 30-day show cause notice shall be issued directly to the 
noncompliant contractor or subcontractor with an informational copy sent 
to any concerned prime contractors.
    (6) Conciliation efforts during show cause period. (i) The 
Compliance Specialist is required to attempt conciliation with the 
contractor throughout the show cause time period. Conciliation and 
negotiation efforts shall be directed toward correcting contractor 
program deficiencies and initiating corrective action which will 
maintain and assure equal opportunity. Records shall be maintained in 
the State, FHWA division, or FHWA regional office's case files, as 
appropriate, indicating actions and reactions of the contractor, a brief 
synopsis of any meetings with the contractor, notes on verbal 
communication and written correspondence, requests for assistance or 
interpretations, and other relevant matters.
    (ii) In instances where a contractor is determined to be in 
compliance after a show cause notice has been issued, the show cause 
notice will be recinded and the contractor formally notified (Action R-
17). The FHWA Washington Headquarters, Office of Civil Rights, shall 
immediately be notified of any change in status.
    (7) Corrective action plans. (i) When a contractor is required to 
show cause and the deficiencies cannot be corrected within the 30-day 
show cause period, a written corrective action plan may be accepted. The 
written corrective action plan shall specify clear unequivocal action by 
the contractor with time limits for completion. Token actions to correct 
cited deficiencies will not be accepted. (See Sample Corrective Action 
Plan--appendix B of this subpart)
    (ii) When a contractor submits an acceptable written corrective 
action plan, the contractor shall be considered in compliance during the 
plan's effective implementation and submission of required progress 
reports. (Action R-15 and R-17).
    (iii) When an acceptable corrective action plan is not agreed upon 
and the contractor does not otherwise show cause as required, the formal 
hearing process shall be recommended through appropriate channels by the 
compliance specialist immediately upon expiration of the 30-day show 
cause period. (Action R-16, R-18, R-19)
    (iv) When a contractor, after having submitted an acceptable 
corrective action plan and being determined in compliance is 
subsequently determined to be in noncompliance based upon the 
contractor's failure to implement the corrective action plan, the formal 
hearing process must be recommended immediately. There are no provisions 
for reinstituting a show cause notice.
    (v) When, however, a contractor operating under an acceptable 
corrective action plan carries out the provisions of the corrective 
action plan but the actions do not result in the necessary

[[Page 64]]

changes, the corrective action plan shall be immediately amended through 
negotiations. If, at this point, the contractor refuses to appropriately 
amend the corrective action plan, the formal hearing process shall be 
recommended immediately.
    (vi) A contractor operating under an approved voluntary corrective 
action plan (i.e. plan entered into prior to the issuance of a show 
cause) must be issued a 30-day show cause notice in the situations 
referred to in paragraphs (h) (7) (iv) and (v) of this section, i.e., 
failure to implement an approved corrective action plan or failure of 
corrective actions to result in necessary changes.
    (i) Followup reviews. (1) A followup review is an extension of the 
initial review process to verify the contractors performance of 
corrective action and to validate progress report information. 
Therefore, followup reviews shall only be conducted of those contractors 
where the initial review resulted in a finding of noncompliance and a 
show cause notice was issued.
    (2) Followup reviews shall be reported as a narrative summary 
referencing the initial review report.
    (j) Hearing process. (1) When such procedures as show cause issuance 
and conciliation conferences have been unsuccessful in bringing 
contractors into compliance within the prescribed 30 days, the reviewer 
(or other appropriate level) shall immediately recommend, through 
channels, that the Department of Transportation obtain approval from the 
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs for a formal hearing 
(Action R-19). The Contractor should be notified of this action.
    (2) Recommendations to the Federal Highway Administrator for hearing 
approval shall be accompanied by full reports of findings and case files 
containing any related correspondence. The following items shall be 
included with the recommendation:
    (i) Copies of all Federal and Federal-aid contracts and/or 
subcontracts to which the contractor is party;
    (ii) Copies of any contractor or subcontractor certifications;
    (iii) Copy of show cause notice;
    (iv) Copies of any corrective action plans; and
    (v) Copies of all pertinent Manpower Utilization Reports, if 
applicable.
    (3) SHA's through FHWA regional and division offices, will be 
advised of decisions and directions affecting contractors by the FHWA 
Washington Headquarters, Office of Civil Rights, for the Department of 
Transportation.
    (k) Responsibility determinations. (1) In instances where requests 
for formal hearings are pending OFCCP approval, the contractor may be 
declared a nonresponsible contractor for inability to comply with the 
equal opportunity requirements.
    (2) SHA's shall refrain from entering into any contract or contract 
modification subject to E.O. 11246, as amended, with a contractor who 
has not demonstrated eligibility for Government contracts and federally 
assisted construction contracts pursuant to E.O. 11246, as amended.


<R05>
Sec. 230.411  Guidance for conducting reviews.

    (a) Extensions of time. Reasonable extensions of time limits set 
forth in these instructions may be authorized by the SHA's or the FHWA 
regional office, as appropriate. However, all extensions are subject to 
Washington Headquarters approval and should only be granted with this 
understanding. The Federal Highway Administrator shall be notified of 
all time extensions granted and the justification therefor. In sensitive 
or special interest cases, simultaneous transmittal of reports and other 
pertinent documents is authorized.
    (b) Contract completion. Completion of a contract or seasonal 
shutdown shall not preclude completion of the administrative procedures 
outlined herein or the possible imposition of sanctions or debarment.
    (c) Home office reviews outside regions. When contractor's home 
offices are located outside the FHWA region in which the particular 
contract is being performed, and it is determined that the contractors' 
home offices should be reviewed, requests for such reviews with 
accompanying justification shall be forwarded through appropriate

[[Page 65]]

channels to the Washington Headquarters, Office of Civil Rights. After 
approval, the Washington Headquarters, Office of Civil Rights, (OCR) 
shall request the appropriate region to conduct the home office review.
    (d) Employment of women. Executive Order 11246, as amended, 
implementing rules and regulations regarding sex discrimination are 
outlined in 41 CFR part 60-20. It is the responsibility of the 
Compliance Specialist to ensure that contractors provide women full 
participation in their work forces.
    (e) Effect of exclusive referral agreements. (1) The OFCCP has 
established the following criteria for determining compliance when an 
exclusive referral agreement is involved;
    (i) It shall be no excuse that the union, with which the contractor 
has a collective bargaining agreement providing for exclusive referral, 
failed to refer minority or female employees.
    (ii) Discrimination in referral for employment, even if pursuant to 
provisions of a collective bargaining agreement, is prohibited by the 
National Labor Relations Act and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, as amended.
    (iii) Contractors and subcontractors have a responsibility to 
provide equal opportunity if they want to participate in federally 
involved contracts. To the extent they have delegated the responsibility 
for some of their employment practices to some other organization or 
agency which prevents them from meeting their obligations, these 
contractors must be found in noncompliance.
    (2) If the contractor indicates that union action or inaction is a 
proximate cause of the contractor's failure to provide equal 
opportunity, a finding of noncompliance will be made and a show cause 
notice issued, and:
    (i) The contractor will be formally directed to comply with the 
equal opportunity requirements.
    (ii) Reviews of other contractors with projects within the 
jurisdiction of the applicable union locals shall be scheduled.
    (iii) If the reviews indicate a pattern and/or practice of 
discrimination on the part of specific union locals, each contractor in 
the area shall be informed of the criteria outlined in Sec. 
230.411(e)(1) of this section. Furthermore, the FHWA Washington 
Headquarters, OCR, shall be provided with full documentary evidence to 
support the discriminatory pattern indicated.
    (iv) In the event the union referral practices prevent the 
contractor from meeting the equal opportunity requirements pursuant to 
the E.O. 11246, as amended, such contractor shall immediately notify the 
SHA.


<R05>
Sec. 230.413  Review reports.

    (a) General. (1) The Compliance Specialist shall maintain detailed 
notes from the beginning of the review from which a comprehensive 
compliance review report can be developed.
    (2) The completed compliance review report shall contain documentary 
evidence to support the determination of a contractor's or 
subcontractor's compliance status.
    (3) Findings, conclusions, and recommendations shall be explicitly 
stated and, when necessary, supported by documentary evidence.
    (4) The compliance review report shall contain at least the 
following information. \1\ (Action R-20)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The Federal Highway Administration will accept completed Form 
FHWA-86 for the purpose. The form is available at the offices listed in 
49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (i) Complete name and address of contractor.
    (ii) Project(s) identification.
    (iii) Basis for the review, i.e. area work force, project work 
force, home office work force, and target area work force.
    (iv) Identification of Federal or Federal-aid contract(s).
    (v) Date of review.
    (vi) Employment data by job craft, classification, or occupation by 
race and sex in accordance with (iii) above. This shall be the data 
verified during the onsite.
    (vii) Identification of local unions involved with contractor, when 
applicable.
    (viii) Determination of compliance status: compliance or 
noncompliance.
    (ix) Copy of show cause notice or compliance notification sent to 
contractor.

[[Page 66]]

    (x) Name of the Compliance Specialist who conducted the review and 
whether that person is a State, division or regional Compliance 
Specialist.
    (xi) Concurrences at appropriate levels.
    (5) Each contractor (joint venture is one contractor) will be 
reported separately. When a project review is conducted, the reports 
should be attached, with the initial report being that of the prime 
contractor followed by the reports of each subcontractor.
    (6) Each review level is responsible for ensuring that required 
information is contained in the report.
    (7) When a project review is conducted, the project work force shall 
be reported. When an areawide review is conducted (all Federal-aid, 
Federal, and non-Federal projects in an area), then areawide work force 
shall be reported. When a home office review is conducted, only home 
office work force shall be reported. Other information required by 
regional offices shall be detached before forwarding the reports to the 
Washington Headquarters, OCR.
    (8) The Washington Headquarters, OCR, shall be provided all of the 
following:
    (i) The compliance review report required by Sec. 230.413(a)(4).
    (ii) Corrective action plans.
    (iii) Show cause notices or compliance notifications.
    (iv) Show cause recissions.

While other data and information should be kept by regional offices 
(including progress reports, correspondence, and similar review backup 
material), it should not be routinely forwarded to the Washington 
Headquarters, OCR.
    (b) Administrative requirements--(1) State conducted reviews. (i) 
Within 15 days from the completion of the onsite verification and exit 
conference, the State Compliance Specialist will:
    (A) Prepare the compliance review report, based on information 
obtained;
    (B) Determine the contractor's compliance status;
    (C) Notify the contractor of the compliance determination, i.e., 
send the contractor either notification of compliance or show cause 
notice; and
    (D) Forward three copies of the compliance review report, and the 
compliance notification or show cause notice to the FHWA division EEO 
Specialist.
    (ii) Within 10 days of receipt, the FHWA division EEO Specialist 
shall:
    (A) Analyze the State's report, ensure that it is complete and 
accurate;
    (B) Resolve nonconcurrence, if any;
    (C) Indicate concurrence, and, where appropriate, prepare comments; 
and
    (D) Forward two copies of the compliance review report, and the 
compliance notification or show cause notice to the Regional Civil 
Rights Director.
    (iii) Within 15 days of receipt, the FHWA Regional Civil Rights 
Director shall:
    (A) Analyze the report, ensure that it is complete and accurate;
    (B) Resolve nonconcurrence, if any;
    (C) Indicate concurrence, and, where appropriate, prepare comments; 
and
    (D) Forward one copy of the compliance review report, and the 
compliance notification or show cause notice to the Washington 
Headquarters, OCR.
    (2) FHWA division conducted reviews. (i) Within 15 days from the 
completion of the onsite verification and exit conference, the division 
EEO Specialist shall:
    (A) Prepare compliance review report, based on information obtained;
    (B) Determine the contractor's compliance status;
    (C) Notify the State to send the contractor the compliance 
determination, i.e. either notification of compliance or show cause 
notice; and
    (D) Forward two copies of the compliance review report and the 
compliance notification or show cause notice to the Regional Civil 
Rights Director.
    (ii) Within 15 days of receipt, the FHWA Regional Civil Rights 
Director will take the steps outlined in Sec. 230.413(b)(1)(iii).
    (3) FHWA region conducted reviews. (i) Within 15 days from the 
completion of the onsite verification and exit conference the regional 
EEO Specialist shall:
    (A) Prepare the compliance review report, based on information 
obtained;
    (B) Determine the contractor's compliance status;
    (C) Inform the appropriate division to notify the State to send the 
contractor

[[Page 67]]

the compliance determination i.e. either notification of compliance or 
show cause notice; and
    (D) Forward one copy of the compliance review report, and the 
compliance notification or show cause notice to the Washington 
Headquarters, OCR.
    (4) Upon receipt of compliance review reports, the Washington 
Headquarters, OCR, shall review, resolve any nonconcurrences, and record 
them for the purpose of:
    (i) Providing ongoing technical assistance to FHWA regional and 
division offices and SHA's;
    (ii) Gathering a sufficient data base for program evaluation;
    (iii) Ensuring uniform standards are being applied in the compliance 
review process;
    (iv) Initiating appropriate changes in FHWA policy and implementing 
regulations; and
    (v) Responding to requests from the General Accounting Office, 
Office of Management and Budget, Senate Subcommittee on Public Roads, 
and other agencies and organizations.


<R05>
Sec. 230.415  Consolidated compliance reviews.

    (a) General. Consolidated compliance reviews shall be implemented to 
determine employment opportunities on an areawide rather than an 
individual project basis. The consolidated compliance review approach 
shall be adopted and directed by either Headquarters, region, division, 
or SHA, however, consolidated reviews shall at all times remain a 
cooperative effort.
    (b) OFCCP policy requires contracting agencies to ensure compliance, 
in hometown an imposed plan areas, on an areawide rather than a project 
basis. The consolidated compliance review approach facilitates 
implementation of this policy.
    (c) Methodology--(1) Selection of a target area. In identifying the 
target area of a consolidated compliance review (e.g. SMSA, hometown or 
imposed plan area, a multicounty area, or an entire State), 
consideration shall at least be given to the following facts:
    (i) Minority and female work force concentrations;
    (ii) Suspected or alleged discrimination in union membership or 
referral practices by local unions involved in highway construction;
    (iii) Present or potential problem areas;
    (iv) The number of highway projects in the target area; and
    (v) Hometown or imposed plan reports that indicate underutilization 
of minorities or females.
    (2) Determine the review period. After the target area has been 
selected, the dates for the actual onsite reviews shall be established.
    (3) Obtain background information. EEO-3's Local Union Reports, 
should be obtained from regional offices of the EEOC. Target area 
civilian labor force statistics providing percent minorities and percent 
females in the target area shall be obtained from State employment 
security agencies or similar State agencies.
    (4) Identify contractors. Every nonexempt federally assisted or 
direct Federal contractor and subcontractor in the target area shall be 
identified. In order to establish areawide employment patterns in the 
target area, employment data is needed for all contractors and 
subcontractors in the area. However, only those contractors with 
significant work forces (working prior to peak and not recently 
reviewed) may need to be actually reviwed onsite. Accordingly, once all 
contractors are identified, those contractors which will actually be 
reviewed onsite shall be determined. Compliance determinations shall 
only reflect the status of crafts covered by part II of plan bid 
conditions. Employment data of crafts covered by part I of plan bid 
conditions shall be gathered and identified as such in the composite 
report, however, OFCCP has reserved the responsibility for compliance 
determinations on crafts covered by part I of the plan bid conditions.
    (5) Contractor notification. Those contractors selected for onsite 
review shall be sent a notification letter as outlined in Sec. 
230.409(c) along with a request for current workforce data \2\ for 
completion

[[Page 68]]

and submission at the onsite review. Those contractors in the target 
area not selected for onsite review shall also be requested to supply 
current workforce data as of the onsite review period, and shall return 
the data within 15 days following the onsite review period.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The Consolidated Workforce Questionnaire is convenient for the 
purpose and appears as attachment 4 to volume 2, chapter 2, section 3 of 
the Federal-Aid Highway Program Manual, which is available at the 
offices listed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (6) Onsite reviews. Compliance reviews shall then be conducted in 
accordance with the requirements set forth in Sec. 230.409. Reviewers 
may use Form FHWA-86, Compliance Data Report, if appropriate. It is of 
particular importance during the onsite reviews that the review team 
provide for adequate coordination of activities at every stage of the 
review process.
    (7) Compliance determinations. Upon completion of the consolidated 
reviews, compliance determinations shall be made on each review by the 
reviewer. Individual show cause notices or compliance notifications 
shall be sent (as appropriate) to each reviewed contractor.

The compliance determination shall be based on the contractor's target 
area work force (Federal, Federal-aid and non-Federal), except when the 
target area is coincidental with hometown plan area, compliance 
determinations must not be based on that part of a contractor's work 
force covered by part I of the plan bid conditions, as previously set 
forth in this regulation. For example: ABC Contracting, Inc. employs 
carpenters, operating engineers, and cement masons. Carpenters and 
operating engineers are covered by part II of the plan bid conditions, 
however, cement masons are covered by part I of the plan bid conditions. 
The compliance determination must be based only on the contractor's 
utilization of carpenters and operating engineers.
    (d) Reporting--(1) Composite report. A final composite report shall 
be submitted as a complete package to the Washington Headquarters, OCR, 
within 45 days after the review period and shall consist of the 
following:
    (i) Compliance review report, for each contractor and subcontractor 
with accompanying show cause notice or compliance notification.
    (ii) Work force data to show the aggregate employment of all 
contractors in the target area.
    (iii) A narrative summary of findings and recommendations to include 
the following:
    (A) A summary of highway construction employment in the target area 
by craft, race, and sex. This summary should explore possible patterns 
of discrimination or underutilization and possible causes, and should 
compare the utilization of minorities and females on contractor's work 
forces to the civilian labor force percent for minorities and females in 
the target area.
    (B) If the target area is a plan area, a narrative summary of the 
plan's effectiveness with an identification of part I and part II 
crafts. This summary shall discuss possible differences in minority and 
female utilization between part I and part II crafts, documenting any 
inferences drawn from such comparisons.
    (C) If applicable, discuss local labor unions' membership and/or 
referral practices that impact on the utilization of minorities and 
females in the target area. Complete and current copies of all 
collective bargaining agreements and copies of EEO-3, Local Union 
Reports, for all appropriate unions shall accompany the composite 
report.
    (D) Any other appropriate data, analyses, or information deemed 
necessary for a complete picture of the areawide employment.
    (E) Considering the information compiled from the summaries listed 
above, make concrete recommendations on possible avenues for correcting 
problems uncovered by the analyses.
    (2) Annual planning report. The proper execution of consolidated 
compliance reviews necessitates scheduling, along with other fiscal 
program planning. The Washington Headquarters, OCR, shall be notified of 
all planned consolidated reviews by August 10 of each year and of any 
changes in the target area or review periods, as they become known. The 
annual consolidated planning report shall indicate:
    (i) Selected target areas:

[[Page 69]]

    (ii) The basis for selection of each area; and
    (iii) The anticipated review period (dates) for each target area.

      Appendix A to Subpart D of Part 230--Sample Show Cause Notice

Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested
Date
Contractor's Name
Address
City, State, and Zip Code.

    Dear Contractor: As a result of the review of your (Project Number) 
project located at (Project Location) conducted on (Date) by (Reviewing 
Agency), it is our determination that you are not in compliance with 
your equal opportunity requirements and that good faith efforts have not 
been made to meet your equal opportunity requirements in the following 
areas:
    List of Deficiencies
    1.
    2.
    3.

    Your failure to take the contractually required affirmative action 
has contributed to the unacceptable level of minority and female 
employment in your operations, particularly in the semiskilled and 
skilled categories of employees.
    The Department of Labor regulations (41 CFR 60) implementing 
Executive Order 11246, as amended, are applicable to your Federal-aid 
highway construction contract and are controlling in this matter (see 
Required Contract Provisions, Form PR-1273, Clause II). Section 60-
1.20(b) of these regulations provides that when equal opportunity 
deficiencies exist, it is necessary that you make a commitment in 
writing to correct such deficiencies before you may be found in 
compliance. The commitment must include the specific action which you 
propose to take to correct each deficiency and the date of completion of 
such action. The time period allotted shall be no longer than the 
minimum period necessary to effect the necessary correction. In 
accordance with instructions issued by the Office of Federal Contract 
Compliance Programs (OFCCP), U.S. Department of Labor, your written 
commitment must also provide for the submission of monthly progress 
reports which shall include a head count of minority and female 
representation at each level of each trade and a list of minority 
employees.
    You are specifically advised that making the commitment discussed 
above will not preclude a further determination of noncompliance upon a 
finding that the commitment is not sufficient to achieve compliance.
    We will hold a compliance conference at ----------------(Address) at 
---------------- (Time) on ----------------(Date) for you to submit and 
discuss your written commitment. If your written commitment is 
acceptable and if the commitment is sufficient to achieve compliance, 
you will be found in compliance during the effective implementation of 
that commitment. You are cautioned, however, that our determination is 
subject to review by the Federal Highway Administration, the Department 
of Transportation, and OFCCP and may be disapproved if your written 
commitment is not considered sufficient to achieve compliance.
    If you indicate either directly or by inaction that you do not wish 
to participate in the scheduled conference and do not otherwise show 
cause within 30 days from receipt of this notice why enforcement 
proceedings should not be instituted, this agency will commence 
enforcement proceedings under Executive Order 11246, as amended.
    If your written commitment is accepted and it is subsequently found 
that you have failed to comply with its provisions, you will be advised 
of this determination and formal sanction proceedings will be instituted 
immediately.
    In the event formal sanction proceedings are instituted and the 
final determination is that a violation of your equal opportunity 
contract requirements has taken place, any Federal-aid highway 
construction contracts or subcontracts which you hold may be canceled, 
terminated, or suspended, and you may be debarred from further such 
contracts or subcontracts. Such other sanctions as are authorized by 
Executive Order 11246, as amended, may also be imposed.
    We encourage you to to take whatever action is necessary to resolve 
this matter and are anxious to assist you in achieving compliance. Any 
questions concerning this notice should be addressed to (Name, Address, 
and Phone).
Sincerely yours,

[41 FR 34245, Aug. 13, 1976]

   Appendix B to Subpart D of Part 230--Sample Corrective Action Plan

    Deficiency 1: Sources likely to yield minority employees have not 
been contacted for recruitment purposes.
    Commitment: We have developed a system of written job applications 
at our home office which readily identifies minority applicants. In 
addition to this, as a minimum, we will contact the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), League of Latin American 
Citizens (LULAC), Urban League, and the Employment Security Office 
within 20 days to establish a referral system for minority group 
applicants and expand our recruitment base. We are in the process of 
identifying other community organizations and associations that may be 
able to provide minority applicants and will

[[Page 70]]

submit an updated listing of recruitment sources and evidence of contact 
by ----------------(Date).
    Deficiency 2: There have been inadequate efforts to locate, qualify, 
and increase skills of minority and female employees and applicants for 
employment.
    Commitment: We will set up an individual file for each apprentice or 
trainee by ------------(Date) in order to carefully screen the progress, 
ensure that they are receiving the necessary training, and being 
promoted promptly upon completion of training requirements. We have 
established a goal of at least 50 percent of our apprentices and 
trainees will be minorities and 15 percent will be female. In addition 
to the commitment made to deficiency number 1, we will conduct a similar 
identification of organizations able to supply female applicants. Based 
on our projected personnel needs, we expect to have reached our 50 
percent goal for apprentices and trainees by --------------(Date).
    Deficiency 3: Very little effort to assure subcontractors have 
meaningful minority group representation among their employees.
    Commitment: In cooperation with the Regional Office of Minority 
Business Enterprise, Department of Commerce, and the local NAACP, we 
have identified seven minority-owned contractors that may be able to 
work on future contracts we may receive. These contractors (identified 
in the attached list) will be contacted prior to our bidding on all 
future contracts. In addition, we have scheduled a meeting with all 
subcontractors currently working on our contracts. This meeting will be 
held to inform the subcontractors of our intention to monitor their 
reports and require meaningful minority representation. This meeting 
will be held on --------------------(Date) and we will summarize the 
discussions and current posture of each subcontractor for your review by 
--------------------(Date) Additionally, as requested, we will submit a 
PR-1391 on --------------------(Date), --------------------------------
--------(Date), --------------------(Date). Finally, we have committed 
ourselves to maintaining at least 20 percent minority and female 
representation in each trade during the time we are carrying out the 
above commitments. We plan to have completely implemented all the 
provisions of these commitments by --------------------(Date).

[41 FR 34245, Aug. 13, 1976]

    Appendix C to Subpart D of Part 230--Sample Show Cause Rescission

Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested
Date
Contractor
Address
City, State, and Zip Code

    Dear Contractor: On --------------, (Date) you received a 30-day 
show cause notice from this office for failing to implement the required 
contract requirements pertaining to equal employment opportunity.
    Your corrective action plan, discussed and submitted at the 
compliance conference held on --------------------(Date), has been 
reviewed and determined to be acceptable. Your implementation of your 
corrective action plan shows that you are now taking the required 
affirmative action and can be considered in compliance with Executive 
Order 11246, as amended. If it should later be determined that your 
corrective action plan is not sufficient to achieve compliance, this 
Rescission shall not preclude a subsequent finding of noncompliance.
    In view of the above, this letter is to inform you that the 30-day 
show cause notice of --------------------(Date) is hereby rescinded. You 
are further advised that if it is found that you have failed to comply 
with the provisions of your corrective action plan, formal sanction 
proceedings will be instituted immediately.
Sincerely,

[[Page 71]]

Appendix D to Subpart D of Part 230--Equal Opportunity Compliance Review 
                           Process Flow Chart
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.004


[41 FR 34245, Aug. 13, 1976]

[[Page 72]]


<R03>
                 SUBCHAPTER D_NATIONAL HIGHWAY INSTITUTE




<R03>
PART 260_EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMS--Table of Contents




               Subpart A_Fellowship and Scholarship Grants

Sec.
260.101 Purpose.
260.103 Definitions.
260.105 Policy.
260.107 Eligibility.
260.109 Selection.
260.111 Responsibilities of educational institutions.
260.113 Responsibilities of employing agencies.
260.115 Equal opportunity.
260.117 Application procedures.

Subparts B-C [Reserved]

             Subpart D_State Education and Training Programs

260.401 Purpose.
260.403 Policy.
260.405 Application and approval procedures.
260.407 Implementation and reimbursement.

Appendix A to Part 260--Request for Use of Federal-Aid Highway Funds for 
          Education or Training (Form FHWA-1422)


<R04>
               Subpart A_Fellowship and Scholarship Grants

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 307(a), 315, 321 and 403; and 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 43 FR 3558, Jan. 26, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 260.101  Purpose.

    To establish policy for the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 
Fellowship and Scholarship Programs as administered by the National 
Highway Institute (NHI).


<R05>
Sec. 260.103  Definitions.

    As used in this regulation, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Candidate. One who meets the eligibility criteria set forth in 
Sec. 260.107, and who has completed and submitted the necessary forms 
and documents in order to be considered for selection for a fellowship 
or scholarship.
    (b) Direct educational expenses. Those expenses directly related to 
attending school including tuition, student fees, books, and expendable 
supplies but excluding travel expenses to and from the school.
    (c) Employing agency. The agency for which the candidate works. This 
may be either a State or local highway/transportation agency or the 
FHWA.
    (d) Fellowship. The grant presented to the recipient's school and 
administered by the school to assist the candidate financially during 
the period of graduate study.
    (e) Living stipend. The portion of the fellowship or scholarship 
grant remaining after the direct educational expenses have been 
deducted.
    (f) Local highway/transportation agency. The agency or metropolitan 
planning organization with the responsibility for initiating and 
carrying forward a highway program or public transportation program 
utilizing highways at the local level, usually the city or county level.
    (g) National Highway Institute (NHI). The organization located 
within the FHWA responsible for the administration of the FHWA 
fellowship and scholarship grant programs.
    (h) Recipient. The successful candidate receiving a fellowship or 
scholarship.
    (i) Scholarship. The grant presented to the recipient's school and 
administered by the school to assist the candidate financially during 
the period of post-secondary study.
    (j) State highway/transportation agency. The agency with the 
responsibility for initiating and carrying forward a highway program or 
public transportation program utilizing highways at the State level.


<R05>
Sec. 260.105  Policy.

    It is the policy of the FHWA to administer, through the NHI, 
fellowship and scholarship grant programs to assist State and local 
agencies and the FHWA in developing the expertise needed for the 
implementation of their highway programs and to assist in the

[[Page 73]]

development of more effective transportation programs at all levels of 
government. These programs shall provide financial support for up to 24 
months of either full-time or part-time study in the field of highway 
transportation. The programs for each year shall be announced by FHWA 
notices. \1\ These notices shall contain an application form and shall 
announce the number of grants to be awarded and their value.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The Federal Highway Administration notices are available for 
inspection and copying as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.

[43 FR 3558, Jan. 26, 1978, as amended at 45 FR 67091, Oct. 9, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 260.107  Eligibility.

    (a) Prior recipients of FHWA scholarships or fellowships are 
eligible if they will have completed all specific work commitments 
before beginining study under the programs for which applications are 
made.
    (b) Candidates for the fellowship program shall have earned 
bachelor's or comparable college-level degrees prior to beginining 
advanced studies under the program.
    (c) Candidates shall submit evidence of acceptance, or probable 
acceptance, for study in programs that will enhance their contributions 
to their employers. Evidence of probable acceptance may be a letter from 
the department chairman or other school official.
    (d) Candidates shall agree to pursue certain minimum study loads as 
determined by the FHWA and designated in the FHWA notices announcing the 
programs each year.
    (e) FHWA employees who receive awards will be required to execute 
continued service agreements, consistent with the Government Employees 
Training Act requirements, which obligate the employees to continue to 
work for the agency for three times the duration of the training 
received.
    (f) Candidates who are students or employees of State or local 
highway/transportation agencies shall agree in writing to work on a 
full-time basis in public service with State or local highway/
transportation agencies for a specified period of time after completing 
study under the program. The FHWA notices announcing the programs each 
year shall specify the time period of the work commitment.
    (g) Candidates shall agree to respond to brief questionnaires 
designed to assist the NHI in program evaluation both during and 
following the study period.
    (h) Recipients of awards for full-time shall agree to limit their 
part-time employment as stipulated in the FHWA notice announcing the 
programs.
    (i) Candidates shall not profit financially from FHWA grants. Where 
acceptance of the living stipend portion of the grant would result in a 
profit to the candidate, as determined by comparing the candidate's 
regular full-time salary with the candidate's part-time salary and 
employer salary support plus living stipend, the grant amount will be 
reduced accordingly. In cases where a candidate must relocate and 
maintain two households, exceptions to this condition will be 
considered.
    (j) Candidates shall be citizens, or shall declare their intent to 
become citizens of the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 260.109  Selection.

    (a) Candidates shall be rated by a selection panel appointed by the 
Director of the NHI. Members of the panel shall represent the highway 
transportation interests of government, industry, and the academic 
community. The factors considered by the selection panel are weighed in 
accordance with specific program objectives.
    (b) The major factors to be considered by the panel are:
    (1) Candidate's potential to contribute to a public agency's highway 
transportation program,
    (2) Relevance of a candidate's study program to the objectives of 
the fellowship or scholarship program,
    (3) Relevant experience, and
    (4) Academic and professional achievements.
    (c) Using ratings given by the selection panel, the Director of the 
NHI shall select candidates for awards and designate alternates.
    (d) The FHWA may designate in the FHWA notices announcing the 
programs the maximum number of awards

[[Page 74]]

that will be made to employees of any one agency.


<R05>
Sec. 260.111  Responsibilities of educational institutions.

    (a) The college or university chosen by the grant recipient shall 
enter into an appropriate agreement with the FHWA providing for the 
administration of the grant by the college or university.
    (b) The college or university chosen by the recipient shall 
designate a faculty advisor prior to the commitment of funds by the 
FHWA. The faculty advisor will be requested to submit reports of the 
recipient's study progress following completion of each study period. 
These reports are oriented toward total program evaluation. To assure 
the recipient's rights to privacy, the FHWA will obtain appropriate 
advance concurrences from the recipient.


<R05>
Sec. 260.113  Responsibilities of employing agencies.

    (a) A candidate's employing agency is responsible for furnishing a 
statement of endorsement and information concerning the relevancy of the 
candidate's study to agency requirements. The agency is encouraged to 
identify educational and training priorities and to provide backup to 
support its priority candidates for these programs.
    (b) Employing agencies are encouraged to give favorable 
consideration to the requests of candidates for educational leave and 
salary support for the study period to facilitate the candidates' 
applications. Agency decisions involving salary support and educational 
leave that will affect the acceptance of awards by recipients should be 
made at the earliest possible date to provide adequate time for the FHWA 
to select alternates to replace candidates that decline their awards.
    (c) Agencies are responsible for negotiations with their candidates 
concerning conditions of reinstatement and the candidates' commitments 
to return to work.
    (d) Employing agencies are encouraged to publicize the availability 
of these grants throughout the agencies, to implement procedures for 
internal evaluation of applications, and to forward the applications to 
the FHWA division office in their State.
    (e) Employing agencies that choose to process their employees' 
applications are responsible for observing the cutoff date for the FHWA 
to receive applications. This date will be stipulated in the Notices 
announcing the program for each academic year.


<R05>
Sec. 260.115  Equal opportunity.

    (a) Consistent with the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
and Title VI, assurances executed by each State, 23 U.S.C. 324, and 29 
U.S.C. 794, no applicant, including otherwise qualified handicapped 
individuals, shall on the grounds of race, color, religion, sex, 
national origin, or handicap, be excluded from participation in, be 
denied benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under 
this program.
    (b) In accordance with Executive Order 11141, no individual shall be 
denied benefits of this program because of age.
    (c) Agencies should make information on this program available to 
all eligible employees, including otherwise qualified handicapped 
individuals, so as to assure nondiscrimination on the grounds of race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or handicap.


<R05>
Sec. 260.117  Application procedures.

    (a) The FHWA notices announcing each year's programs and containing 
the application form may be obtained from FHWA regional and division 
offices, State highway agencies, metropolitan planning organizations, 
Governors' highway safety representatives, Urban Mass Transportation 
Administration regional directors, major transit authorities and from 
colleges and universities. Forms may also be obtained from the NHI, HHI-
3, FHWA, Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) In order to become a candidate, the applicant shall complete and 
forward the application form according to the instructions in the FHWA 
notice announcing the programs. The cutoff date for submitting the 
application stipulated in the notices should be observed.

Subparts B-C [Reserved]

[[Page 75]]


<R04>
             Subpart D_State Education and Training Programs

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 315, 321 (b) and (c); 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 43 FR 35477, Aug. 10, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 260.401  Purpose.

    To prescribe policy and implement procedures for the administration 
of Federal-aid funds for education and training of State and local 
highway department employees.


<R05>
Sec. 260.403  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) to 
provide continuing education of State and local highway agency employees 
engaged or to be engaged in Federal-aid highway work. To carry out this 
policy, States are encouraged to fully utilize the authority contained 
in 23 U.S.C. 321(b) and 321(c).


<R05>
Sec. 260.405  Application and approval procedures.

    The State may apply for education and training funds by submitting a 
signed agreement designating the desired Federal-aid funds, not to 
exceed the limits in 23 U.S.C. 321(b). The FHWA's approval of the 
agreement will constitute obligation of funds and authorization for work 
to proceed.


<R05>
Sec. 260.407  Implementation and reimbursement.

    (a) After execution of the fiscal agreement, the State may make 
grants and contracts with public and private agencies, institutions, 
individuals, and the National Highway Institute to provide highway-
related training and education. The principal recipients of this 
training shall be employees who are engaged or likely to be engaged, in 
Federal-aid highway work.
    (b) Claims for Federal-aid reimbursement of costs incurred may be 
submitted following established procedures to cover 75 percent of the 
cost of tuition and direct educational expenses (including incidental 
training, equipment, and program materials) exclusive of travel, 
subsistence, or salary of trainees.
    (c) As provided in 23 U.S.C. 321(c), education and training for 
subject areas that are identified by the FHWA as Federal program 
responsibilities, shall be provided at no cost to State and local 
governments.

[43 FR 35477, Aug. 10, 1978, as amended at 45 FR 6378, Jan. 28, 1980; 53 
FR 3745, Feb. 9, 1988]

[[Page 76]]

                         Appendix A to Part 260
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.005


[[Page 77]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.006


[[Page 78]]


<R03>
                   SUBCHAPTER E_PLANNING AND RESEARCH




<R03>
PART 420_PLANNING AND RESEARCH PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION--Table of Contents




      Subpart A_Administration of FHWA Planning and Research Funds

Sec.
420.101 What is the purpose of this part?
420.103 How does the FHWA define the terms used in this part?
420.105 What is the FHWA's policy on use of FHWA planning and research 
          funds?
420.107 What is the minimum required expenditure of State planning and 
          research funds for research development and technology 
          transfer?
420.109 What are the requirements for distribution of metropolitan 
          planning funds?
420.111 What are the documentation requirements for use of FHWA planning 
          and research funds?
420.113 What costs are eligible?
420.115 What are the FHWA approval and authorization requirements?
420.117 What are the program monitoring and reporting requirements?
420.119 What are the fiscal requirements?
420.121 What other requirements apply to the administration of FHWA 
          planning and research funds?

    Subpart B_Research, Development, and Technology Transfer Program 
                               Management

420.201 What is the purpose of this subpart?
420.203 How does the FHWA define the terms used in this subpart?
420.205 What is the FHWA's policy for research, development, and 
          technology transfer funding?
420.207 What are the requirements for research, development, and 
          technology transfer work programs?
420.209 What are the conditions for approval?

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 103(b)(6), 104(f), 115, 120, 133(b), 134(n), 
303(g), 505, and 315; and 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 67 FR 47271, July 18, 2002, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
      Subpart A_Administration of FHWA Planning and Research Funds


<R05>
Sec. 420.101  What is the purpose of this part?

    This part prescribes the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 
policies and procedures for the administration of activities undertaken 
by State departments of transportation (State DOTs) and their 
subrecipients, including metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs), 
with FHWA planning and research funds. Subpart A identifies the 
administrative requirements that apply to use of FHWA planning and 
research funds both for planning and for research, development, and 
technology transfer (RD&T) activities. Subpart B describes the policies 
and procedures that relate to the approval and authorization of RD&T 
work programs. The requirements in this part supplement those in 49 CFR 
part 18, Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative 
Agreements to State and Local Governments and 49 CFR part 19, Uniform 
Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements with 
Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals and Other Non-Profit 
Organizations.


<R05>
Sec. 420.103  How does the FHWA define the terms used in this part?

    Unless otherwise specified in this part, the definitions in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) are applicable to this part. As used in this part:
    FHWA planning and research funds include:
    (1) State planning and research (SPR) funds (the two percent set 
aside of funds apportioned or allocated to a State DOT for activities 
authorized under 23 U.S.C. 505);
    (2) Metropolitan planning (PL) funds (the one percent of funds 
authorized under 23 U.S.C. 104(f) to carry out the provisions of 23 
U.S.C. 134);
    (3) National highway system (NHS) funds authorized under 23 U.S.C. 
104(b)(1) used for transportation planning in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 
134

[[Page 79]]

and 135, highway research and planning in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 505, 
highway-related technology transfer activities, or development and 
establishment of management systems under 23 U.S.C. 303;
    (4) Surface transportation program (STP) funds authorized under 23 
U.S.C. 104(b)(3) used for highway and transit research and development 
and technology transfer programs, surface transportation planning 
programs, or development and establishment of management systems under 
23 U.S.C. 303; and
    (5) Minimum guarantee (MG) funds authorized under 23 U.S.C. 505 used 
for transportation planning and research, development and technology 
transfer activities that are eligible under title 23, U.S.C.
    Grant agreement means a legal instrument reflecting a relationship 
between an awarding agency and a recipient or subrecipient when the 
principal purpose of the relationship is to transfer a thing of value to 
the recipient or subrecipient to carry out a public purpose of support 
or stimulation authorized by a law instead of acquiring (by purchase, 
lease, or barter) property or services for the direct benefit or use of 
the awarding agency.
    Metropolitan planning area means the geographic area in which the 
metropolitan transportation planning process required by 23 U.S.C. 134 
and 49 U.S.C. 5303-5305 must be carried out.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decisionmaking for a metropolitan planning 
area.
    National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) means the 
cooperative RD&T program directed toward solving problems of national or 
regional significance identified by State DOTs and the FHWA, and 
administered by the Transportation Research Board, National Academy of 
Sciences.
    Procurement contract means a legal instrument reflecting a 
relationship between an awarding agency and a recipient or subrecipient 
when the principal purpose of the instrument is to acquire (by purchase, 
lease, or barter) property or services for the direct benefit or use of 
the awarding agency.
    State Department of Transportation (State DOT) means that 
department, commission, board, or official of any State charged by its 
laws with the responsibility for highway construction.
    Transportation management area (TMA) means an urbanized area with a 
population over 200,000 (as determined by the latest decennial census) 
and designated by the Secretary of Transportation or other area when TMA 
designation is requested by the Governor and the MPO (or affected local 
officials), and officially designated by the Secretary of 
Transportation.
    Transportation pooled fund study means a planning, research, 
development, or technology transfer activity administered by the FHWA, a 
lead State DOT, or other organization that is supported by two or more 
participants and that addresses an issue of significant or widespread 
interest related to highway, public, or intermodal transportation. A 
transportation pooled fund study is intended to address a new area or 
provide information that will complement or advance previous 
investigations of the subject matter.
    Work program means a periodic statement of proposed work, covering 
no less than one year, and estimated costs that documents eligible 
activities to be undertaken by State DOTs and/or their subrecipients 
with FHWA planning and research funds.


<R05>
Sec. 420.105  What is the FHWA's policy on use of FHWA planning and 
research funds?

    (a) If the FHWA determines that planning activities of national 
significance, identified in paragraph (b) of this section, and the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 134, 135, 303, and 505 are being adequately 
addressed, the FHWA will allow State DOTs and MPOs:
    (1) Maximum possible flexibility in the use of FHWA planning and 
research funds to meet highway and local public transportation planning 
and RD&T needs at the national, State, and local levels while ensuring 
legal use of such funds and avoiding unnecessary duplication of efforts; 
and
    (2) To determine which eligible planning and RD&T activities they 
desire

[[Page 80]]

to support with FHWA planning and research funds and at what funding 
level.
    (b) The State DOTs must provide data that support the FHWA's 
responsibilities to the Congress and to the public. These data include, 
but are not limited to, information required for: preparing proposed 
legislation and reports to the Congress; evaluating the extent, 
performance, condition, and use of the Nation's transportation systems; 
analyzing existing and proposed Federal-aid funding methods and levels 
and the assignment of user cost responsibility; maintaining a critical 
information base on fuel availability, use, and revenues generated; and 
calculating apportionment factors.
    (c) The policy in paragraph (a) of this section does not remove the 
FHWA's responsibility and authority to determine which activities are 
eligible for funding. Activities proposed to be funded with FHWA 
planning and research funds by the State DOTs and their subrecipients 
shall be documented and submitted for FHWA approval and authorization as 
prescribed in Sec. Sec. 420.111 and 420.113. (The information 
collection requirements in paragraph (b) of Sec. 420.105 have been 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under control 
numbers 2125-0028 and 2125-0032.)


<R05>
Sec. 420.107  What is the minimum required expenditure of State planning 
and research funds for research development and technology transfer?

    (a) A State DOT must expend no less than 25 percent of its annual 
SPR funds on RD&T activities relating to highway, public transportation, 
and intermodal transportation systems in accordance with the provisions 
of 23 U.S.C. 505(b), unless a State DOT certifies, and the FHWA accepts 
the State DOT's certification, that total expenditures by the State DOT 
during the fiscal year for transportation planning under 23 U.S.C. 134 
and 135 will exceed 75 percent of the amount apportioned for the fiscal 
year.
    (b) Prior to submitting a request for an exception to the 25 percent 
requirement, the State DOT must ensure that:
    (1) The additional planning activities are essential, and there are 
no other reasonable options available for funding these planning 
activities (including the use of NHS, STP, MG, or FTA State planning and 
research funds (49 U.S.C. 5313(b)) or by deferment of lower priority 
planning activities);
    (2) The planning activities have a higher priority than RD&T 
activities in the overall needs of the State DOT for a given fiscal 
year; and
    (3) The total level of effort by the State DOT in RD&T (using both 
Federal and State funds) is adequate.
    (c) If the State DOT chooses to pursue an exception, it must send 
the request, along with supporting justification, to the FHWA Division 
Administrator for action by the FHWA Associate Administrator for 
Research, Development, and Technology. The Associate Administrator's 
decision will be based upon the following considerations:
    (1) Whether the State DOT has a process for identifying RD&T needs 
and for implementing a viable RD&T program.
    (2) Whether the State DOT is contributing to cooperative RD&T 
programs or activities, such as the National Cooperative Highway 
Research Program, the Transportation Research Board, and transportation 
pooled fund studies.
    (3) Whether the State DOT is using SPR funds for technology transfer 
and for transit or intermodal research and development to help meet the 
25 percent minimum requirement.
    (4) Whether the State DOT can demonstrate that it will meet the 
requirement or substantially increase its RD&T expenditures over a 
multi-year period, if an exception is granted for the fiscal year.
    (5) Whether Federal funds needed for planning exceed the 75 percent 
limit for the fiscal year and whether any unused planning funds are 
available from previous fiscal years.
    (d) If the FHWA Associate Administrator for Research, Development, 
and Technology approves the State DOT's request for an exception, the 
exception is valid only for that fiscal year's funds. A new request must 
be submitted and approved for subsequent fiscal year funds.

[[Page 81]]


<R05>
Sec. 420.109  What are the requirements for distribution of metropolitan 
planning funds?

    (a) The State DOTs shall make all PL funds authorized by 23 U.S.C. 
104(f) available to the MPOs in accordance with a formula developed by 
the State DOT, in consultation with the MPOs, and approved by the FHWA 
Division Administrator. The formula may allow for a portion of the PL 
funds to be used by the State DOT, or other agency agreed to by the 
State DOT and the MPOs, for activities that benefit all MPOs in the 
State, but State DOTs shall not use any PL funds for grant or subgrant 
administration. The formula may also provide for a portion of the funds 
to be made available for discretionary grants to MPOs to supplement 
their annual amount received under the distribution formula.
    (b) In developing the formula for distributing PL funds, the State 
DOT shall consider population, status of planning, attainment of air 
quality standards, metropolitan area transportation needs, and other 
factors necessary to provide for an appropriate distribution of funds to 
carry out the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 134 and other applicable 
requirements of Federal law.
    (c) The State DOTs shall inform the MPOs and the FHWA Division 
Office of the amounts allocated to each MPO as soon as possible after PL 
funds have been apportioned by the FHWA to the State DOTs.
    (d) If the State DOT, in a State receiving the minimum apportionment 
of PL funds under the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 104(f)(2), determines that 
the share of funds to be allocated to any MPO results in the MPO 
receiving more funds than necessary to carry out the provisions of 23 
U.S.C. 134, the State DOT may, after considering the views of the 
affected MPO(s) and with the approval of the FHWA Division 
Administrator, use those funds for transportation planning outside of 
metropolitan planning areas.
    (e) In accordance with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 134(n), any PL 
funds not needed for carrying out the metropolitan planning provisions 
of 23 U.S.C. 134 in any State may be made available by the MPO(s) to the 
State DOT for funding statewide planning activities under 23 U.S.C. 135, 
subject to approval by the FHWA Division Administrator.
    (f) Any State PL fund distribution formula that does not meet the 
requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall be brought 
into conformance with those requirements before distribution on any new 
apportionment of PL funds.


<R05>
Sec. 420.111  What are the documentation requirements for use of FHWA 
planning and research funds?

    (a) Proposed use of FHWA planning and research funds must be 
documented by the State DOTs and subrecipients in a work program, or 
other document that describes the work to be accomplished, that is 
acceptable to the FHWA Division Administrator. Statewide, metropolitan, 
other transportation planning activities, and transportation RD&T 
activities may be documented in separate programs, paired in various 
combinations, or brought together as a single work program. The 
expenditure of PL funds for transportation planning outside of 
metropolitan planning areas under Sec. 420.109(d) may be included in 
the work program for statewide transportation planning activities or in 
a separate work program submitted by the State DOT.
    (b)(1) A work program(s) for transportation planning activities must 
include a description of work to be accomplished and cost estimates by 
activity or task. In addition, each work program must include a summary 
that shows:
    (i) Federal share by type of fund;
    (ii) Matching rate by type of fund;
    (iii) State and/or local matching share; and
    (iv) Other State or local funds.
    (2) Additional information on metropolitan planning area work 
programs is contained in 23 CFR part 450. Additional information on RD&T 
work program content and format is contained in subpart B of this part.
    (c) In areas not designated as TMAs, a simplified statement of work 
that describes who will perform the work and the work that will be 
accomplished using Federal funds may be used in lieu of a work program. 
If a simplified statement of work is used, it may be

[[Page 82]]

submitted separately or as part of the Statewide planning work program.
    (d) The State DOTs that use separate Federal-aid projects in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this section must submit an overall 
summary that identifies the amounts and sources of FHWA planning and 
research funds available, matching funds, and the amounts budgeted for 
each activity (e.g., statewide planning, RD&T, each metropolitan area, 
contributions to NCHRP and transportation pooled fund studies, etc.).
    (e) The State DOTs and MPOs also are encouraged to include cost 
estimates for transportation planning, research, development, and 
technology transfer related activities funded with other Federal or 
State and/or local funds; particularly for producing the FHWA-required 
data specified in paragraph (b) of Sec. 420.105, for planning for other 
transportation modes, and for air quality planning activities in areas 
designated as non-attainment for transportation-related pollutants in 
their work programs. The MPOs in TMAs must include such information in 
their work programs. (The information collection requirements in 
Sec. Sec. 420.111 have been approved by the OMB and assigned control 
numbers 2125-0039 for States and 2132-0529 for MPOs.)


<R05>
Sec. 420.113  What costs are eligible?

    (a) Costs will be eligible for FHWA participation provided that the 
costs:
    (1) Are for work performed for activities eligible under the section 
of title 23, U.S.C., applicable to the class of funds used for the 
activities;
    (2) Are verifiable from the State DOT's or the subrecipient's 
records;
    (3) Are necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient 
accomplishment of project objectives and meet the other criteria for 
allowable costs in the applicable cost principles cited in 49 CFR 18.22;
    (4) Are included in the approved budget, or amendment thereto; and
    (5) Were not incurred prior to FHWA authorization.
    (b) Indirect costs of State DOTs and their subrecipients are 
allowable if supported by a cost allocation plan and indirect cost 
proposal prepared, submitted (if required), and approved by the 
cognizant or oversight agency in accordance with the OMB requirements 
applicable to the State DOT or subrecipient specified in 49 CFR 
18.22(b).


<R05>
Sec. 420.115  What are the FHWA approval and authorization requirements?

    (a) The State DOT and its subrecipients must obtain approval and 
authorization to proceed prior to beginning work on activities to be 
undertaken with FHWA planning and research funds. Such approvals and 
authorizations should be based on final work programs or other documents 
that describe the work to be performed. The State DOT and its 
subrecipients also must obtain prior approval for budget and 
programmatic changes as specified in 49 CFR 18.30 or 49 CFR 19.25 and 
for those items of allowable costs which require approval in accordance 
with the cost principles specified in 49 CFR 18.22(b) applicable to the 
entity expending the funds.
    (b) Authorization to proceed with the FHWA funded work in whole or 
in part is a contractual obligation of the Federal government pursuant 
to 23 U.S.C. 106 and requires that appropriate funds be available for 
the full Federal share of the cost of work authorized. Those State DOTs 
that do not have sufficient FHWA planning and research funds or 
obligation authority available to obligate the full Federal share of a 
work program or project may utilize the advance construction provisions 
of 23 U.S.C. 115(a) in accordance with the requirements of 23 CFR part 
630, subpart G. The State DOTs that do not meet the advance construction 
provisions, or do not wish to utilize them, may request authorization to 
proceed with that portion of the work for which FHWA planning and 
research funds are available. In the latter case, authorization to 
proceed may be given for either selected work activities or for a 
portion of the program period, but such authorization does not 
constitute a commitment by the FHWA to fund the remaining portion of the 
work if additional funds do become available.
    (c) A project agreement must be executed by the State DOT and the 
FHWA Division Office for each statewide transportation planning, 
metropolitan

[[Page 83]]

planning area, or RD&T work program, individual activity or study, or 
any combination administered as a single Federal-aid project. The 
project agreement may be executed concurrent with or after authorization 
has been given by the FHWA Division Administrator to proceed with the 
work in whole or in part. In the event that the project agreement is 
executed for only part of the work, the project agreement must be 
amended when authorization is given to proceed with additional work.

(The information collection requirements in Sec. 420.115(c) have been 
approved by the OMB and assigned control numbers 2125-0529.)


<R05>
Sec. 420.117  What are the program monitoring and reporting requirements?

    (a) In accordance with 49 CFR 18.40, the State DOT shall monitor all 
activities performed by its staff or by subrecipients with FHWA planning 
and research funds to assure that the work is being managed and 
performed satisfactorily and that time schedules are being met.
    (b)(1) The State DOT must submit performance and expenditure 
reports, including a report from each subrecipient, that contain as a 
minimum:
    (i) Comparison of actual performance with established goals;
    (ii) Progress in meeting schedules;
    (iii) Status of expenditures in a format compatible with the work 
program, including a comparison of budgeted (approved) amounts and 
actual costs incurred;
    (iv) Cost overruns or underruns;
    (v) Approved work program revisions; and
    (vi) Other pertinent supporting data.
    (2) Additional information on reporting requirements for individual 
RD&T studies is contained in subpart B of this part.
    (c) Reports required by paragraph (b) of this section shall be 
annual unless more frequent reporting is determined to be necessary by 
the FHWA Division Administrator. The FHWA may not require more frequent 
than quarterly reporting unless the criteria in 49 CFR 18.12 or 49 CFR 
19.14 are met. Reports are due 90 days after the end of the reporting 
period for annual and final reports and no later than 30 days after the 
end of the reporting period for other reports.
    (d) Events that have significant impact on the work must be reported 
as soon as they become known. The types of events or conditions that 
require reporting include: problems, delays, or adverse conditions that 
will materially affect the ability to attain program objectives. This 
disclosure must be accompanied by a statement of the action taken, or 
contemplated, and any Federal assistance needed to resolve the 
situation.
    (e) Suitable reports that document the results of activities 
performed with FHWA planning and research funds must be prepared by the 
State DOT or subrecipient and submitted for approval by the FHWA 
Division Administrator prior to publication. The FHWA Division 
Administrator may waive this requirement for prior approval. The FHWA's 
approval of reports constitutes acceptance of such reports as evidence 
of work performed but does not imply endorsement of a report's findings 
or recommendations. Reports prepared for FHWA-funded work must include 
appropriate credit references and disclaimer statements. (The 
information collection requirements in Sec. 420.117 have been approved 
by the OMB and assigned control numbers 2125-0039 for States and 2132-
0529 for MPOs.)


<R05>
Sec. 420.119  What are the fiscal requirements?

    (a) The maximum rate of Federal participation for FHWA planning and 
research funds shall be as prescribed in title 23, U.S.C., for the 
specific class of funds used (i.e., SPR, PL, NHS, STP, or MG) except as 
specified in paragraph (d) of this section. The provisions of 49 CFR 
18.24 or 49 CFR 19.23 are applicable to any necessary matching of FHWA 
planning and research funds.
    (b) The value of third party in-kind contributions may be accepted 
as the match for FHWA planning and research funds, in accordance with 
the provisions of 49 CFR 18.24(a)(2) or 49 CFR 19.23(a) and may be on 
either a total planning work program basis or for specific line items or 
projects. The use of third party in-kind contributions must be 
identified in the original work program/scope of work and the grant/

[[Page 84]]

subgrant agreement, or amendments thereto. The use of third-party in-
kind contributions must be approved in advance by the FHWA Division 
Administrator and may not be made retroactive prior to approval of the 
work program/scope of work or an amendment thereto. The State DOT or 
subrecipient is responsible for ensuring that the following additional 
criteria are met:
    (1) The third party performing the work agrees to allow the value of 
the work to be used as the match;
    (2) The cost of the third party work is not paid for by other 
Federal funds or used as a match for other federally funded grants/
subgrants;
    (3) The work performed by the third party is an eligible 
transportation planning or RD&T related activity that benefits the 
federally funded work;
    (4) The third party costs (i.e., salaries, fringe benefits, etc.) 
are allowable under the applicable Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
cost principles (i.e., OMB Circular A-21, A-87, or A-122);\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ OMB Circulars are available on the Internet at http://
www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) The third party work is performed during the period to which the 
matching requirement applies;
    (6) The third party in-kind contributions are verifiable from the 
records of the State DOT or subrecipient and these records show how the 
value placed on third party in-kind contributions was derived; and
    (7) If the total amount of third party expenditures at the end of 
the program period is not sufficient to match the total expenditure of 
Federal funds by the recipient/subrecipient, the recipient/subrecipient 
will need to make up any shortfall with its own funds.
    (c) In accordance with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 120(j), toll 
revenues that are generated and used by public, quasi-public, and 
private agencies to build, improve, or maintain highways, bridges, or 
tunnels that serve the public purpose of interstate commerce may be used 
as a credit for the non-Federal share of an FHWA planning and research 
funded project.
    (d) In accordance with 23 U.S.C. 505(c) or 23 U.S.C. 104(f)(3), the 
requirement for matching SPR or PL funds may be waived if the FHWA 
determines the interests of the Federal-aid highway program would be 
best served. Waiver of the matching requirement is intended to encourage 
State DOTs and/or MPOs to pool SPR and/or PL funds to address national 
or regional high priority planning or RD&T problems that would benefit 
multiple States and/or MPOs. Requests for waiver of matching 
requirements must be submitted to the FHWA headquarters office for 
approval by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Environment 
(for planning activities) or the Associate Administrator for Research, 
Development, and Technology (for RD&T activities). The matching 
requirement may not be waived for NHS, STP, or MG funds.
    (e) NHS, STP, or MG funds used for eligible planning and RD&T 
purposes must be identified separately from SPR or PL funds in the work 
program(s) and must be administered and accounted for separately for 
fiscal purposes. In accordance with the statewide and metropolitan 
planning process requirements for fiscally constrained transportation 
improvement program (TIPs) planning or RD&T activities funded with NHS, 
STP, or MG funds must be included in the Statewide and/or metropolitan 
TIP(s) unless the State DOT and MPO (for a metropolitan area) agree that 
they may be excluded from the TIP.
    (f) Payment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of 49 
CFR 18.21 or 49 CFR 19.22.


<R05>
Sec. 420.121  What other requirements apply to the administration of 
FHWA planning and research funds?

    (a) Audits. Audits of the State DOTs and their subrecipients shall 
be performed in accordance with OMB Circular A-133, Audits of States, 
Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.\2\ Audits of for-profit 
contractors are to be performed in accordance with State DOT or 
subrecipient contract administration procedures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ See footnote 1.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 85]]

    (b) Copyrights. The State DOTs and their subrecipients may copyright 
any books, publications, or other copyrightable materials developed in 
the course of the FHWA planning and research funded project. The FHWA 
reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive and irrevocable right to 
reproduce, publish, or otherwise use, and to authorize others to use, 
the work for Government purposes.
    (c) Disadvantaged business enterprises. The State DOTs must 
administer the transportation planning and RD&T program(s) consistent 
with their overall efforts to implement section 1001(b) of the 
Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (Pub. L. 105-178) and 49 
CFR part 26 regarding disadvantaged business enterprises.
    (d) Drug free workplace. In accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 
part 29, subpart F, State DOTs must certify to the FHWA that they will 
provide a drug free workplace. This requirement may be satisfied through 
the annual certification for the Federal-aid highway program.
    (e) Equipment. Acquisition, use, and disposition of equipment 
purchased with FHWA planning and research funds by the State DOTs must 
be in accordance with 49 CFR 18.32(b). Local government subrecipients of 
State DOTs must follow the procedures specified by the State DOT. 
Universities, hospitals, and other non-profit organizations must follow 
the procedures in 49 CFR 19.34.
    (f) Financial management systems. The financial management systems 
of the State DOTs and their local government subrecipients must be in 
accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.20(a). The financial 
management systems of universities, hospitals, and other non-profit 
organizations must be in accordance with 49 CFR 19.21.
    (g) Lobbying. The provisions of 49 CFR part 20 regarding 
restrictions on influencing certain Federal activities are applicable to 
all tiers of recipients of FHWA planning and research funds.
    (h) Nondiscrimination. The nondiscrimination provisions of 23 CFR 
parts 200 and 230 and 49 CFR part 21, with respect to Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, 
apply to all programs and activities of recipients, subrecipients, and 
contractors receiving FHWA planning and research funds whether or not 
those programs or activities are federally funded.
    (i) Patents. The State DOTs and their subrecipients are subject to 
the provisions of 37 CFR part 401 governing patents and inventions and 
must include or cite the standard patent rights clause at 37 CFR 401.14, 
except for Sec. 401.14(g), in all subgrants or contracts. In addition, 
State DOTs and their subrecipients must include the following clause, 
suitably modified to identify the parties, in all subgrants or 
contracts, regardless of tier, for experimental, developmental or 
research work: ``The subgrantee or contractor will retain all rights 
provided for the State in this clause, and the State will not, as part 
of the consideration for awarding the subgrant or contract, obtain 
rights in the subgrantee's or contractor's subject inventions.''
    (j) Procurement. Procedures for the procurement of property and 
services with FHWA planning and research funds by the State DOTs must be 
in accordance with 49 CFR 18.36(a) and (i) and, if applicable, 18.36(t). 
Local government subrecipients of State DOTs must follow the procedures 
specified by the State DOT. Universities, hospitals, and other non-
profit organizations must follow the procedures in 49 CFR 19.40 through 
19.48. The State DOTs and their subrecipients must not use FHWA funds 
for procurements from persons (as defined in 49 CFR 29.105) who have 
been debarred or suspended in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 
part 29, subparts A through E.
    (k) Program income. Program income, as defined in 49 CFR 18.25(b) or 
49 CFR 19.24, must be shown and deducted from total expenditures to 
determine the Federal share to be reimbursed, unless the FHWA Division 
Administrator has given prior approval to use the program income to 
perform additional eligible work or as the non-Federal match.
    (l) Record retention. Recordkeeping and retention requirements must 
be in accordance with 49 CFR 18.42 or 49 CFR 19.53.
    (m) Subgrants to local governments. The State DOTs and subrecipients 
are

[[Page 86]]

responsible for administering FHWA planning and research funds passed 
through to MPOs and local governments, for ensuring that such funds are 
expended for eligible activities, and for ensuring that the funds are 
administered in accordance with this part, 49 CFR part 18, Uniform 
Administrative Requirements for Grants and Agreements to State and Local 
Governments, and applicable OMB cost principles. The State DOTs shall 
follow State laws and procedures when awarding and administering 
subgrants to MPOs and local governments and must ensure that the 
requirements of 49 CFR 18.37(a) have been satisfied.
    (n) Subgrants to universities, hospitals, and other non-profit 
organizations. The State DOTs and subrecipients are responsible for 
ensuring that FHWA planning and research funds passed through to 
universities, hospitals, and other non-profit organizations are expended 
for eligible activities and for ensuring that the funds are administered 
in accordance with this part, 49 CFR part 19, Uniform Administrative 
Requirements for Grants and Agreements with Institutions of Higher 
Education, Hospitals, and Other Non-Profit Organizations, and applicable 
OMB cost principles.
    (o) Suspension and debarment. (1) The State DOTs and their 
subrecipients shall not award grants or cooperative agreements to 
entities who are debarred or suspended, or otherwise excluded from or 
ineligible for participation in Federal assistance programs under 
Executive Order 12549 of February 18, 1986 (3 CFR, 1986 Comp., p. 189); 
and
    (2) The State DOTs and their subrecipients shall comply with the 
provisions of 49 CFR part 29, subparts A through E, for procurements 
from persons (as defined in 49 CFR 29.105) who have been debarred or 
suspended.
    (p) Supplies. Acquisition and disposition of supplies acquired by 
the State DOTs and their subrecipients with FHWA planning and research 
funds must be in accordance with 49 CFR 18.33 or 49 CFR 19.35.


<R04>
    Subpart B_Research, Development and Technology Transfer Program 
                               Management


<R05>
Sec. 420.201  What is the purpose of this subpart?

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe requirements for 
research, development, and technology transfer (RD&T) activities, 
programs, and studies undertaken by State DOTs and their subrecipients 
with FHWA planning and research funds.


<R05>
Sec. 420.203  How does the FHWA define the terms used in this subpart?

    Unless otherwise specified in this part, the definitions in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) and subpart A of this part, are applicable to this 
subpart. As used in this subpart:
    Applied research means the study of phenomena to gain knowledge or 
understanding necessary for determining the means by which a recognized 
need may be met; the primary purpose of this kind of research is to 
answer a question or solve a problem.
    Basic research means the study of phenomena, and of observable 
facts, without specific applications towards processes or products in 
mind; the primary purpose of this kind of research is to increase 
knowledge.
    Development means the systematic use of the knowledge or 
understanding gained from research, directed toward the production of 
useful materials, devices, systems or methods, including design and 
development of prototypes and processes.
    Final report means a report documenting a completed RD&T study or 
activity.
    Intermodal RD&T means research, development, and technology transfer 
activities involving more than one mode of transportation, including 
transfer facilities between modes.
    Peer exchange means a periodic review of a State DOT's RD&T program, 
or portion thereof, by representatives of other State DOT's, for the 
purpose of exchange of information or best practices. The State DOT may 
also invite the participation of the FHWA, and other Federal, State, 
regional or local

[[Page 87]]

transportation agencies, the Transportation Research Board, academic 
institutions, foundations or private firms that support transportation 
research, development or technology transfer activities.
    RD&T activity means a basic or applied research project or study, 
development or technology transfer activity.
    Research means a systematic study directed toward fuller scientific 
knowledge or understanding of the subject studied. Research can be basic 
or applied.
    Technology transfer means those activities that lead to the adoption 
of a new technique or product by users and involves dissemination, 
demonstration, training, and other activities that lead to eventual 
innovation.
    Transportation Research Information Services (TRIS) means the 
database produced and maintained by the Transportation Research Board 
and available online through the National Transportation Library. TRIS 
includes bibliographic records and abstracts of on-going and completed 
RD&T activities. TRIS Online also includes links to the full text of 
public-domain documents.


<R05>
Sec. 420.205  What is the FHWA's policy for research, development, 
and technology transfer funding?

    (a) It is the FHWA's policy to administer the RD&T program 
activities utilizing FHWA planning and research funds consistent with 
the policy specified in Sec. 420.105 and the following general 
principles in paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section.
    (b) The State DOTs must provide information necessary for peer 
exchanges.
    (c) The State DOTs are encouraged to develop, establish, and 
implement an RD&T program, funded with Federal and State DOT resources 
that anticipates and addresses transportation concerns before they 
become critical problems. Further, the State DOTs are encouraged to 
include in this program development and technology transfer programs to 
share the results of their own research efforts and promote the use of 
new technology.
    (d) To promote effective use of available resources, the State DOTs 
are encouraged to cooperate with other State DOTs, the FHWA, and other 
appropriate agencies to achieve RD&T objectives established at the 
national level and to develop a technology transfer program to promote 
and use those results. This includes contributing to cooperative RD&T 
programs such as the NCHRP, the TRB, and transportation pooled fund 
studies as a means of addressing national and regional issues and as a 
means of leveraging funds.
    (e) The State DOTs will be allowed the authority and flexibility to 
manage and direct their RD&T activities as presented in their work 
programs, and to initiate RD&T activities supported by FHWA planning and 
research funds, subject to the limitation of Federal funds and to 
compliance with program conditions set forth in subpart A of this part 
and Sec. 420.207.
    (f) The State DOTs will have primary responsibility for managing 
RD&T activities supported with FHWA planning and research funds carried 
out by other State agencies and organizations and for ensuring that such 
funds are expended for purposes consistent with this subpart.
    (g) Each State DOT must develop, establish, and implement a 
management process that ensures effective use of available FHWA planning 
and research funds for RD&T activities on a statewide basis. Each State 
DOT is permitted to tailor its management process to meet State or local 
needs; however, the process must comply with the minimum requirements 
and conditions of this subpart.
    (h) The State DOTs are encouraged to make effective use of the FHWA 
Division, Resource Center, and Headquarters office expertise in 
developing and carrying out their RD&T activities. Participation of the 
FHWA on advisory panels and in program exchange meetings is encouraged.


<R05>
Sec. 420.207  What are the requirements for research, development, and 
technology transfer work programs?

    (a) The State DOT's RD&T work program must, as a minimum, consist of 
a description of RD&T activities to be accomplished during the program 
period, estimated costs for each eligible

[[Page 88]]

activity, and a description of any cooperative activities including the 
State DOT's participation in any transportation pooled fund studies and 
the NCHRP. The State DOT's work program should include a list of the 
major items with a cost estimate for each item. The work program should 
also include any study funded under a previous work program until a 
final report has been completed for the study.
    (b) The State DOT's RD&T work program must include financial 
summaries showing the funding levels and share (Federal, State, and 
other sources) for RD&T activities for the program year. State DOTs are 
encouraged to include any activity funded 100 percent with State or 
other funds for information purposes.
    (c) Approval and authorization procedures in Sec. 420.115 are 
applicable to the State DOT's RD&T work program.


<R05>
Sec. 420.209  What are the conditions for approval?

    (a) As a condition for approval of FHWA planning and research funds 
for RD&T activities, a State DOT must develop, establish, and implement 
a management process that identifies and results in implementation of 
RD&T activities expected to address high priority transportation issues. 
The management process must include:
    (1) An interactive process for identification and prioritization of 
RD&T activities for inclusion in an RD&T work program;
    (2) Use of all FHWA planning and research funds set aside for RD&T 
activities, either internally or for participation in transportation 
pooled fund studies or other cooperative RD&T programs, to the maximum 
extent possible;
    (3) Procedures for tracking program activities, schedules, 
accomplishments, and fiscal commitments;
    (4) Support and use of the TRIS database for program development, 
reporting of active RD&T activities, and input of the final report 
information;
    (5) Procedures to determine the effectiveness of the State DOT's 
management process in implementing the RD&T program, to determine the 
utilization of the State DOT's RD&T outputs, and to facilitate peer 
exchanges of its RD&T Program on a periodic basis;
    (6) Procedures for documenting RD&T activities through the 
preparation of final reports. As a minimum, the documentation must 
include the data collected, analyses performed, conclusions, and 
recommendations. The State DOT must actively implement appropriate 
research findings and should document benefits; and
    (7) Participation in peer exchanges of its RD&T management process 
and of other State DOTs' programs on a periodic basis. To assist peer 
exchange teams in conducting an effective exchange, the State DOT must 
provide to them the information and documentation required to be 
collected and maintained under this subpart. Travel and other costs 
associated with the State DOT's peer exchange may be identified as a 
line item in the State DOT's work program and will be eligible for 100 
percent Federal funding. The peer exchange team must prepare a written 
report of the exchange.
    (b) Documentation that describes the State DOT's management process 
and the procedures for selecting and implementing RD&T activities must 
be developed by the State DOT and submitted to the FHWA Division office 
for approval. Significant changes in the management process also must be 
submitted by the State DOT to the FHWA for approval. The State DOT must 
make the documentation available, as necessary, to facilitate peer 
exchanges.
    (c) The State DOT must include a certification that it is in full 
compliance with the requirements of this subpart in each RD&T work 
program. If the State DOT is unable to certify full compliance, the FHWA 
Division Administrator may grant conditional approval of the State DOT's 
work program. A conditional approval must cite those areas of the State 
DOT's management process that are deficient and require that the 
deficiencies be corrected within 6 months of conditional approval. The 
certification must consist of a statement signed by the Administrator, 
or an official designated by the Administrator, of the State DOT 
certifying as follows: ``I (name of certifying official), (position 
title), of the State (Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby

[[Page 89]]

certify that the State (Commonwealth) is in compliance with all 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 505 and its implementing regulations with 
respect to the research, development, and technology transfer program, 
and contemplate no changes in statutes, regulations, or administrative 
procedures which would affect such compliance.''
    (d) The FHWA Division Administrator shall periodically review the 
State DOT's management process to determine if the State is in 
compliance with the requirements of this subpart. If the Division 
Administrator determines that a State DOT is not complying with the 
requirements of this subpart, or is not performing in accordance with 
its RD&T management process, the FHWA Division Administrator shall issue 
a written notice of proposed determination of noncompliance to the State 
DOT. The notice will set forth the reasons for the proposed 
determination and inform the State DOT that it may reply in writing 
within 30 calendar days from the date of the notice. The State DOT's 
reply should address the deficiencies cited in the notice and provide 
documentation as necessary. If the State DOT and the Division 
Administrator cannot resolve the differences set forth in the 
determination of nonconformity, the State DOT may appeal to the Federal 
Highway Administrator whose action shall constitute the final decision 
of the FHWA. An adverse decision shall result in immediate withdrawal of 
approval of FHWA planning and research funds for the State DOT's RD&T 
activities until the State DOT is in full compliance.

(The information collection requirements in Sec. 420.209 have been 
approved by the OMB and assigned control number 2125-0039.)


<R03>
PART 450_PLANNING ASSISTANCE AND STANDARDS--Table of Contents




                     Subpart A_Planning Definitions

Sec.
450.100 Purpose.
450.102 Applicability.
450.104 Definitions.

               Subpart B_Statewide Transportation Planning

450.200 Purpose.
450.202 Applicability.
450.204 Definitions.
450.206 Statewide transportation planning process: General requirements.
450.208 Statewide transportation planning process: Factors.
450.210 Coordination.
450.212 Public involvement.
450.214 Statewide transportation plan.
450.216 Statewide transportation improvement program (STIP).
450.218 Funding.
450.220 Approvals.
450.222 Project selection for implementation.
450.224 Phase-in of new requirements.

     Subpart C_Metropolitan Transportation Planning and Programming

450.300 Purpose.
450.302 Applicability.
450.304 Definitions.
450.306 Metropolitan planning organization: Designations and 
          redesignation.
450.308 Metropolitan planning organization: Metropolitan planning area 
          boundaries.
450.310 Metropolitan planning organization: Agreements.
450.312 Metropolitan transportation planning: Responsibilities, 
          cooperation, and coordination.
450.314 Metropolitan transportation planning process: Unified planning 
          work programs.
450.316 Metropolitan transportation planning process: Elements.
450.318 Metropolitan transportation planning process: Major metropolitan 
          transportation investments.
450.320 Metropolitan transportation planning process: Relation to 
          management systems.
450.322 Metropolitan transportation planning process: Transportation 
          plan.
450.324 Transportation improvement program: General.
450.326 Transportation improvement program: Modification.
450.328 Transportation improvement program: Relationship to statewide 
          TIP.
450.330 Transportation improvement program: Action required by FHWA/FTA.
450.332 Project selection for implementation.
450.334 Metropolitan transportation planning process: Certification.
450.336 Phase-in of new requirements.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 134, 135, 217(g), and 315; 42 U.S.C. 7410 et 
seq.; 49 U.S.C. 5303-5306; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and 1.51.

    Source: 58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 90]]


<R04>
                     Subpart A_Planning Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 450.100  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to provide definitions for terms used 
in this part which go beyond those terms defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a).


<R05>
Sec. 450.102  Applicability.

    The definitions in this subpart are applicable to this part, except 
as otherwise provided.


<R05>
Sec. 450.104  Definitions.

    Except as defined in this subpart, terms defined in 23 U.S.C 101(a) 
are used in this part as so defined.
    Consultation means that one party confers with another identified 
party in accordance with an established process and, prior to taking 
action(s), considers that party's views and periodically informs that 
party about action(s) taken.
    Cooperation means that the parties involved in carrying out the 
planning, programming and management systems processes work together to 
achieve a common goal or objective.
    Coordination means the comparison of the transportation plans, 
programs, and schedules of one agency with related plans, programs and 
schedules of other agencies or entities with legal standing, and 
adjustment of plans, programs and schedules to achieve general 
consistency .
    Governor means the Governor of any one of the fifty States, or 
Puerto Rico, and includes the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
    Maintenance area means any geographic region of the United States 
designated nonattainment pursuant to the CAA Amendments of 1990 (Section 
102(e)), 42 U.S.C. 7410 et seq., and subsequently redesignated to 
attainment subject to the requirement to develop a maintenance plan 
under section 175A of the Clean Air Act as amended (CAA), 42 U.S.C. 7410 
et seq.
    Major metropolitan transportation investment means a high-type 
highway or transit improvement of substantial cost that is expected to 
have a significant effect on capacity, traffic flow, level of service, 
or mode share at the transportation corridor or subarea scale. 
Consultation among the MPO, State department of transportation, transit 
operator, the FHWA and the FTA may lead to the designation of other 
proposed improvements as major investments beyond the examples listed 
below. Examples of such investments could generally include but are not 
limited to: Construction of a new partially controlled access (access 
allowed only for public roads) principal arterial, extension of an 
existing partially controlled access (access allowed only for public 
roads) principal arterial by one or more miles, capacity expansion of a 
partially controlled access (access provided only for public roads) 
principal arterial by at least one lane through widening or an 
equivalent increase in capacity produced by access control or 
technological improvement, construction or extension of a high-occupancy 
vehicle (HOV) facility or a fixed guideway transit facility by one or 
more miles, the addition of lanes or tracks to an existing fixed 
guideway transit facility for a distance of one or more miles, or a 
substantial increase in transit service on a fixed guideway facility. 
For this purpose, a fixed guideway refers to any public transportation 
facility which utilizes and occupies a designated right-of-way or rails 
including (but not limited to) rapid rail, light rail, commuter rail, 
busways, automated guideway transit, and people movers. Projects that 
generally are not considered to be major transportation investments 
include but are not limited to: Highway projects on principal arterials 
where access is not limited to public roads only, small scale 
improvements or extensions (normally less than one mile) on principal 
arterials with the primary goal of relieving localized safety or 
operational difficulties, resurfacing, replacement, or rehabilitation of 
existing principal arterials and equipment, highway projects not located 
on a principal arterial, and changes in transit routing and scheduling.
    Management system means a systematic process, designed to assist 
decisionmakers in selecting cost effective strategies/actions to improve 
the efficiency and safety of, and protect the investment in the nation's 
infrastructure. A management system includes:

[[Page 91]]

identification of performance measures; data collection and analysis; 
determination of needs; evaluation, and selection of appropriate 
strategies/actions to address the needs; and evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the implemented strategies/actions.
    Metropolitan planning area means the geographic area in which the 
metropolitan transportation planning process required by 23 U.S.C. 134 
and section 8 of the Federal Transit Act must be carried out.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decisionmaking for the metropolitan planning 
area. MPOs designated prior to the promulgation of this regulation 
remain in effect until redesignated in accordance with Sec. 450.106 and 
nothing in this part is intended to require or encourage such 
redesignation.
    Metropolitan transportation plan means the official intermodal 
transportation plan that is developed and adopted through the 
metropolitan transportation planning process for the metropolitan 
planning area.
    Nonattainment area means any geographic region of the United States 
that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has designated as a 
nonattainment area for a transportation related pollutant(s) for which a 
National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) exists.
    Non-metropolitan area means the geographic area outside designated 
metropolitan planning areas, as designated under 23 U.S.C. 134 and 49 
U.S.C. 5303.
    Non-metropolitan local official means elected and appointed 
officials of general purpose local government, in non-metropolitan 
areas, with jurisdiction/responsibility for transportation.
    Regionally significant project means a project (other than projects 
that may be grouped in the STIP/TIP pursuant to Sec. 450.216 and Sec. 
450.324) that is on a facility which serves regional transportation 
needs (such as access to and from the area outside of the region, major 
activity centers in the region, major planned developments such as new 
retail malls, sports complexes, etc., or transportation terminals as 
well as most terminals themselves) and would normally be included in the 
modeling of a metropolitan area's transportation network, including, as 
a minimum, all principal arterial highways and all fixed guideway 
transit facilities that offer a significant alternative to regional 
highway travel.
    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.
    State Implementation Plan (SIP) means the portion (or portions) of 
an applicable implementation plan approved or promulgated, or the most 
recent revision thereof, under sections 110, 301(d) and 175A of the 
Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7409, 7601, and 7505a).
    Statewide transportation improvement program (STIP) means a staged, 
multiyear, statewide, intermodal program of transportation projects 
which is consistent with the Statewide transportation plan and planning 
processes and metropolitan plans, TIPs and processes.
    Statewide transportation plan means the official statewide, 
intermodal transportation plan that is developed through the statewide 
transportation planning process.
    Transportation improvement program (TIP) means a staged, multiyear, 
intermodal program of transportation projects which is consistent with 
the metropolitan transportation plan.
    Transportation Management Area (TMA) means an urbanized area with a 
population over 200,000 (as determined by the latest decennial census) 
or other area when TMA designation is requested by the Governor and the 
MPO (or affected local officials), and officially designated by the 
Administrators of the FHWA and the FTA. The TMA designation applies to 
the entire metropolitan planning area(s).

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 68 FR 3181, Jan. 23, 2003; 68 
FR 7419, Feb. 14, 2003]


<R04>
               Subpart B_Statewide Transportation Planning


<R05>
Sec. 450.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 135, which 
requires each State to carry out a continuing, comprehensive, and 
intermodal statewide transportation planning process,

[[Page 92]]

including the development of a statewide transportation plan and 
transportation improvement program, that facilitates the efficient, 
economic movement of people and goods in all areas of the State, 
including those areas subject to the requirements of 23 U.S.C 134.


<R05>
Sec. 450.202  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart are applicable to States and any 
other agencies/organizations which are responsible for satisfying these 
requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 450.204  Definitions.

    Except as otherwise provided in subpart A of this part, terms 
defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a) are used in this part as so defined.


<R05>
Sec. 450.206  Statewide transportation planning process: General requirements.

    (a) The statewide transportation planning process shall include, as 
a minimum:
    (1) Data collection and analysis;
    (2) Consideration of factors contained in Sec. 450.208;
    (3) Coordination of activities as noted in Sec. 450.210;
    (4) Development of a statewide transportation plan that considers a 
range of transportation options designed to meet the transportation 
needs (both passenger and freight) of the state including all modes and 
their connections; and
    (5) Development of a statewide transportation improvement program 
(STIP).
    (b) The statewide transportation planning process shall be carried 
out in coordination with the metropolitan planning process required by 
subpart C of this part and shall consider coordination with planning 
activities in non-metropolitan areas.
    (c) In carrying out statewide transportation planning, the State 
shall consider, with respect to non-metropolitan areas, the concerns of 
local elected officials representing units of general purpose local 
government.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 68 FR 3181, Jan. 23, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 450.208  Statewide transportation planning process: Factors.

    (a) Each State shall, at a minimum, explicitly consider, analyze as 
appropriate and reflect in planning process products the following 
factors in conducting its continuing statewide transportation planning 
process:
    (1) The transportation needs (strategies and other results) 
identified through the management systems required by 23 U.S.C. 303;
    (2) Any Federal, State, or local energy use goals, objectives, 
programs, or requirements;
    (3) Strategies for incorporating bicycle transportation facilities 
and pedestrian walkways in appropriate projects throughout the State;
    (4) International border crossings and access to ports, airports, 
intermodal transportation facilities, major freight distribution routes, 
national parks, recreation and scenic areas, monuments and historic 
sites, and military installations;
    (5) The transportation needs of nonmetropolitan areas (areas outside 
of MPO planning boundaries) through a process that includes consultation 
with local elected officials with jurisdiction over transportation;
    (6) Any metropolitan area plan developed pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 134 
and section 8 of the Federal Transit Act, 49 U.S.C. app. 1607;
    (7) Connectivity between metropolitan planning areas within the 
State and with metropolitan planning areas in other States;
    (8) Recreational travel and tourism;
    (9) Any State plan developed pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution 
Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. (and in addition to plans pursuant 
to the Coastal Zone Management Act);
    (10) Transportation system management and investment strategies 
designed to make the most efficient use of existing transportation 
facilities (including consideration of all transportation modes);
    (11) The overall social, economic, energy, and environmental effects 
of transportation decisions (including housing and community development 
effects and effects on the human, natural and manmade environments);

[[Page 93]]

    (12) Methods to reduce traffic congestion and to prevent traffic 
congestion from developing in areas where it does not yet occur, 
including methods which reduce motor vehicle travel, particularly 
single-occupant motor vehicle travel;
    (13) Methods to expand and enhance appropriate transit services and 
to increase the use of such services (including commuter rail);
    (14) The effect of transportation decisions on land use and land 
development, including the need for consistency between transportation 
decisionmaking and the provisions of all applicable short-range and 
long-range land use and development plans (analyses should include 
projections of economic, demographic, environmental protection, growth 
management and land use activities consistent with development goals and 
transportation demand projections);
    (15) Strategies for identifying and implementing transportation 
enhancements where appropriate throughout the State;
    (16) The use of innovative mechanisms for financing projects, 
including value capture pricing, tolls, and congestion pricing;
    (17) Preservation of rights-of-way for construction of future 
transportation projects, including identification of unused rights-of-
way which may be needed for future transportation corridors, 
identification of those corridors for which action is most needed to 
prevent destruction or loss (including strategies for preventing loss of 
rights-of-way);
    (18) Long-range needs of the State transportation system for 
movement of persons and goods;
    (19) Methods to enhance the efficient movement of commercial motor 
vehicles;
    (20) The use of life-cycle costs in the design and engineering of 
bridges, tunnels, or pavements;
    (21) The coordination of transportation plans and programs developed 
for metropolitan planning areas of the State under 23 U.S.C. 134 and 
section 8 of the Federal Transit Act with the statewide transportation 
plans and programs developed under this subpart, and the reconciliation 
of such plans and programs as necessary to ensure connectivity within 
transportation systems;
    (22) Investment strategies to improve adjoining State and local 
roads that support rural economic growth and tourism development, 
Federal agency renewable resources management, and multipurpose land 
management practices, including recreation development; and
    (23) The concerns of Indian tribal governments having jurisdiction 
over lands within the boundaries of the State.
    (b) The degree of consideration and analysis of the factors should 
be based on the scale and complexity of many issues, including 
transportation problems, land use, employment, economic development, 
environmental and housing and community development objectives, the 
extent of overlap between factors and other circumstances statewide or 
in subareas within the State.


<R05>
Sec. 450.210  Coordination.

    (a) In addition to the coordination required under Sec. 
450.208(a)(21), in carrying out the requirements of this subpart, each 
State, in cooperation with participating organizations (such as MPOs, 
Indian tribal governments, environmental, resource and permit agencies, 
public transit operators) shall, to the extent appropriate, provide for 
a fully coordinated process including coordination of the following:
    (1) Data collection, data analysis and evaluation of alternatives 
for a transit, highway, bikeway, scenic byway, recreational trail, or 
pedestrian program with any such activities for the other programs;
    (2) Plans, such as the statewide transportation plan required under 
Sec. 450.214, with programs and priorities for transportation projects, 
such as the STIP;
    (3) Data analysis used in development of plans and programs, (for 
example, information resulting from traffic data analysis, data and 
plans regarding employment and housing availability, data and plans 
regarding land use control and community development) with land use 
projections, with data analysis on issues that are part of public

[[Page 94]]

involvement relating to project implementation, and with data analyses 
done as part of the establishment and maintenance of management systems 
developed in response to 23 U.S.C. 303;
    (4) Consideration of intermodal facilities with land use planning, 
including land use activities carried out by local, regional, and 
multistate agencies;
    (5) Transportation planning carried out by the State with 
transportation planning carried out by Indian tribal governments, 
Federal agencies and local governments, MPOs, large-scale public and 
private transportation providers, operators of major intermodal 
terminals and multistate businesses;
    (6) Transportation planning carried out by the State with 
significant transportation-related actions carried out by other agencies 
for recreation, tourism, and economic development and for the operation 
of airports, ports, rail terminals and other intermodal transportation 
facilities;
    (7) Public involvement carried out for the statewide planning 
process with public involvement carried out for the metropolitan 
planning process;
    (8) Public involvement carried out for planning with public 
involvement carried out for project development;
    (9) Transportation planning carried out by the State with Federal, 
State, and local environmental resource planning that substantially 
affects transportation actions;
    (10) Transportation planning with financial planning;
    (11) Transportation planning with analysis of potential corridors 
for preservation;
    (12) Transportation planning with analysis of social, economic, 
employment, energy, environmental, and housing and community development 
effects of transportation actions; and
    (13) Transportation planning carried out by the State to meet the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 135 with transportation planning to meet other 
Federal requirements including the State rail plan.
    (b) The degree of coordination should be based on the scale and 
complexity of many issues including transportation problems, land use, 
employment, economic, environmental, and housing and community 
development objectives, and other circumstances statewide or in subareas 
within the State.


<R05>
Sec. 450.212  Public involvement.

    (a) Public involvement processes shall be proactive and provide 
complete information, timely public notice, full public access to key 
decisions, and opportunities for early and continuing involvement. The 
processes shall provide for:
    (1) Early and continuing public involvement opportunities throughout 
the transportation planning and programming process;
    (2) Timely information about transportation issues and processes to 
citizens, affected public agencies, representatives of transportation 
agency employees, private providers of transportation, other interested 
parties and segments of the community affected by transportation plans, 
programs, and projects;
    (3) Reasonable public access to technical and policy information 
used in the development of the plan and STIP;
    (4) Adequate public notice of public involvement activities and time 
for public review and comment at key decision points, including but not 
limited to action on the plan and STIP;
    (5) A process for demonstrating explicit consideration and response 
to public input during the planning and program development process;
    (6) A process for seeking out and considering the needs of those 
traditionally underserved by existing transportation systems, such as 
low-income and minority households which may face challenges accessing 
employment and other amenities;
    (7) Periodic review of the effectiveness of the public involvement 
process to ensure that the process provides full and open access to all 
and revision of the process as necessary.
    (b) Public involvement activities carried out in a metropolitan area 
in response to metropolitan planning requirements in Sec. 450.322(c) or 
Sec. 450.324(c) may by agreement of the State and the MPO satisfy the 
requirements of this section.
    (c) During initial development and major revisions of the statewide 
transportation plan required under Sec. 450.214,

[[Page 95]]

the State shall provide citizens, affected public agencies and 
jurisdictions, employee representatives of transportation and other 
affected agencies, private and public providers of transportation, and 
other interested parties a reasonable opportunity to comment on the 
proposed plan. The proposed plan shall be published, with reasonable 
notification of its availability, or otherwise made readily available 
for public review and comment. Likewise, the official statewide 
transportation plan (see Sec. 450.214(d)) shall be published, with 
reasonable notification of its availability, or otherwise made readily 
available for public information.
    (d) During development and major revision of the statewide 
transportation improvement program required under Sec. 450.216, the 
Governor shall provide citizens, affected public agencies and 
jurisdictions, employee representatives of transportation or other 
affected agencies, private providers of transportation, and other 
interested parties, a reasonable opportunity for review and comment on 
the proposed program. The proposed program shall be published, with 
reasonable notification of its availability, or otherwise made readily 
available for public review and comment. The approved program (see Sec. 
450.220(c)) if it differs significantly from the proposed program, shall 
be published, with reasonable notification of its availability, or 
otherwise made readily available for public information.
    (e) The time provided for public review and comment for minor 
revisions to the statewide transportation plan or statewide 
transportation improvement program will be determined by the State and 
local officials based on the complexity of the revisions.
    (f) The State shall, as appropriate, provide for public comment on 
existing and proposed procedures for public involvement throughout the 
statewide transportation planning and programming process. As a minimum, 
the State shall publish procedures and allow 45 days for public review 
and written comment before the procedures and any major revisions to 
existing procedures are adopted.
    (g) The public involvement processes will be considered by the FHWA 
and the FTA as they make the planning finding required in Sec. 
450.220(b) to assure that full and open access is provided to the 
decision making process.
    (h) The State shall provide for non-metropolitan local official 
participation. The State shall have a documented process(es) that is 
separate and discrete from the public involvement process for consulting 
with non-metropolitan local officials representing units of general 
purpose local government and/or local officials with responsibility for 
transportation that provides an opportunity for their participation in 
the statewide transportation planning process and development of the 
statewide transportation improvement program.
    (i) The State shall review and solicit comments from non-
metropolitan local officials and other interested parties for a period 
of not less than 60 days regarding the effectiveness of the consultation 
process and proposed modifications within 2 years of process 
implementation, and thereafter at least once every 5 years. A specific 
request for comments shall be directed to the State association of 
counties, State municipal league, regional planning agencies, or 
directly to non-metropolitan local officials. The State, at its 
discretion, shall be responsible for determining whether to adopt any 
proposed modifications. If a proposed modification is not adopted, the 
State shall make publicly available its reasons for not accepting the 
proposed modification, including notification to non-metropolitan local 
officials or their associations.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 68 FR 3181, Jan. 23, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 450.214  Statewide transportation plan.

    (a) The State shall develop a statewide transportation plan for all 
areas of the State.
    (b) The plan shall:
    (1) Be intermodal (including consideration and provision, as 
applicable, of elements and connections of and between rail, commercial 
motor vehicle, waterway, and aviation facilities, particularly with 
respect to intercity

[[Page 96]]

travel) and statewide in scope in order to facilitate the efficient 
movement of people and goods;
    (2) Be reasonably consistent in time horizon among its elements, but 
cover a period of at least 20 years;
    (3) Contain, as an element, a plan for bicycle transportation, 
pedestrian walkways and trails which is appropriately interconnected 
with other modes;
    (4) Be coordinated with the metropolitan transportation plans 
required under 23 U.S.C. 134;
    (5) Reference, summarize or contain any applicable short range 
planning studies, strategic planning and/or policy studies, 
transportation need studies, management system reports and any 
statements of policies, goals and objectives regarding issues such as 
transportation, economic development, housing, social and environmental 
effects, energy, etc., that were significant to development of the plan; 
and
    (6) Reference, summarize or contain information on the availability 
of financial and other resources needed to carry out the plan.
    (c) In developing the plan, the State shall:
    (1) Cooperate with the MPOs on the portions of the plan affecting 
metropolitan planning areas;
    (2) Cooperate with the Indian tribal government and the Secretary of 
the Interior on the portions of the plan affecting areas of the State 
under the jurisdiction of an Indian tribal government;
    (3) Provide for public involvement as required under Sec. 450.212;
    (4) Provide for substantive consideration and analysis as 
appropriate of specified factors as required under Sec. 450.208; and
    (5) Provide for coordination as required under Sec. 450.210.
    (d) The State shall provide and carryout a mechanism to establish 
the document, or documents, comprising the plan as the official 
statewide transportation plan.
    (e) The plan shall be continually evaluated and periodically updated 
as appropriate using the procedures in this section for development and 
establishment of the plan.
    (f) In developing the statewide transportation plan, affected local 
officials with responsibility for transportation shall be involved on a 
consultation basis for the portions of the plan in non-metropolitan 
areas of the State.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 68 FR 3181, Jan. 23, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 450.216  Statewide transportation improvement program (STIP).

    (a) Each State shall develop a statewide transportation improvement 
program for all areas of the State. In case of difficulties in 
developing the STIP portion for a particular area, e.g., metropolitan 
area, Indian tribal lands, etc., a partial STIP covering the rest of the 
State may be developed. The portion of the STIP in a metropolitan 
planning area (the metropolitan TIP developed pursuant to subpart C of 
this part) shall be developed in cooperation with the MPO. To assist 
this process, the State will need to provide MPOs with estimates of 
available Federal and State funds which the MPO can utilize in 
developing the metropolitan TIP. Metropolitan planning area TIPs shall 
be included without modification in the STIP, directly or by reference, 
once approved by the MPO and the Governor and after needed conformity 
findings are made. Metropolitan TIPs in nonattainment and maintenance 
areas are subject to the FHWA and the FTA conformity findings before 
their inclusion in the STIP. In nonattainment and maintenance areas 
outside metropolitan planning areas, Federal findings of conformity must 
be made prior to placing projects in the STIP. The State shall notify 
the appropriate MPO, local jurisdictions, Federal land agency, Indian 
tribal government, etc. when a TIP including projects under the 
jurisdiction of the agency has been included in the STIP. All title 23 
and Federal Transit Act fund recipients will share information as 
projects in the STIP are implemented. The Governor shall provide for 
public involvement in development of the STIP as required by Sec. 
450.212. In addition, the STIP shall:
    (1) Include a list of priority transportation projects proposed to 
be carried out in the first 3 years of the STIP. Since each TIP is 
approved by the Governor, the TIP priorities will dictate

[[Page 97]]

STIP priorities for each individual metropolitan area. As a minimum, the 
lists shall group the projects that are to be undertaken in each of the 
years, e.g., year 1, year 2, year 3;
    (2) Cover a period of not less than 3 years, but may at State 
discretion cover a longer period. If the STIP covers more than 3 years, 
the projects in the additional years will be considered by the FHWA and 
the FTA only as informational;
    (3) Contain only projects consistent with the statewide plan 
developed under Sec. 450.214;
    (4) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, contain only 
transportation projects found to conform, or from programs that conform, 
to the requirements contained in 40 CFR part 51;
    (5) Be financially constrained by year and include sufficient 
financial information to demonstrate which projects are to be 
implemented using current revenues and which projects are to be 
implemented using proposed revenue sources while the system as a whole 
is being adequately operated and maintained. In nonattainment and 
maintenance areas, projects included in the first two years of the 
current STIP/TIP shall be limited to those for which funds are available 
or committed. In the case of proposed funding sources, strategies for 
ensuring their availability shall be identified;
    (6) Contain all capital and non-capital transportation projects 
(including transportation enhancements, Federal lands highways projects, 
trails projects, pedestrian walkways, and bicycle transportation 
facilities), or identified phases of transportation projects, proposed 
for funding under the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1602, 1607a, 
1612 and 1614) and/or title 23, U.S.C. excluding:
    (i) Safety projects funded under section 402 of the Surface 
Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, as amended (49 U.S.C. app. 2302);
    (ii) IVHS planning grants funded under section 6055(b) of the 
Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (Pub. L. 102-
240, 105 Stat. 1914);
    (iii) Transit planning grants funded under section 8 or 26 of the 
Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1607 and 1622);
    (iv) Metropolitan planning projects funded under 23 U.S.C. 104(f);
    (v) State planning and research projects funded under 23 U.S.C. 
307(c)(1) (except those funded with NHS, STP and minimum allocation (MA) 
funds that the State and MPO for a metropolitan area agree should be in 
the TIP and consequently must be in the STIP); and
    (vi) Emergency relief projects (except those involving substantial 
functional, locational or capacity changes);
    (7) Contain all regionally significant transportation projects 
requiring an action by the FHWA or the FTA whether or not the projects 
are to be funded with title 23, U.S.C. or Federal Transit Act funds, 
e.g., addition of an interchange to the Interstate System with State, 
local and/or private funds, demonstration projects not funded under 
title 23, U.S.C., or the Federal Transit Act. (The STIP should, for 
information purposes, include all regionally significant transportation 
projects proposed to be funded with Federal funds other than those 
administered by the FHWA or the FTA. It should also include, for 
information purposes, if appropriate and cited in any TIPs, all 
regionally significant projects, to be funded with non-Federal funds);
    (8) Include for each project the following:
    (i) Sufficient descriptive material (i.e., type of work, termini, 
length, etc.) to identify the project or phase;
    (ii) Estimated total cost;
    (iii) The amount of Federal funds proposed to be obligated during 
each program year;
    (iv) For the first year, the proposed category of Federal funds and 
source(s) of non-Federal funds;
    (v) For the second and third years, the likely category or possible 
categories of Federal funds and sources of non-Federal funds;
    (vi) Identification of the agencies responsible for carrying out the 
project; and
    (9) For non-metropolitan areas, include in the first year only those 
projects which have been selected in accordance with the project 
selection requirements in Sec. 450.222(c).

[[Page 98]]

    (b) Projects that are not considered to be of appropriate scale for 
individual identification in a given program year may be grouped by 
function, work type, and/or geographic area using the applicable 
classifications under 23 CFR 771.117 (c) and (d) and/or 40 CFR part 51.
    (c) Projects in any of the first three years of the STIP may be 
moved to any other of the first three years of the STIP subject to the 
project selection requirements of Sec. 450.222.
    (d) The STIP may be amended at any time under procedures agreed to 
by the cooperating parties consistent with the procedures established in 
this section (for STIP development), in Sec. 450.212 (for public 
involvement) and in Sec. 450.220 (for the FHWA and the FTA approval).
    (e) In developing the statewide transportation improvement program, 
affected local officials with responsibility for transportation shall be 
involved on a consultation basis for the portions of the program in non-
metropolitan areas of the State.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 68 FR 3181, Jan. 23, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 450.218  Funding.

    Funds provided under sections 8, 9, 18, and 26(a)(2) of the Federal 
Transit Act and 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(1), 104(b)(3), 104(f)(3) and 307(c)(1) 
may be used to accomplish activities in this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 450.220  Approvals.

    (a) At least every two years, each State shall submit the entire 
proposed STIP, and amendments as necessary, concurrently to the FHWA and 
the FTA for joint approval. The State shall certify that the 
transportation planning process is being carried out in accordance with 
all applicable requirements of:
    (1) 23 U.S.C. 135, section 8(q) of the Federal Transit Act and this 
part;
    (2) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Title VI 
assurance executed by each State under 23 U.S.C. 324 and 29 U.S.C. 794;
    (3) Section 1003(b) of the Intermodal Surface Transportation 
Efficiency Act of 1991 (Pub. L. 102-240, 105 Stat. 1914) regarding the 
involvement of disadvantaged business enterprises in the FHWA and the 
FTA funded projects (sec. 105(f), Pub. L. 97-424, 96 Stat. 2100; 49 CFR 
part 23);
    (4) The provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
(Pub. L. 101-336, 104 Stat. 327, as amended) and U.S. DOT regulations 
``Transportation for Individuals with Disabilities'' (49 CFR parts 27, 
37, and 38);
    (5) The provisions of 49 CFR part 20 regarding restrictions on 
influencing certain Federal activities; and
    (6) In States containing nonattainment and maintenance areas, 
sections 174 and 176 (c) and (d) of the Clean Air Act as amended (42 
U.S.C. 7504, 7506 (c) and (d)).
    (b) The FHWA and the FTA Administrators, in consultation with, where 
applicable, Federal lands agencies, will review the STIP or amendment 
and jointly make a finding as to the extent the projects in the STIP are 
based on a planning process that meets or substantially meets the 
requirements of title 23, U.S.C., the Federal Transit Act and subparts 
A, B and C of this part.
    (c) If, upon review, the FHWA and the FTA Administrators jointly 
determine that the STIP or amendment meet, to an acceptable degree, the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 135 and these regulations (including subpart C 
where a metropolitan TIP is involved), they will approve the STIP. 
Approval action will take one of the following forms, as appropriate:
    (1) Joint approval of the STIP;
    (2) Joint approval of the STIP subject to certain corrective actions 
being taken;
    (3) Joint approval of the STIP as the basis for approval of 
identified categories of projects; and/or
    (4) Under special circumstances, joint approval of a partial STIP 
covering only a portion of the State.
    (d) The joint approval period for a new STIP or amended STIP will 
not exceed two years. Where the State demonstrates that extenuating 
circumstances will delay the submittal of a new STIP or amended STIP for 
approval, FHWA and FTA will consider and take appropriate action on 
requests to extend the approval beyond two years for all or part of the 
STIP for a limited period of time. Where the request involves projects 
in a metropolitan planning area(s), the affected

[[Page 99]]

MPO(s) must concur in the request and if the delay was due to the 
development and approval of the TIP, the affected MPO(s) must provide 
supporting information for the request. If nonattainment and/or 
maintenance areas are involved, a request for an extension cannot be 
granted if the conformity determination on the TIP is no longer valid 
under EPA's conformity regulations (40 CFR part 51).
    (e) If, upon review, the FHWA and the FTA Administrators jointly 
determine that the STIP or amendment does not substantially meet the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 135 and this part for any identified 
categories of projects, they will not approve the STIP.
    (f) The FHWA and the FTA will notify the State of actions taken 
under this section.
    (g) Where necessary in order to maintain or establish operations, 
the Federal Transit Administrator and/or the Federal Highway 
Administrator may approve operating assistance for specific projects or 
programs even though the projects or programs may not be included in an 
approved STIP.


<R05>
Sec. 450.222  Project selection for implementation.

    (a) Except as provided in Sec. Sec. 450.220(f) and 450.216(a)(7), 
only projects included in the Federally approved STIP shall be eligible 
for funds administered by the FHWA or the FTA.
    (b) In metropolitan planning areas, transportation projects 
requiring title 23 or Federal Transit Act funds administered by the FHWA 
or the FTA shall be selected in accordance with procedures established 
pursuant to the project selection portion of the metropolitan planning 
regulation in subpart C of this part.
    (c) Outside metropolitan planning areas, transportation projects 
undertaken on the National Highway System with title 23 funds and under 
the bridge and Interstate maintenance programs shall be selected by the 
State in consultation with the affected local officials. Federal lands 
highway projects shall be selected in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 204. 
Other transportation projects undertaken with funds administered by the 
FHWA shall be selected by the State in cooperation with the affected 
local officials, and projects undertaken with Federal Transit Act funds 
shall be selected by the State in cooperation with the appropriate 
affected local officials and transit operators.
    (d) The projects in the first year of an approved STIP shall 
constitute an ``agreed to'' list of projects for subsequent scheduling 
and implementation. No further project selection action is required for 
the implementing agency to proceed with these projects except that if 
appropriated Federal funds available are significantly less than the 
authorized amounts, Sec. 450.332(c) provides for a revised list of 
``agreed to'' projects to be developed upon the request of the State, 
MPO, or transit operators. If an implementing agency wishes to proceed 
with a project in the second and third year of the STIP, the specific 
project selection procedures stated in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section must be used. Expedited selection procedures which provide for 
the advancement of projects from the second or third years of the STIP 
may be used if agreed to by all the parties involved in the selection.


<R05>
Sec. 450.224  Phase-in of new requirements.

    (a) The State shall, by January 1, 1995, identify the official 
statewide transportation plan, described under Sec. 450.214, to be used 
as a basis for subsequently approved STIPs. Until such a plan is 
identified, but no later than January 1, 1995, the State may identify 
existing plans and policies which can serve as the official interim 
plan. STIP development shall be based upon a transportation plan which 
serves as the official plan (including an interim plan, if appropriate, 
prior to January 1, 1995, provided that all factors identified in Sec. 
450.208 are considered).
    (b) The State has a period of one year after February 24, 2003 to 
document and implement the consultation process discussed in Sec. 
450.212(h).

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 68 FR 3181, Jan. 23, 2003]

[[Page 100]]


<R04>
     Subpart C_Metropolitan Transportation Planning and Programming


<R05>
Sec. 450.300  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 134 and 
section 8 of the Federal Transit Act, as amended, which require that a 
Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) be designated for each 
urbanized area and that the metropolitan area has a continuing, 
cooperative, and comprehensive transportation planning process that 
results in plans and programs that consider all transportation modes and 
supports metropolitan community development and social goals. These 
plans and programs shall lead to the development and operation of an 
integrated, intermodal transportation system that facilitates the 
efficient, economic movement of people and goods.


<R05>
Sec. 450.302  Applicability.

    The provisions of this subpart are applicable to agencies involved 
in the transportation planning, program development, and project 
selection processes in metropolitan planning areas.


<R05>
Sec. 450.304  Definitions.

    Except as otherwise provided in subpart A of this part, terms 
defined in 23 U.S.C 101(a) are used in this part as so defined.


<R05>
Sec. 450.306  Metropolitan planning organization: Designations and 
redesignation.

    (a) Designations of metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) made 
after December 18, 1991, shall be by agreement among the Governor(s) and 
units of general purpose local governments representing 75 percent of 
the affected metropolitan population (including the central city or 
cities as defined by the Bureau of the Census), or in accordance with 
procedures established by applicable State or local law. To the extent 
possible, only one MPO shall be designated for each UZA or group of 
contiguous UZAs. More than one MPO may be designated within an UZA only 
if the Governor(s) determines that the size and complexity of the UZA 
make designation of more than one MPO appropriate.
    (b) The designation shall clearly identify the policy body that is 
the forum for cooperative decisionmaking that will be taking the 
required approval actions as the MPO.
    (c) To the extent possible, the MPO designated should be established 
under specific State legislation, State enabling legislation, or by 
interstate compact, and shall have authority to carry out metropolitan 
transportation planning.
    (d) Redesignation (designation of a new MPO(s) to replace an 
existing MPO) shall occur by agreement of the Governor and affected 
local units of government representing 75 percent of the population in 
the entire metropolitan area. The central city(ies) must be among the 
units of local government agreeing to the redesignation.
    (e) Nothing in this subpart shall be deemed to prohibit the MPO from 
utilizing the staff resources of other agencies to carry out selected 
elements of the planning process.
    (f) Existing MPO designations remain valid until a new MPO is 
redesignated, unless revoked by the Governor and local units of 
government representing 75 percent of the population in the area served 
by the existing MPO (the central city(ies) must be among those desiring 
to revoke the MPO designation), or as otherwise provided under State or 
local procedures. If the Governor and local officials decide to 
redesignate an existing MPO, but do not formally revoke the existing MPO 
designation, the existing MPO remains in effect until a new MPO is 
formally designated.
    (g) Redesignation of an MPO in a multistate metropolitan area 
requires the approval of the Governor of each State and local officials 
representing 75 percent of the population in the entire metropolitan 
planning area. The local officials in the central city(ies) must be 
among those agreeing to the redesignation.
    (h) Redesignation of an MPO covering more than one UZA requires the 
approval of the Governor and local officials representing 75 percent of 
the population in the metropolitan planning area covered by the current 
MPO; the local officials in the central city(ies) in each urbanized area 
must

[[Page 101]]

be among those agreeing to the redesignation.
    (i) The voting membership of an MPO policy body designated/
redesignated subsequent to December 18, 1991, and serving a TMA, must 
include representation of local elected officials, officials of agencies 
that administer or operate major modes or systems of transportation, 
e.g., transit operators, sponsors of major local airports, maritime 
ports, rail operators, etc. (including all transportation agencies that 
were included in the MPO on June 1, 1991), and appropriate State 
officials. Where agencies that operate other major modes of 
transportation do not already have a voice on existing MPOs, the MPOs 
(in cooperation with the States) are encouraged to provide such agencies 
a voice in the decisionmaking process, including representation/
membership on the policy body and/or other appropriate committees. 
Further, where appropriate, existing MPOs should increase the 
representation of local elected officials on the policy board and other 
committees as a means for encouraging their greater involvement in MPO 
processes. Adding such representation to an MPO will not, in itself, 
constitute a redesignation action.
    (j) Where the metropolitan planning area boundaries for a previously 
designated MPO need to be expanded, the membership on the MPO policy 
body and other committees, should be reviewed to ensure that the added 
area has appropriate representation.
    (k) Adding membership (e.g., local elected officials and operators 
of major modes or systems of transportation, or representatives of newly 
urbanized areas) to the policy body or expansion of the metropolitan 
planning area does not automatically require redesignation of the MPO. 
To the extent possible, it is encouraged that this be done without a 
formal redesignation. The Governor and MPO shall review the previous MPO 
designation, State and local law, MPO bylaws, etc., to determine if this 
can be accomplished without a formal redesignation. If redesignation is 
considered necessary, the existing MPO will remain in effect until a new 
MPO is formally designated or the existing designation is formally 
revoked in accordance with the procedures of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 450.308  Metropolitan planning organization: Metropolitan planning 
area boundaries.

    (a) The metropolitan planning area boundary shall, as a minimum, 
cover the UZA(s) and the contiguous geographic area(s) likely to become 
urbanized within the twenty year forecast period covered by the 
transportation plan described in Sec. 450.322 of this part. The 
boundary may encompass the entire metropolitan statistical area or 
consolidated metropolitan statistical area, as defined by the Bureau of 
the Census. For geographic areas designated as nonattainment or 
maintenance areas (as created by the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 
(CAAA)) for transportation related pollutants under the CAA, the 
boundaries of the metropolitan planning area shall include at least the 
boundaries of the nonattainment or maintenance areas, except as 
otherwise provided by agreement between the MPO and the Governor under 
the procedures specified in Sec. 450.310(f) of this part. In the 
absence of a formal agreement between the Governor and the MPO to reduce 
the metropolitan planning area to an area less than the boundaries of 
the nonattainment or maintenance area, the entire nonattainment or 
maintenance area is subject to the applicable provisions of this part. 
Where a portion of the nonattainment or maintenance area is excluded 
from the metropolitan planning area boundary, the STP funds suballocated 
to urbanized areas greater than 200,000 in population shall not be 
utilized for projects outside the metropolitan planning area boundary.
    (b) The metropolitan planning area for a new UZA served by an 
existing or new MPO shall be established in accordance with these 
criteria. The current planning area boundaries for previously designated 
UZAs shall be reviewed and modified if necessary to comply with these 
criteria.
    (c) In addition to the criteria in paragraph (a) of this section, 
the planning areas currently in use for all transportation modes should 
be reviewed before establishing the metropolitan planning

[[Page 102]]

area boundary. Where appropriate, adjustments should be made to reflect 
the most comprehensive boundary to foster an effective planning process 
that ensures connectivity between modes, reduces access disadvantages 
experienced by modal systems, and promotes efficient overall 
transportation investment strategies.
    (d) Approval of metropolitan planning area boundaries by the FHWA or 
the FTA is not required. However, metropolitan planning area boundary 
maps must be submitted to the FHWA and the FTA after their approval by 
the MPO and the Governor.


<R05>
Sec. 450.310  Metropolitan planning organization: Agreements.

    (a) The responsibilities for cooperatively carrying out 
transportation planning (including corridor and subarea studies) and 
programming shall be clearly identified in an agreement or memorandum of 
understanding between the State and the MPO.
    (b) There shall be an agreement between the MPO and operators of 
publicly owned transit services which specifies cooperative procedures 
for carrying out transportation planning (including corridor and subarea 
studies) and programming as required by this subpart.
    (c) In nonattainment or maintenances areas, if the MPO is not 
designated for air quality planning under section 174 of the Clean Air 
Act (42 U.S.C. 7504), there shall be an agreement between the MPO and 
the designated agency describing their respective roles and 
responsibilities for air quality related transportation planning.
    (d) To the extent possible, there shall be one cooperative agreement 
containing the understandings required by paragraphs (a) through (c) of 
this section among the State, MPO, publicly owned operators of mass 
transportation services, and air quality agencies.
    (e) Where the parties involved agree, the requirement for agreements 
specified in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section may be 
satisfied by including the responsibilities and procedures for carrying 
out a cooperative process in the unified planning work program or a 
prospectus as defined in Sec. 450.314(c).
    (f) If the metropolitan planning area does not include the entire 
nonattainment or maintenance area, there shall be an agreement among the 
State department of transportation, State air quality agency, affected 
local agencies, and the MPO describing the process for cooperative 
planning and analysis of all projects outside the metropolitan planning 
area but within the nonattainment or maintenance area. The agreement 
also must indicate how the total transportation related emissions for 
the nonattainment or maintenance area, including areas both within and 
outside the metropolitan planning area, will be treated for the purposes 
of determining conformity in accordance with the U.S. EPA conformity 
regulation (40 CFR part 51). The agreement shall address policy 
mechanisms for resolving conflicts concerning transportation related 
emissions that may arise between the metropolitan planning area and the 
portion of the nonattainment or maintenance area outside the 
metropolitan planning area. Proposals to exclude a portion of the 
nonattainment or maintenance area from the planning area boundary shall 
be coordinated with the FHWA, the FTA, the EPA, and the State air 
quality agency before a final decision is made.
    (g) Where more than one MPO has authority within a metropolitan 
planning area or a nonattainment or maintenance area, there shall be an 
agreement between the State department(s) of transportation and the MPOs 
describing how the processes will be coordinated to assure the 
development of an overall transportation plan for the metropolitan 
planning area. In metropolitan planning areas that are nonattainment or 
maintenance areas, the agreement shall include State and local air 
quality agencies. The agreement shall address policy mechanisms for 
resolving potential conflicts that may arise between the MPOs, e.g., 
issues related to the exclusion of a portion of the nonattainment area 
from the planning area boundary.
    (h) For all requirements specified in paragraphs (a) through (g) of 
this section, existing agreements shall be reviewed for compliance and 
reaffirmed

[[Page 103]]

or modified as necessary to ensure participation by all appropriate 
modes.


<R05>
Sec. 450.312  Metropolitan transportation planning: Responsibilities, 
cooperation, and coordination.

    (a) The MPO in cooperation with the State and with operators of 
publicly owned transit services shall be responsible for carrying out 
the metropolitan transportation planning process. The MPO, the State and 
transit operator(s) shall cooperatively determine their mutual 
responsibilities in the conduct of the planning process, including 
corridor refinement studies, described in Sec. Sec. 450.316 through 
450.318. They shall cooperatively develop the unified planning work 
program, transportation plan, and transportation improvement program 
specified in Sec. Sec. 450.314 through 450.318. In addition, the 
development of the plan and TIP shall be coordinated with other 
providers of transportation, e.g., sponsors of regional airports, 
maritime port operators, rail freight operators, etc.
    (b) The MPO shall approve the metropolitan transportation plan and 
its periodic updates. The MPO and the Governor shall approve the 
metropolitan transportation improvement program and any amendments.
    (c) In nonattainment or maintenance areas, the MPO shall coordinate 
the development of the transportation plan with the SIP development 
process including the development of the transportation control 
measures. The MPO shall develop or assist in developing the 
transportation control measures.
    (d) In nonattainment or maintenance areas for transportation related 
pollutants, the MPO shall not approve any transportation plan or program 
which does not conform with the SIP, as determined in accordance with 
the U.S. EPA conformity regulation (40 CFR Part 51).
    (e) If more than one MPO has authority in a metropolitan planning 
area (including multi-State metropolitan planning areas) or in an area 
which is designated as nonattainment or maintenance for transportation 
related pollutants, the MPOs and the Governor(s) shall cooperatively 
establish the boundaries of the metropolitan planning area (including 
the twenty year planning horizon and relationship to the nonattainment 
or maintenance areas) and the respective jurisdictional responsibilities 
of each MPO. The MPOs shall consult with each other and the State(s) to 
assure the preparation of integrated plans and transportation 
improvement programs for the entire metropolitan planning area. An 
individual MPO plan and program may be developed separately. However, 
each plan and program must be consistent with the plans and programs of 
other MPOs in the metropolitan planning area. For the overall 
metropolitan planning area, the individual MPO planning process shall 
reflect coordinated data collection, analysis and development. In those 
areas where this provision is applicable, coordination efforts shall be 
initiated and the process and outcomes documented in subsequent 
transmittals of the UPWP and various planning products (the plan, TIP, 
etc.) to the State, the FHWA, and the FTA.
    (f) The Secretary must designate as transportation management areas 
all UZAs over 200,000 population as determined by the most recent 
decennial census. The Secretary designated TMAs by publishing a notice 
in the Federal Register. Copies of this notice may be obtained from the 
FHWA Metropolitan Planning Division or Office of Planning FTA. The TMAs 
so designated and those designated subsequently by the FHWA and the FTA 
(including those designated upon request of the MPO and the Governor) 
must comply with the special requirements applicable to such areas 
regarding congestion management systems, project selection, and 
certification. The TMA designation applies to the entire metropolitan 
planning area boundary. If a metropolitan planning area encompasses a 
TMA and other UZA(s), the designation applies to the entire metropolitan 
planning area regardless of the population of constituent UZAs.
    (g) As required by 23 CFR part 500, the required management systems 
shall be developed cooperatively by the State, the MPOs and transit 
operators for each metropolitan planning area. In TMAs, the congestion 
management system will be developed as part of the

[[Page 104]]

metropolitan transportation planning process.
    (h) The State shall cooperatively participate in the development of 
metropolitan transportation plans. The relationship of the statewide 
transportation plan and the metropolitan plan is specified in subpart B 
of this part.
    (i) Where a metropolitan planning area includes Federal public lands 
and/or Indian tribal lands, the affected Federal agencies and Indian 
tribal governments shall be involved appropriately in the development of 
transportation plans and programs.


<R05>
Sec. 450.314  Metropolitan transportation planning process: Unified 
planning work programs.

    (a) In TMAs, the MPO(s) in cooperation with the State and operators 
of publicly owned transit shall develop unified planning work programs 
(UPWPs) that meet the requirements of 23 CFR part 420, subpart A, and:
    (1) Discuss the planning priorities facing the metropolitan planning 
area and describe all metropolitan transportation and transportation-
related air quality planning activities (including the corridor and 
subarea studies discussed in Sec. 450.318) anticipated within the area 
during the next one or two year period, regardless of funding sources or 
agencies conducting activities, in sufficient detail to indicate who 
will perform the work, the schedule for completing it and the products 
that will be produced;
    (2) Document planning activities to be performed with funds provided 
under title 23, U.S.C., and the Federal Transit Act.
    (b) Arrangements may be made with the FHWA and the FTA to combine 
the UPWP requirements with the work program for other Federal sources of 
planning funds.
    (c) The metropolitan transportation planning process may include the 
development of a prospectus that establishes a multiyear framework 
within which the UPWP is accomplished. The prospectus may be used to 
satisfy the requirements of Sec. 450.310 and paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section.
    (d) In areas not designated as TMAs, the MPO in cooperation with the 
State and transit operators, with the approval of the FHWA and the FTA, 
may prepare a simplified statement of work, in lieu of a UPWP, that 
describes who will perform the work and the work that will be 
accomplished using Federal funds. If a simplified statement of work is 
used, it may be submitted as part of the Statewide planning work 
program, in accordance with 23 CFR part 420.


<R05>
Sec. 450.316  Metropolitan transportation planning process: Elements.

    (a) Section 134(f) of title 23, U.S.C., and Federal Transit Act 
section 8(f) (49 U.S.C. app. 1607(f)) list 15 factors that must be 
considered as part of the planning process for all metropolitan areas. 
The following factors shall be explicitly considered, analyzed as 
appropriate, and reflected in the planning process products:
    (1) Preservation of existing transportation facilities and, where 
practical, ways to meet transportation needs by using existing 
transportation facilities more efficiently;
    (2) Consistency of transportation planning with applicable Federal, 
State, and local energy conservation programs, goals, and objectives;
    (3) The need to relieve congestion and prevent congestion from 
occurring where it does not yet occur including:
    (i) The consideration of congestion management strategies or actions 
which improve the mobility of people and goods in all phases of the 
planning process; and
    (ii) In TMAs, a congestion management system that provides for 
effective management of new and existing transportation facilities 
through the use of travel demand reduction and operation management 
strategies (e.g., various elements of IVHS) shall be developed in 
accordance with Sec. 450.320;
    (4) The likely effect of transportation policy decisions on land use 
and development and the consistency of transportation plans and programs 
with the provisions of all applicable short- and long-term land use and 
development plans (the analysis should include projections of 
metropolitan planning area economic, demographic, environmental 
protection, growth management, and land use activities consistent with

[[Page 105]]

metropolitan and local/central city development goals (community, 
economic, housing, etc.), and projections of potential transportation 
demands based on the interrelated level of activity in these areas);
    (5) Programming of expenditures for transportation enhancement 
activities as required under 23 U.S.C. 133;
    (6) The effects of all transportation projects to be undertaken 
within the metropolitan planning area, without regard to the source of 
funding (the analysis shall consider the effectiveness, cost 
effectiveness, and financing of alternative investments in meeting 
transportation demand and supporting the overall efficiency and 
effectiveness of transportation system performance and related impacts 
on community/central city goals regarding social and economic 
development, housing, and employment);
    (7) International border crossings and access to ports, airports, 
intermodal transportation facilities, major freight distribution routes, 
national parks, recreation areas, monuments and historic sites, and 
military installations (supporting technical efforts should provide an 
analysis of goods and services movement problem areas, as determined in 
cooperation with appropriate private sector involvement, including, but 
not limited to, addressing interconnected transportation access and 
service needs of intermodal facilities);
    (8) Connectivity of roads within metropolitan planning areas with 
roads outside of those areas;
    (9) Transportation needs identified through the use of the 
management systems required under 23 U.S.C. 303 (strategies identified 
under each management system will be analyzed during the development of 
the transportation plan, including its financial component, for possible 
inclusion in the metropolitan plan and TIP);
    (10) Preservation of rights-of-way for construction of future 
transportation projects, including future transportation corridors;
    (11) Enhancement of the efficient movement of freight;
    (12) The use of life-cycle costs in the design and engineering of 
bridges, tunnels, or pavement (operating and maintenance costs must be 
considered in analyzing transportation alternatives);
    (13) The overall social, economic, energy, and environmental effects 
of transportation decisions (including consideration of the effects and 
impacts of the plan on the human, natural and man-made environment such 
as housing, employment and community development, consultation with 
appropriate resource and permit agencies to ensure early and continued 
coordination with environmental resource protection and management 
plans, and appropriate emphasis on transportation-related air quality 
problems in support of the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 109(h), and section 
14 of the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. 1610), section 4(f) of the DOT 
Act (49 U.S.C. 303) and section 174(b) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
7504(b)));
    (14) Expansion, enhancement, and increased use of transit services;
    (15) Capital investments that would result in increased security in 
transit systems; and
    (16) Recreational travel and tourism.
    (b) In addition, the metropolitan transportation planning process 
shall:
    (1) Include a proactive public involvement process that provides 
complete information, timely public notice, full public access to key 
decisions, and supports early and continuing involvement of the public 
in developing plans and TIPs and meets the requirements and criteria 
specified as follows:
    (i) Require a minimum public comment period of 45 days before the 
public involvement process is initially adopted or revised;
    (ii) Provide timely information about transportation issues and 
processes to citizens, affected public agencies, representatives of 
transportation agency employees, private providers of transportation, 
other interested parties and segments of the community affected by 
transportation plans, programs and projects (including but not limited 
to central city and other local jurisdiction concerns);
    (iii) Provide reasonable public access to technical and policy 
information used in the development of plans and TIPs and open public 
meetings where matters related to the Federal-aid

[[Page 106]]

highway and transit programs are being considered;
    (iv) Require adequate public notice of public involvement activities 
and time for public review and comment at key decision points, 
including, but not limited to, approval of plans and TIPs (in 
nonattainment areas, classified as serious and above, the comment period 
shall be at least 30 days for the plan, TIP and major amendment(s));
    (v) Demonstrate explicit consideration and response to public input 
received during the planning and program development processes;
    (vi) Seek out and consider the needs of those traditionally 
underserved by existing transportation systems, including but not 
limited to low-income and minority households;
    (vii) When significant written and oral comments are received on the 
draft transportation plan or TIP (including the financial plan) as a 
result of the public involvement process or the interagency consultation 
process required under the U.S. EPA's conformity regulations, a summary, 
analysis, and report on the disposition of comments shall be made part 
of the final plan and TIP;
    (viii) If the final transportation plan or TIP differs significantly 
from the one which was made available for public comment by the MPO and 
raises new material issues which interested parties could not reasonably 
have foreseen from the public involvement efforts, an additional 
opportunity for public comment on the revised plan or TIP shall be made 
available;
    (ix) Public involvement processes shall be periodically reviewed by 
the MPO in terms of their effectiveness in assuring that the process 
provides full and open access to all;
    (x) These procedures will be reviewed by the FHWA and the FTA during 
certification reviews for TMAs, and as otherwise necessary for all MPOs, 
to assure that full and open access is provided to MPO decisionmaking 
processes;
    (xi) Metropolitan public involvement processes shall be coordinated 
with statewide public involvement processes wherever possible to enhance 
public consideration of the issues, plans, and programs and reduce 
redundancies and costs;
    (2) Be consistent with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 
the Title VI assurance executed by each State under 23 U.S.C. 324 and 29 
U.S.C. 794, which ensure that no person shall, on the grounds of race, 
color, sex, national origin, or physical handicap, be excluded from 
participation in, be denied benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to 
discrimination under any program receiving Federal assistance from the 
United States Department of Transportation;
    (3) Identify actions necessary to comply with the Americans With 
Disabilities Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-336, 104 Stat. 327, as amended) 
and U.S. DOT regulations ``Transportation for Individuals With 
Disabilities'' (49 CFR parts 27, 37, and 38);
    (4) Provide for the involvement of traffic, ridesharing, parking, 
transportation safety and enforcement agencies; commuter rail operators; 
airport and port authorities; toll authorities; appropriate private 
transportation providers, and where appropriate city officials; and
    (5) Provide for the involvement of local, State, and Federal 
environment resource and permit agencies as appropriate.
    (c) In attainment areas not designated as TMAs simplified procedures 
for the development of plans and programs, if considered appropriate, 
shall be proposed by the MPO in cooperation with the State and transit 
operator, and submitted by the State for approval by the FHWA and the 
FTA. In developing proposed simplified planning procedures, 
consideration shall be given to the transportation problems in the area 
and their complexity, the growth rate of the area (e.g., fast, moderate 
or slow), the appropriateness of the factors specified for consideration 
in this subpart including air quality, and the desirability of 
continuing any planning process that has already been established. Areas 
experiencing fast growth should give consideration to a planning process 
that addresses all of the general requirements specified in this 
subpart. As a minimum, all areas

[[Page 107]]

employing a simplified planning process will need to develop a 
transportation plan to be approved by the MPO and a TIP to be approved 
by the MPO and the Governor.
    (d) The metropolitan transportation planning process shall include 
preparation of technical and other reports to assure documentation of 
the development, refinement, and update of the transportation plan. The 
reports shall be reasonably available to interested parties, consistent 
with Sec. 450.316(b)(1).

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 67175, Dec. 19, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 450.318  Metropolitan transportation planning process: Major 
metropolitan transportation investments.

    (a) Where the need for a major metropolitan transportation 
investment is identified, and Federal funds are potentially involved, 
major investment (corridor or subarea) studies shall be undertaken to 
develop or refine the plan and lead to decisions by the MPO, in 
cooperation with participating agencies, on the design concept and scope 
of the investment. Where the studies have not been completed prior to 
plan approval, the provisions of Sec. 450.322(b)(8) apply.
    (b) When any of the implementing agencies or the MPO wish to 
initiate a major investment study, a meeting will be convened to 
determine the extent of the analyses and agency roles in a cooperative 
process which involves the MPO, the State department of transportation, 
public transit operators, environmental, resource and permit agencies, 
local officials, the FHWA and the FTA and where appropriate community 
development agencies, major governmental housing bodies, and such other 
related agencies as may be impacted by the proposed scope of analysis. A 
reasonable opportunity, consistent with Sec. 450.316(b)(1), shall be 
provided for citizens and interested parties including affected public 
agencies, representatives of transportation agency employees, and 
private providers of transportation to participate in the cooperative 
process. This cooperative process shall establish the range of 
alternatives to be studied, such as alternative modes and technologies 
(including intelligent vehicle and highway systems), general alignment, 
number of lanes, the degree of demand management, and operating 
characteristics.
    (c) To the extent appropriate as determined under paragraph (b) of 
this section, major investment studies shall evaluate the effectiveness 
and cost-effectiveness of alternative investments or strategies in 
attaining local, State and national goals and objectives. The analysis 
shall consider the direct and indirect costs of reasonable alternatives 
and such factors as mobility improvements; social, economic, and 
environmental effects; safety; operating efficiencies; land use and 
economic development; financing; and energy consumption.
    (d) These major investment studies will serve as the ``alternatives 
analyses'' required by section 3(i)(1)(A) of the Federal Transit Act (49 
U.S.C. app. 1602(i)) for certain projects for which discretionary 
section 3 ``New Start'' funding is being sought. The studies will also 
be used as the primary source of information for the other section 
3(i)(1)(A) Secretarial findings on cost-effectiveness, local financial 
commitment and capacity, mobility improvements, environmental benefits, 
economic development, operating efficiency, etc.
    (e) These major investment studies also will, when appropriate, 
serve as the analysis of demand reduction and operational management 
strategies pursuant to 23 CFR 500.109(b).
    (f) A major investment study will include environmental studies 
which will be used for environmental documents as described in 
paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of this section:
    (1) As a minimum the participating agencies will use the major 
investment study as input to an environmental impact statement or 
environmental assessment prepared subsequent to the completion of the 
study. In such a case, the major investment study reports shall document 
the consideration given to alternatives and their impacts; or
    (2) The participating agencies may elect to develop a draft 
environmental impact statement or environmental assessment as part of 
the major investment study. At any time after the completion of the 
study and the inclusion of the major transportation investment

[[Page 108]]

in the plan and the TIP the participating agencies may request the 
development of final environmental decision documents required under 
NEPA for such major transportation investments, culminating in the 
execution of a Record of Decision or Finding of No Significant Impact by 
the FHWA and/or the FTA.
    (g) Major investment studies may lead to decisions that modify the 
project design concept and scope assumed in the plan development 
process. In this case, the study shall lead to the specification of a 
project's design concept and scope in sufficient detail to meet the 
requirements of the U.S. EPA conformity regulations (40 CFR part 51).
    (h) Major investment studies are eligible for funds authorized under 
sections 8, 9 and 26 of the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1607, 
16072, and 1622) and planning and capital funds apportioned under title 
23, U.S.C., and shall be included in the UPWP. If CMAQ, STP, NHS, or 
other capital funds administered by the FHWA are utilized for this 
purpose, the study must also be included in the TIP.
    (i) Where the environmental process has been completed and a Record 
of Decision or Finding of No Significant Impact has been signed, Sec. 
450.318 does not apply. Where the environmental process has been 
initiated but not completed, the FHWA and the FTA shall be consulted on 
appropriate modifications to meet the requirements of this section.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 67175, Dec. 19, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 450.320  Metropolitan transportation planning process: Relation 
to management systems.

    (a) Within all metropolitan areas, congestion, public 
transportation, and intermodal management systems, to the extent 
appropriate, shall be part of the metropolitan transportation planning 
process required under the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 134 and 49 U.S.C. 
5303-5305.
    (b) In TMAs designated as nonattainment for ozone or carbon 
monoxide, Federal funds may not be programmed for any project that will 
result in a significant increase in carrying capacity for single 
occupant vehicles (a new general purpose highway on a new location or 
adding general purpose lanes, with the exception of safety improvements 
or the elimination of bottlenecks) unless the project results from a 
congestion management system (CMS) meeting the requirements of 23 CFR 
part 500. Such projects shall incorporate all reasonably available 
strategies to manage the SOV facility effectively (or to facilitate its 
management in the future). Other travel demand reduction and operational 
management strategies, as appropriate for the corridor, but not 
appropriate for incorporation into the SOV facility itself, shall be 
committed to by the State and the MPO for implementation in a timely 
manner, but no later than the completion date for the SOV project. 
Projects that had advanced beyond the NEPA stage prior to April 6, 1992, 
and which are actively advancing to implementation, e.g., right-of-way 
acquisition has been approved, shall be deemed programmed and not 
subject to this provision.
    (c) In TMAs, the planning process must include the development of a 
CMS that provides for effective management of new and existing 
transportation facilities through the use of travel demand reduction and 
operational management strategies and meets the requirements of 23 CFR 
part 500.
    (d) The effectiveness of the management systems in enhancing 
transportation investment decisions and improving the overall efficiency 
of the metropolitan area's transportation systems and facilities shall 
be evaluated periodically, preferably as part of the metropolitan 
planning process.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 67175, Dec. 19, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 450.322  Metropolitan transportation planning process: Transportation 
plan.

    (a) The metropolitan transportation planning process shall include 
the development of a transportation plan addressing at least a twenty-
year planning horizon. The plan shall include both long-range and short-
range strategies/actions that lead to the development of an integrated 
intermodal

[[Page 109]]

transportation system that facilitates the efficient movement of people 
and goods. The transportation plan shall be reviewed and updated at 
least triennially in nonattainment and maintenance areas and at least 
every five years in attainment areas to conform its validity and 
consistency with current and forecasted transportation and land use 
conditions and trends and to extend the forecast period, except that the 
transportation plan for the New York Metropolitan Transportation Council 
that was reviewed and updated on September 30, 1999, shall be reviewed 
and updated no later than September 30, 2005. The transportation plan 
must be approved by the MPO.
    (b) In addition, the plan shall:
    (1) Identify the projected transportation demand of persons and 
goods in the metropolitan planning area over the period of the plan;
    (2) Identify adopted congestion management strategies including, as 
appropriate, traffic operations, ridesharing, pedestrian and bicycle 
facilities, alternative work schedules, freight movement options, high 
occupancy vehicle treatments, telecommuting, and public transportation 
improvements (including regulatory, pricing, management, and operational 
options), that demonstrate a systematic approach in addressing current 
and future transportation demand;
    (3) Identify pedestrian walkway and bicycle transportation 
facilities in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 217(g);
    (4) Reflect the consideration given to the results of the management 
systems, including in TMAs that are nonattainment areas for carbon 
monoxide and ozone, identification of SOV projects that result from a 
congestion management system that meets the requirements of 23 CFR part 
500;
    (5) Assess capital investment and other measures necessary to 
preserve the existing transportation system (including requirements for 
operational improvements, resurfacing, restoration, and rehabilitation 
of existing and future major roadways, as well as operations, 
maintenance, modernization, and rehabilitation of existing and future 
transit facilities) and make the most efficient use of existing 
transportation facilities to relieve vehicular congestion and enhance 
the mobility of people and goods;
    (6) Include design concept and scope descriptions of all existing 
and proposed transportation facilities in sufficient detail, regardless 
of the source of funding, in nonattainment and maintenance areas to 
permit conformity determinations under the U.S. EPA conformity 
regulations at 40 CFR part 51. In all areas, all proposed improvements 
shall be described in sufficient detail to develop cost estimates;
    (7) Reflect a multimodal evaluation of the transportation, 
socioeconomic, environmental, and financial impact of the overall plan, 
including all major transportation investments in accordance with Sec. 
450.318;
    (8) For major transportation investments for which analyses are not 
complete, indicate that the design concept and scope (mode and 
alignment) have not been fully determined and will require further 
analysis. The plan shall identify such study corridors and subareas and 
may stipulate either a set of assumptions (assumed alternatives) 
concerning the proposed improvements or a no-build condition pending the 
completion of a corridor or subarea level analysis under Sec. 450.318. 
In nonattainment and maintenance areas, the set of assumed alternatives 
shall be in sufficient detail to permit plan conformity determinations 
under the U.S. EPA conformity regulations (40 CFR part 51);
    (9) Reflect, to the extent that they exist, consideration of: the 
area's comprehensive long-range land use plan and metropolitan 
development objectives; national, State, and local housing goals and 
strategies, community development and employment plans and strategies, 
and environmental resource plans; local, State, and national goals and 
objectives such as linking low income households with employment 
opportunities; and the area's overall social, economic, environmental, 
and energy conservation goals and objectives;
    (10) Indicate, as appropriate, proposed transportation enhancement 
activities as defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a); and

[[Page 110]]

    (11) Include a financial plan that demonstrates the consistency of 
proposed transportation investments with already available and projected 
sources of revenue. The financial plan shall compare the estimated 
revenue from existing and proposed funding sources that can reasonably 
be expected to be available for transportation uses, and the estimated 
costs of constructing, maintaining and operating the total (existing 
plus planned) transportation system over the period of the plan. The 
estimated revenue by existing revenue source (local, State, and Federal 
and private) available for transportation projects shall be determined 
and any shortfalls identified. Proposed new revenues and/or revenue 
sources to cover shortfalls shall be identified, including strategies 
for ensuring their availability for proposed investments. Existing and 
proposed revenues shall cover all forecasted capital, operating, and 
maintenance costs. All cost and revenue projections shall be based on 
the data reflecting the existing situation and historical trends. For 
nonattainment and maintenance areas, the financial plan shall address 
the specific financial strategies required to ensure the implementation 
of projects and programs to reach air quality compliance.
    (c) There must be adequate opportunity for public official 
(including elected officials) and citizen involvement in the development 
of the transportation plan before it is approved by the MPO, in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 450.316(b)(1). Such procedures 
shall include opportunities for interested parties (including citizens, 
affected public agencies, representatives of transportation agency 
employees, and private providers of transportation) to be involved in 
the early stages of the plan development/update process. The procedures 
shall include publication of the proposed plan or other methods to make 
it readily available for public review and comment and, in nonattainment 
TMAs, an opportunity for at least one formal public meeting annually to 
review planning assumptions and the plan development process with 
interested parties and the general public. The procedures also shall 
include publication of the approved plan or other methods to make it 
readily available for information purposes.
    (d) In nonattainment and maintenance areas for transportation 
related pollutants, the FHWA and the FTA, as well as the MPO, must make 
a conformity determination on any new/revised plan in accordance with 
the Clean Air Act and the EPA conformity regulations (40 CFR part 51).
    (e) Although transportation plans do not need to be approved by the 
FHWA or the FTA, copies of any new/revised plans must be provided to 
each agency.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 67175, Dec. 19, 1996; 
67 FR 62373, Oct. 7, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 450.324  Transportation improvement program: General.

    (a) The metropolitan transportation planning process shall include 
development of a transportation improvement program (TIP) for the 
metropolitan planning area by the MPO in cooperation with the State and 
public transit operators.
    (b) The TIP must be updated at least every two years and approved by 
the MPO and the Governor. The frequency and cycle for updating the TIP 
must be compatible with the STIP development and approval process. Since 
the TIP becomes part of the STIP, the TIP lapses when the FHWA and FTA 
approval for the STIP lapses. In the case of extenuating circumstances, 
FHWA and FTA will consider and take appropriate action on requests to 
extend the STIP approval period for all or part of the STIP in 
accordance with Sec. 450.220(d). Although metropolitan TIPs, unlike 
statewide TIPs, do not need to be approved by the FHWA or the FTA, 
copies of any new or amended TIPs must be provided to each agency. 
Additionally, in nonattainment and maintenance areas for transportation 
related pollutants, the FHWA and the FTA, as well as the MPO, must make 
a conformity determination on any new or amended TIPs (unless the 
amendment consists entirely of exempt projects) in accordance with the 
Clean Air Act requirements and the EPA conformity regulations (40 CFR 
part 51).

[[Page 111]]

    (c) There must be reasonable opportunity for public comment in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 450.316(b)(1) and, in 
nonattainment TMAs, an opportunity for at least one formal public 
meeting during the TIP development process. This public meeting may be 
combined with the public meeting required under Sec. 450.322(c). The 
proposed TIP shall be published or otherwise made readily available for 
review and comment. Similarly, the approved TIP shall be published or 
otherwise made readily available for information purposes.
    (d) The TIP shall cover a period of not less than 3 years, but may 
cover a longer period if it identifies priorities and financial 
information for the additional years. The TIP must include a priority 
list of projects to be carried out in the first three years. As a 
minimum, the priority list shall group the projects that are to be 
undertaken in each of the years, i.e., year 1, year 2, year 3. In 
nonattainment and maintenance areas, the TIP shall give priority to 
eligible TCMs identified in the approved SIP in accordance with the U.S. 
EPA conformity regulation (40 CFR part 51) and shall provide for their 
timely implementation.
    (e) The TIP shall be financially constrained by year and include a 
financial plan that demonstrates which projects can be implemented using 
current revenue sources and which projects are to be implemented using 
proposed revenue sources (while the existing transportation system is 
being adequately operated and maintained). The financial plan shall be 
developed by the MPO in cooperation with the State and the transit 
operator. The State and the transit operator must provide MPOs with 
estimates of available Federal and State funds which the MPOs shall 
utilize in developing financial plans. It is expected that the State 
would develop this information as part of the STIP development process 
and that the estimates would be refined through this process. Only 
projects for which construction and operating funds can reasonably be 
expected to be available may be included. In the case of new funding 
sources, strategies for ensuring their availability shall be identified. 
In developing the financial analysis, the MPO shall take into account 
all projects and strategies funded under title 23, U.S.C., and the 
Federal Transit Act, other Federal funds, local sources, State 
assistance, and private participation. In nonattainment and maintenance 
areas, projects included for the first two years of the current TIP 
shall be limited to those for which funds are available or committed.
    (f) The TIP shall include:
    (1) All transportation projects, or identified phases of a project, 
(including pedestrian walkways, bicycle transportation facilities and 
transportation enhancement projects) within the metropolitan planning 
area proposed for funding under title 23, U.S.C., (including Federal 
Lands Highway projects) and the Federal Transit Act, excluding safety 
projects funded under 23 U.S.C. 402, emergency relief projects (except 
those involving substantial functional, locational and capacity 
changes), and planning and research activities (except those funded with 
NHS, STP, and/or MA funds). Planning and research activities funded with 
NHS, STP and/or MA funds, other than those used for major investment 
studies, may be excluded from the TIP by agreement of the State and the 
MPO;
    (2) Only projects that are consistent with the transportation plan;
    (3) All regionally significant transportation projects for which an 
FHWA or the FTA approval is required whether or not the projects are to 
be funded with title 23, U.S.C., or Federal Transit Act funds, e.g., 
addition of an interchange to the Interstate System with State, local, 
and/or private funds, demonstration projects not funded under title 23, 
U.S.C., or the Federal Transit Act, etc.;
    (4) For informational purposes and air quality analysis in 
nonattainment and maintenance areas, all regionally significant 
transportation projects proposed to be funded with Federal funds, 
including intermodal facilities, not covered in paragraphs (f)(1) or 
(f)(3) of this section; and
    (5) For informational purposes and air quality analysis in 
nonattainment and maintenance areas, all regionally significant projects 
to be funded with non-Federal funds.

[[Page 112]]

    (g) With respect to each project under paragraph (f) of this section 
the TIP shall include:
    (1) Sufficient descriptive material (i.e., type of work, termini, 
length, etc.) to identify the project or phase;
    (2) Estimated total cost;
    (3) The amount of Federal funds proposed to be obligated during each 
program year;
    (4) Proposed source of Federal and non-Federal funds;
    (5) Identification of the recipient/subrecipient and State and local 
agencies responsible for carrying out the project;
    (6) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, identification of those 
projects which are identified as TCMs in the applicable SIP; and
    (7) In areas with Americans with Disabilities Act required 
Paratransit and key station plans, identification of those projects 
which will implement the plans.
    (h) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, projects included shall 
be specified in sufficient detail (design concept and scope) to permit 
air quality analysis in accordance with the U.S. EPA conformity 
requirements (40 CFR part 51).
    (i) Projects proposed for FHWA and/or FTA funding that are not 
considered by the State and MPO to be of appropriate scale for 
individual identification in a given program year may be grouped by 
function, geographic area, and work type using applicable 
classifications under 23 CFR 771.117 (c) and (d). In nonattainment and 
maintenance areas, classifications must be consistent with the exempt 
project classifications contained in the U.S. EPA conformity 
requirements (40 CFR part 51).
    (j) Projects utilizing Federal funds that have been allocated to the 
area pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 133(d)(3)(E) shall be identified.
    (k) The total Federal share of projects included in the TIP proposed 
for funding under section 9 of the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 
1607a) may not exceed section 9 authorized funding levels available to 
the area for the program year.
    (l) Procedures or agreements that distribute suballocated Surface 
Transportation Program or section 9 funds to individual jurisdictions or 
modes within the metropolitan area by predetermined percentages or 
formulas are inconsistent with the legislative provisions that require 
MPOs in cooperation with the State and transit operators to develop a 
prioritized and financially constrained TIP and shall not be used unless 
they can be clearly shown to be based on considerations required to be 
addressed as part of the planning process.
    (m) For the purpose of including Federal Transit Act section 3 
funded projects in a TIP the following approach shall be followed:
    (1) The total Federal share of projects included in the first year 
of the TIP shall not exceed levels of funding committed to the area; and
    (2) The total Federal share of projects included in the second, 
third and/or subsequent years of the TIP may not exceed levels of 
funding committed, or reasonably expected to be available, to the area.
    (n) As a management tool for monitoring progress in implementing the 
transportation plan, the TIP shall:
    (1) Identify the criteria and process for prioritizing 
implementation of transportation plan elements (including intermodal 
trade-offs) for inclusion in the TIP and any changes in priorities from 
previous TIPs;
    (2) List major projects from the previous TIP that were implemented 
and identify any significant delays in the planned implementation of 
major projects;
    (3) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, describe the progress in 
implementing any required TCMs, including the reasons for any 
significant delays in the planned implementation and strategies for 
ensuring their advancement at the earliest possible time; and
    (4) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, include a list of all 
projects found to conform in a previous TIP and are now part of the base 
case for the purpose of air quality conformity analyses. Projects shall 
be included in this list until construction or acquisition has been 
fully authorized, except when a three-year period has

[[Page 113]]

elapsed subsequent to the NEPA approval without any major action taking 
place to advance the project.
    (o) In order to maintain or establish operations, in the absence of 
an approved metropolitan TIP, the FTA and/or the FHWA Administrators, as 
appropriate, may approve operating assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 450.326  Transportation improvement program: Modification.

    The TIP may be modified at any time consistent with the procedures 
established in this part for its development and approval. In 
nonattainment or maintenance areas for transportation related pollutants 
if the TIP is amended by adding or deleting projects which contribute to 
and/or reduce transportation related emissions or replaced with a new 
TIP, new conformity determinations by the MPO and the FHWA and the FTA 
will be necessary. Public involvement procedures consistent with Sec. 
450.316(b)(1) shall be utilized in amending the TIP, except that these 
procedures are not required for TIP amendments that only involve 
projects of the type covered in Sec. 450.324(i).


<R05>
Sec. 450.328  Transportation improvement program: Relationship to 
statewide TIP.

    (a) After approval by the MPO and the Governor, the TIP shall be 
included without modification, directly or by reference, in the STIP 
program required under 23 U.S.C. 135 and consistent with Sec. 450.220, 
except that in nonattainment and maintenance areas, a conformity finding 
by the FHWA and the FTA must be made before it is included in the STIP. 
After approval by the MPO and the Governor, a copy shall be provided to 
the FHWA and the FTA.
    (b) The State shall notify the appropriate MPO and Federal Lands 
Highways Program agencies, e.g., Bureau of Indian Affairs and/or 
National Park Service, when a TIP including projects under the 
jurisdiction of these agencies has been included in the STIP.


<R05>
Sec. 450.330  Transportation improvement program: Action required by 
FHWA/FTA.

    (a) The FHWA and the FTA must jointly find that each metropolitan 
TIP is based on a continuing, comprehensive transportation process 
carried on cooperatively by the States, MPOs and transit operators in 
accordance with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 134 and section 8 of the 
Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1607). This finding shall be based 
on the self-certification statement submitted by the State and MPO under 
Sec. 450.334 and upon other reviews as deemed necessary by the FHWA and 
the FTA.
    (b) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, the FHWA and the FTA 
must also jointly find that the metropolitan TIP conforms with the 
adopted SIP and that priority has been given to the timely 
implementation of transportation control measures contained in the SIP 
in accordance with 40 CFR part 51. As part of their review in 
nonattainment areas requiring TCMs, the FHWA and the FTA will 
specifically consider any comments relating to the financial plans for 
the plan and TIP contained in the summary of significant comments 
required under Sec. 450.316(b). If the TIP is found to be in 
nonconformance with the SIP, the TIP shall be returned to the Governor 
and the MPO with the joint finding. If the TIP is found to conform with 
the SIP, the Governor/MPO shall be notified of the joint finding. After 
the FHWA and the FTA find the TIP to be in conformance, the TIP shall be 
incorporated, without modification, into the STIP, directly or by 
reference.


<R05>
Sec. 450.332  Project selection for implementation.

    (a) In areas not designated as TMAs and when Sec. 450.332(c) does 
not apply, projects to be implemented using title 23 funds other than 
Federal lands projects or Federal Transit Act funds shall be selected by 
the State and/or the transit operator, in cooperation with the MPO from 
the approved metropolitan TIP. Federal Lands Highways program projects 
shall be selected in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 204.
    (b) In areas designated as TMAs where Sec. 450.332(c) does not 
apply, all

[[Page 114]]

title 23 and Federal Transit Act funded projects, except projects on the 
NHS and projects funded under the bridge, interstate maintenance, and 
Federal Lands Highways programs, shall be selected by the MPO in 
consultation with the State and transit operator from the approved 
metropolitan TIP and in accordance with the priorities in the approved 
metropolitan TIP. Projects on the NHS, and projects funded under the 
bridge and Interstate maintenance programs shall be selected by the 
State in cooperation with the MPO, from the approved metropolitan TIP. 
Federal Lands Highway Program projects shall be selected in accordance 
with 23 U.S.C. 204.
    (c) Once a TIP that meets the requirements of Sec. 450.324 has been 
developed and approved, the first year of the TIP shall constitute an 
``agreed to'' list of projects for project selection purposes and no 
further project selection action is required for the implementing agency 
to proceed with projects, except where the appropriated Federal funds 
available to the metropolitan planning area are significantly less than 
the authorized amounts. In this case, a revised ``agreed to'' list of 
projects shall be jointly developed by the MPO, State, and the transit 
operator if requested by the MPO, State, or the transit operator. If the 
State or transit operator wishes to proceed with a project in the second 
or third year of the TIP, the specific project selection procedures 
stated in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section must be used unless the 
MPO, State, and transit operator jointly develop expedited project 
selection procedures to provide for the advancement of projects from the 
second or third year of the TIP.
    (d) Projects not included in the Federally approved STIP will not be 
eligible for funding with title 23, U.S.C., or Federal Transit Act 
funds.
    (e) In nonattainment and maintenance areas, priority will be given 
to the timely implementation of TCMs contained in the applicable SIP in 
accordance with the U.S. EPA conformity regulations at 40 CFR part 51.


<R05>
Sec. 450.334  Metropolitan transportation planning process: Certification.

    (a) The State and the MPO shall annually certify to the FHWA and the 
FTA that the planning process is addressing the major issues facing the 
area and is being conducted in accordance with all applicable 
requirements of:
    (1) Section 134 of title 23, U.S.C., section 8 of the Federal 
Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1607) and this part;
    (2) Sections 174 and 176 (c) and (d) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
7504, 7506 (c) and (d));
    (3) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Title VI 
assurance executed by each State under 23 U.S.C. 324 and 29 U.S.C. 794;
    (4) Section 1003(b) of the Intermodal Surface Transportation 
Efficiency Act of 1991 (Pub. L. 102-240) regarding the involvement of 
disadvantaged business enterprises in the FHWA and the FTA funded 
planning projects (sec. 105(f), Pub. L. 97-424, 96 Stat. 2100; 49 CFR 
part 23); and
    (5) The provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
(Pub. L. 101-336, 104 Stat. 327, as amended) and U.S. DOT regulations 
``Transportation for Individuals with Disabilities'' (49 CFR parts 27, 
37, and 38).
    (b) The FHWA and the FTA jointly will review and evaluate the 
transportation planning process for each TMA (as appropriate but no less 
than once every three years) to determine if the process meets the 
requirements of this subpart.
    (c) In TMAs that are nonattainment or maintenance areas for 
transportation related pollutants, the FHWA and the FTA will also review 
and evaluate the transportation planning process to assure that the MPO 
has an adequate process to ensure conformity of plans and programs in 
accordance with procedures contained in 40 CFR part 51.
    (d) Upon the review and evaluation conducted under paragraphs (b) 
and (c) of this section, if the FHWA and the FTA jointly determine that 
the transportation planning process in a TMA meets or substantially 
meets the requirements of this part, they will take one of the following 
actions, as appropriate:

[[Page 115]]

    (1) Jointly certify the transportation planning process;
    (2) Jointly certify the transportation planning process subject to 
certain specified corrective actions being taken; or
    (3) Jointly certify the planning process as the basis for approval 
of only those categories of programs or projects that the Administrators 
may jointly determine and subject to certain specified corrective 
actions being taken.
    (e) A certification action under this section will remain in effect 
for three years unless a new certification determination is made sooner.
    (f) If, upon the review and evaluation conducted under paragraph (b) 
or (c) of this section, the FHWA and the FTA jointly determine that the 
transportation planning process in a TMA does not substantially meet the 
requirements, they may take the following action as appropriate, if 
after September 30, 1993, the transportation planning process is not 
certified:
    (1) Withhold in whole or in part the apportionment attributed to the 
relevant metropolitan planning area under 23 U.S.C. 133(d)(3), capital 
funds apportioned under section 9 of the Federal Transit Act, and 
section 3 funds under the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. 1607(a)); or
    (2) Withhold approval of all or certain categories of projects.
    (g) If a transportation planning process remains uncertified for 
more than two consecutive years after September 30, 1994, 20 percent of 
the apportionment attributed to the metropolitan planning area under 23 
U.S.C. 133(d)(3) and capital funds apportioned under the formula program 
of section 9 of the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1607a) will be 
withheld.
    (h) The State and the MPO shall be notified of the actions taken 
under paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section. Upon full, joint 
certification by the FHWA and the FTA, all funds withheld will be 
restored to the metropolitan area, unless they have lapsed.


<R05>
Sec. 450.336  Phase-in of new requirements.

    (a) Except for reflecting the consideration given the results of the 
management systems, the planning process and plans in nonattainment 
areas requiring TCMs shall comply, to the extent possible, with the 
requirements of this subpart by October 1, 1994. All other metropolitan 
areas shall comply to the extent possible with the requirements of this 
subpart by December 18, 1994. Where time does not permit a quantitative 
analysis of certain factors, a qualitative analysis of those factors 
will be acceptable. If a forecast period of less than twenty years is 
acceptable for SIP development and air quality conformity purposes, that 
same time period will be acceptable for transportation planning. The 
initial plan update shall be financially feasible, taking into account 
capital costs and the funds reasonably available for capital 
improvements, as well as addressing to the extent possible the costs of 
and revenues available for operating and maintenance of the 
transportation system. Where TCMs are required, the plan update process 
shall be coordinated with the process for developing TCMs. The planning 
process for subsequent updates of the plan and the updated plans shall 
comply with the requirements of this subpart. Plan updates performed in 
all areas must consider the results of the management systems (specified 
in 23 CFR part 500) as they become available. The plan shall reflect 
this consideration.
    (b)(1) During the period prior to the full implementation of the CMS 
in a TMA, the MPO in cooperation with the State, the public transit 
operators, and other operators of major modes of transportation shall 
identify the location of the most serious congestion problems in the 
metropolitan area and proceed with the development of actions to address 
these problems.
    (2) Prior to the full implementation of a CMS, an adequate interim 
CMS in a TMA designated as nonattainment for carbon monoxide and/or 
ozone shall, as a minimum, include a process that results in an 
appropriate analysis of all reasonably available (including multimodal) 
travel demand reduction and operational management strategies for the 
corridor in which a project that will result in a significant increase 
in SOV capacity is proposed. This analysis must demonstrate how

[[Page 116]]

far such strategies can go in eliminating the need for additional SOV 
capacity in the corridor. If the analysis demonstrates that additional 
SOV capacity is warranted, then all reasonable strategies to manage the 
facility effectively (or to facilitate its management in the future) 
shall be incorporated into the proposed facility. Other travel demand 
reduction and operational management strategies appropriate for the 
corridor, but not appropriate for incorporation into the SOV facility 
itself must be committed to by the State and the MPO for implementation 
in a timely manner but no later than completion of construction of the 
SOV facility. If the area does not already have a traffic management and 
carpool/vanpool program, the establishment of such programs must be a 
part of the commitment.
    (3) In TMAs that are nonattainment for carbon monoxide and/or ozone, 
the MPO, a State and/or transit operator may not advance a project 
utilizing Federal funds that provides a significant capacity increase 
for SOVs (adding general purpose lanes, with the exception of safety 
improvements or the elimination of bottlenecks, or a new highway on a 
new location) beyond the NEPA process unless an interim CMS is in place 
that meets the criteria in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section 
and the project results from this interim CMS.
    (4) Projects that are part of or consistent with a State mandated 
congestion management system/plan are not subject to the requirements in 
paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
    (5) Projects advanced beyond the NEPA process as of April 6, 1992 
and which are being implemented, e.g., right-of-way acquisition has been 
approved, will be deemed to be programmed and not subject to this 
requirement.

[58 FR 58064, Oct. 28, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 67175, Dec. 19, 1996]


<R03>
PART 460_PUBLIC ROAD MILEAGE FOR APPORTIONMENT OF HIGHWAY SAFETY 
FUNDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
460.1 Purpose.
460.2 Definitions.
460.3 Procedures.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 315, 402(c); 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 40 FR 44322, Sept. 26, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 460.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe the policies and procedures 
followed in identifying and reporting public road mileage for 
utilization in the statutory formula for the apportionment of highway 
safety funds under 23 U.S.C. 402(c).


<R05>
Sec. 460.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Public road means any road under the jurisdiction of and 
maintained by a public authority and open to public travel.
    (b) Public authority means a Federal, State, county, town, or 
township, Indian tribe, municipal or other local government or 
instrumentality thereof, with authority to finance, build, operate or 
maintain toll or toll-free highway facilities.
    (c) Open to public travel means that the road section is available, 
except during scheduled periods, extreme weather or emergency 
conditions, passable by four-wheel standard passenger cars, and open to 
the general public for use without restrictive gates, prohibitive signs, 
or regulation other than restrictions based on size, weight, or class of 
registration. Toll plazas of public toll roads are not considered 
restrictive gates.
    (d) Maintenance means the preservation of the entire highway, 
including surfaces, shoulders, roadsides, structures, and such traffic 
control devices as are necessary for its safe and efficient utilization.
    (e) State means any one of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa. For the 
purpose of the application of 23 U.S.C. 402 on Indian reservations, 
State and Governor of a State include the Secretary of the Interior.


<R05>
Sec. 460.3  Procedures.

    (a) General requirements. 23 U.S.C. 402(c) provides that funds 
authorized to

[[Page 117]]

carry out section 402 shall be apportioned according to a formula based 
on population and public road mileage of each State. Public road mileage 
shall be determined as of the end of the calendar year preceding the 
year in which the funds are apportioned and shall be certified to by the 
Governor of the State or his designee and subject to the approval of the 
Federal Highway Administrator.
    (b) State public road mileage. Each State must annually submit a 
certification of public road mileage within the State to the Federal 
Highway Administration Division Administrator by the date specified by 
the Division Administrator. Public road mileage on Indian reservations 
within the State shall be identified and included in the State mileage 
and in computing the State's apportionment.
    (c) Indian reservation public road mileage. The Secretary of the 
Interior or his designee will submit a certification of public road 
mileage within Indian reservations to the Federal Highway Administrator 
by June 1 of each year.
    (d) Action by the Federal Highway Administrator. (1) The 
certification of Indian reservation public road mileage, and the State 
certifications of public road mileage together with comments thereon, 
will be reviewed by the Federal Highway Administrator. He will make a 
final determination of the public road mileage to be used as the basis 
for apportionment of funds under 23 U.S.C. 402(c). In any instance in 
which the Administrator's final determination differs from the public 
road mileage certified by a State or the Secretary of the Interior, the 
Administrator will advise the State or the Secretary of the Interior of 
his final determination and the reasons therefor.
    (2) If a State fails to submit a certification of public road 
mileage as required by this part, the Federal Highway Administrator may 
make a determination of the State's public road mileage for the purpose 
of apportioning funds under 23 U.S.C. 402(c). The State's public road 
mileage determined by the Administrator under this subparagraph may not 
exceed 90 percent of the State's public road mileage utilized in 
determining the most recent apportionment of funds under 23 U.S.C. 
402(c).


<R03>
PART 470_HIGHWAY SYSTEMS--Table of Contents




                  Subpart A_Federal-aid Highway Systems

Sec.
470.101 Purpose.
470.103 Definitions.
470.105 Urban area boundaries and highway functional classification.
470.107 Federal-aid highway systems.
470.109 System procedures--General.
470.111 Interstate System procedures.
470.113 National Highway System procedures.
470.115 Approval authority.

Appendix A to Subpart A of Part 470--Guidance Criteria for Evaluating 
          Requests for Interstate System Designations under 23 U.S.C. 
          139 (a) and (b).
Appendix B to Subpart A of Part 470--Designation of Segments of Section 
          332(a)(2) Corridors as Parts of the Interstate System.
Appendix C to Subpart A of Part 470--Policy for the Signing and 
          Numbering of Future Interstate Corridors Designated by Section 
          332 of the NHS Designation Act of 1995 or Designated Under 23 
          U.S.C. 139(b).
Appendix D to Subpart A of Part 470--Guidance Criteria for Evaluating 
          Requests for Modifications to the National Highway System.

Subparts B-C [Reserved]

    Authority: Authority: 23 U.S.C. 103(b)(2), 103 (e)(1), (e)(2), and 
(e)(3), 103(f), 134, 135, and 315; and 49 CFR 1.48(b)(2).

    Source: 40 FR 42344, Sept. 12, 1975, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated at 41 FR 51396, Nov. 22, 1976.


<R04>
                  Subpart A_Federal-aid Highway Systems

    Source: 62 FR 33355, June 19, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 470.101  Purpose.

    This part sets forth policies and procedures relating to the 
identification of Federal-aid highways, the functional classification of 
roads and streets, the designation of urban area boundaries, and the 
designation of routes on the Federal-aid highway systems.

[[Page 118]]


<R05>
Sec. 470.103  Definitions.

    Except as otherwise provided in this part, terms defined in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) are used in this part as so defined.
    Consultation means that one party confers with another identified 
party and, prior to taking action(s), considers that party's views.
    Cooperation means that the parties involved in carrying out the 
planning, programming and management systems processes work together to 
achieve a common goal or objective.
    Coordination means the comparison of the transportation plans, 
programs, and schedules of one agency with related plans, programs, and 
schedules of other agencies or entities with legal standing, and 
adjustment of plans, programs, and schedules to achieve general 
consistency.
    Federal-aid highway systems means the National Highway System and 
the Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense 
Highways (the ``Interstate System'').
    Federal-aid highways means highways on the Federal-aid highway 
systems and all other public roads not classified as local roads or 
rural minor collectors.
    Governor means the chief executive of the State and includes the 
Mayor of the District of Columbia.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decisionmaking for the metropolitan planning 
area in which the metropolitan transportation planning process required 
by 23 U.S.C. 134 and 49 U.S.C. 5303-5305 must be carried out.
    Responsible local officials means--
    (1) In urbanized areas, principal elected officials of general 
purpose local governments acting through the Metropolitan Planning 
Organization designated by the Governor, or
    (2) In rural areas and urban areas not within any urbanized area, 
principal elected officials of general purpose local governments.
    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, or, for purposes of functional classification of highways, 
the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, or the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Marianas.


<R05>
Sec. 470.105  Urban area boundaries and highway functional classification.

    (a) Urban area boundaries. Routes on the Federal-aid highway systems 
may be designated in both rural and urban areas. Guidance for 
determining the boundaries of urbanized and nonurbanized urban areas is 
provided in the ``Federal-Aid Policy Guide,'' Chapter 4 [G 4063.0], 
dated December 9, 1991. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The ``Federal-aid Policy Guide'' is available for inspection and 
copying as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, Appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Highway Functional Classification. (1) The State transportation 
agency shall have the primary responsibility for developing and updating 
a statewide highway functional classification in rural and urban areas 
to determine functional usage of the existing roads and streets. 
Guidance criteria and procedures are provided in the FHWA publication 
``Highway Functional Classification--Concepts, Criteria and 
Procedures.'' \2\ The State shall cooperate with responsible local 
officials, or appropriate Federal agency in the case of areas under 
Federal jurisdiction, in developing and updating the functional 
classification.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ This publication, revised in March 1989, is available on request 
to the FHWA, Office of Environment and Planning, HEP-10, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) The results of the functional classification shall be mapped and 
submitted to the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) for approval and 
when approved shall serve as the official record for Federal-aid 
highways and the basis for designation of the National Highway System.


<R05>
Sec. 470.107  Federal-aid highway systems.

    (a) Interstate System. (1) The Dwight D. Eisenhower National System 
of Interstate and Defense Highways (Interstate System) shall consist of 
routes of highest importance to the Nation, built to the uniform 
geometric and construction standards of 23 U.S.C. 109(h), which connect, 
as directly as practicable, the principal metropolitan areas, cities, 
and industrial centers, including important routes into, through, and 
around urban areas, serve the national defense and, to the greatest 
extent possible, connect at suitable

[[Page 119]]

border points with routes of continental importance in Canada and 
Mexico.
    (2) The portion of the Interstate System designated under 23 U.S.C. 
103 (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) shall not exceed 69,230 kilometers 
(43,000 miles). Additional Interstate System segments are permitted 
under the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 139 (a) and (c) and section 
1105(e)(5)(A) of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 
1991 (ISTEA), Pub. L. 102-240, 105 Stat. 1914, as amended.
    (b) National Highway System. (1) The National Highway System shall 
consist of interconnected urban and rural principal arterials and 
highways (including toll facilities) which serve major population 
centers, international border crossings, ports, airports, public 
transportation facilities, other intermodal transportation facilities 
and other major travel destinations; meet national defense requirements; 
and serve interstate and interregional travel. All routes on the 
Interstate System are a part of the National Highway System.
    (2) The National Highway System shall not exceed 286,983 kilometers 
(178,250 miles).
    (3) The National Highway System shall include the Strategic Highway 
Corridor Network (STRAHNET) and its highway connectors to major military 
installations, as designated by the Administrator in consultation with 
appropriate Federal agencies and the States. The STRAHNET includes 
highways which are important to the United States strategic defense 
policy and which provide defense access, continuity, and emergency 
capabilities for the movement of personnel, materials, and equipment in 
both peace time and war time.
    (4) The National Highway System shall include all high priority 
corridors identified in section 1105(c) of the ISTEA.


<R05>
Sec. 470.109  System procedures--General.

    (a) The State transportation agency, in consultation with 
responsible local officials, shall have the responsibility for proposing 
to the Federal Highway Administration all official actions regarding the 
designation, or revision, of the Federal-aid highway systems.
    (b) The routes of the Federal-aid highway systems shall be proposed 
by coordinated action of the State transportation agencies where the 
routes involve State-line connections.
    (c) The designation of routes on the Federal-aid highway systems 
shall be in accordance with the planning process required, pursuant to 
the provisions at 23 U.S.C. 135, and, in urbanized areas, the provisions 
at 23 U.S.C. 134(a). The State shall cooperate with local and regional 
officials. In urbanized areas, the local officials shall act through the 
metropolitan planning organizations designated for such areas under 23 
U.S.C. 134.
    (d) In areas under Federal jurisdiction, the designation of routes 
on the Federal-aid highway systems shall be coordinated with the 
appropriate Federal agency.


<R05>
Sec. 470.111  Interstate System procedures.

    (a) Proposals for system actions on the Interstate System shall 
include a route description and a statement of justification. Proposals 
shall also include statements regarding coordination with adjoining 
States on State-line connections, with responsible local officials, and 
with officials of areas under Federal jurisdiction.
    (b) Proposals for Interstate or future Interstate designation under 
23 U.S.C. 139(a) or (b), as logical additions or connections, shall 
consider the criteria contained in appendix A of this subpart. For 
designation as a part of the Interstate system, 23 U.S.C. 139(a) 
requires that a highway meet all the standards of a highway on the 
Interstate System, be a logical addition or connection to the Interstate 
System, and have the affirmative recommendation of the State or States 
involved. For designation as a future part of the Interstate System, 23 
U.S.C. 139(b) requires that a highway be a logical addition or 
connection to the Interstate System, have the affirmative recommendation 
of the State or States involved, and have the written agreement of the 
State or States involved that such highway will be constructed to meet 
all the standards of a highway on the Interstate System within twelve

[[Page 120]]

years of the date of the agreement between the FHWA Administrator and 
the State or States involved. Such highways must also be on the National 
Highway System.
    (c) Proposals for Interstate designation under 23 U.S.C. 139(c) 
shall pertain only to Alaska or Puerto Rico. For designation as parts of 
the Interstate System, 23 U.S.C. 139(c) requires that highway segments 
be in States which have no Interstate System; be logical components to a 
system serving the State's principal cities, national defense needs and 
military installations, and traffic generated by rail, water, and air 
transportation modes; and have been constructed to the geometric and 
construction standards adequate for current and probable future traffic 
demands and the needs of the locality of the segment. Such highways must 
also be on the National Highway System.
    (d) Routes proposed for Interstate designation under section 
332(a)(2) of the NHS Designation Act of 1995 (NHS Act) shall be 
constructed to Interstate standards and connect to the Interstate 
System. Proposals shall consider the criteria contained in appendix B of 
this subpart.
    (e) Proposals for Interstate route numbering shall be submitted by 
the State transportation agency to the Route Numbering Committee of the 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
    (f) Signing of corridors federally designated as future Interstate 
routes can follow the criteria contained in appendix C of this subpart. 
No law, rule, regulation, map, document, or other record of the United 
States, or of any State or political subdivision thereof, shall refer to 
any highway under 23 U.S.C. 139, nor shall any such highway be signed or 
marked, as a highway on the Interstate System until such time as such 
highway is constructed to the geometric and construction standards for 
the Interstate System and has been designated as a part of the 
Interstate System.


<R05>
Sec. 470.113  National Highway System procedures.

    (a) Proposals for system actions on the National Highway System 
shall include a route description, a statement of justification, and 
statements of coordination with adjoining States on State-line 
connections, with responsible local officials, and with officials of 
areas under Federal jurisdiction.
    (b) Proposed modifications to the National Highway System shall 
enhance the national transportation characteristics of the National 
Highway System and shall follow the criteria listed in Sec. 470.107. 
Proposals shall also consider the criteria contained in appendix D of 
this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 470.115  Approval authority.

    (a) The Federal Highway Administrator will approve Federal-aid 
highway system actions involving the designation, or revision, of routes 
on the Interstate System, including route numbers, future Interstate 
routes, and routes on the National Highway System.
    (b) The Federal Highway Administrator will approve functional 
classification actions.

 Appendix A to Subpart A of Part 470--Guidance Criteria for Evaluating 
Requests for Interstate System Designations Under 23 U.S.C. 139 (a) and 
                                   (b)

    Section 139 (a) and (b), of title 23, U.S.C., permits States to 
request the designation of National Highway System routes as parts or 
future parts of the Interstate System. The FHWA Administrator may 
approve such a request if the route is a logical addition or connection 
to the Interstate System and has been, or will be, constructed to meet 
Interstate standards. The following are the general criteria to be used 
to evaluate 23 U.S.C. 139 requests for Interstate System designations.
    1. The proposed route should be of sufficient length to serve long-
distance Interstate travel, such as connecting routes between principal 
metropolitan cities or industrial centers important to national defense 
and economic development.
    2. The proposed route should not duplicate other Interstate routes. 
It should serve Interstate traffic movement not provided by another 
Interstate route.
    3. The proposed route should directly serve major highway traffic 
generators. The term ``major highway traffic generator'' means either an 
urbanized area with a population over 100,000 or a similar major 
concentrated land use activity that produces and attracts long-distance 
Interstate and statewide travel of persons and goods. Typical examples 
of

[[Page 121]]

similar major concentrated land use activities would include a principal 
industrial complex, government center, military installation, or 
transportation terminal.
    4. The proposed route should connect to the Interstate System at 
each end, with the exception of Interstate routes that connect with 
continental routes at an international border, or terminate in a ``major 
highway traffic generator'' that is not served by another Interstate 
route. In the latter case, the terminus of the Interstate route should 
connect to routes of the National Highway System that will adequately 
handle the traffic. The proposed route also must be functionally 
classified as a principal arterial and be a part of the National Highway 
System system.
    5. The proposed route must meet all the current geometric and safety 
standards criteria as set forth in 23 CFR part 625 for highways on the 
Interstate System, or a formal agreement to construct the route to such 
standards within 12 years must be executed between the State(s) and the 
Federal Highway Administration. Any proposed exceptions to the standards 
shall be approved at the time of designation.
    6. A route being proposed for designation under 23 U.S.C. 139(b) 
must have an approved final environmental document (including, if 
required, a 49 U.S.C. 303(c) [Section 4(f)] approval) covering the route 
and project action must be ready to proceed with design at the time of 
designation. Routes constructed to Interstate standards are not 
necessarily logical additions to the Interstate System unless they 
clearly meet all of the above criteria.

Appendix B to Subpart A of Part 470--Designation of Segments of Section 
          332(a)(2) Corridors as Parts of the Interstate System

    The following guidance is comparable to current procedures for 
Interstate System designation requests under 23 U.S.C. 139(a). All 
Interstate System additions must be approved by the Federal Highway 
Administrator. The provisions of section 332(a)(2) of the NHS Act have 
also been incorporated into the ISTEA as section 1105(e)(5)(A).
    1. The request must be submitted through the appropriate FHWA 
Division and Regional Offices to the Associate Administrator for Program 
Development (HEP-10). Comments and recommendations by the division and 
regional offices are requested.
    2. The State DOT secretary (or equivalent) must request that the 
route segment be added to the Interstate System. The exact location and 
termini must be specified. If the route segment involves more than one 
State, each affected State must submit a separate request.
    3. The request must provide information to support findings that the 
segment (a) is built to Interstate design standards and (b) connects to 
the existing Interstate System. The segment should be of sufficient 
length to provide substantial service to the travelling public.
    4. The request must also identify and justify any design exceptions 
for which approval is requested.
    5. Proposed Interstate route numbering for the segment must be 
submitted to FHWA and the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials Route Numbering

    Appendix C to Subpart A of Part 470--Policy for the Signing and 
 Numbering of Future Interstate Corridors Designated by Section 332 of 
  the NHS Designation Act of 1995 or Designated Under 23 U.S.C. 139(b)

                                 Policy

    State transportation agencies are permitted to erect informational 
Interstate signs along a federally designated future Interstate corridor 
only after the specific route location has been established for the 
route to be constructed to Interstate design standards.

                               Conditions

    1. The corridor must have been designated a future part of the 
Interstate System under section 332(a)(2) of the NHS Designation Act of 
1995 or 23 U.S.C. 139(b).
    2. The specific route location to appropriate termini must have 
received Federal Highway (FHWA) environmental clearance. Where FHWA 
environmental clearance is not required or Interstate standards have 
been met, the route location must have been publicly announced by the 
State.
    3. Numbering of future Interstate route segments must be coordinated 
with affected States and be approved by the American Association of 
State Highway and Transportation Officials and the FHWA at Headquarters. 
Short portions of a multistate corridor may require use of an interim 3-
digit number.
    4. The State shall coordinate the location and content of signing 
near the State line with the adjacent State.
    5. Signing and other identification of a future Interstate route 
segment must not indicate, nor imply, that the route is on the 
Interstate System.
    6. The FHWA Regional Office must confirm in advance that the above 
conditions have been met and approve the general locations of signs.

[[Page 122]]

                              Sign Details

    1. Signs may not be used to give directions and should be away from 
directional signs, particularly at interchanges.
    2. An Interstate shield may be located on a green informational sign 
of a few words. For example: Future Interstate Corridor or Future I-00 
Corridor.
    3. The Interstate shield may not include the word ``Interstate.''
    4. The FHWA Division Office must approve the signs as to design, 
wording, and detailed location.

 Appendix D to Subpart A of Part 470--Guidance Criteria for Evaluating 
        Requests for Modifications to the National Highway System

    Section 103(b), of title 23, U.S.C., allows the States to propose 
modifications to the National Highway System (NHS) and authorizes the 
Secretary to approve such modifications provided that they meet the 
criteria established for the NHS and enhance the characteristics of the 
NHS. In proposing modifications under 23 U.S.C. 103(b), the States must 
cooperate with local and regional officials. In urbanized areas, the 
local officials must act through the metropolitan planning organization 
(MPO) designated for such areas under 23 U.S.C. 134. The following 
guidance criteria should be used by the States to develop proposed 
modifications to the NHS.
    1. Proposed additions to the NHS should be included in either an 
adopted State or metropolitan transportation plan or program.
    2. Proposed additions should connect at each end with other routes 
on the NHS or serve a major traffic generator.
    3. Proposals should be developed in consultation with local and 
regional officials.
    4. Proposals to add routes to the NHS should include information on 
the type of traffic served (i.e., percent of trucks, average trip 
length, local, commuter, interregional, interstate) by the route, the 
population centers or major traffic generators served by the route, and 
how this service compares with existing NHS routes.
    5. Proposals should include information on existing and anticipated 
needs and any planned improvements to the route.
    6. Proposals should include information concerning the possible 
effects of adding or deleting a route to or from the NHS might have on 
other existing NHS routes that are in close proximity.
    7. Proposals to add routes to the NHS should include an assessment 
of whether modifications (adjustments or deletions) to existing NHS 
routes, which provide similar service, may be appropriate.
    8. Proposed modifications that might affect adjoining States should 
be developed in cooperation with those States.
    9. Proposed modifications consisting of connections to major 
intermodal facilities should be developed using the criteria set forth 
below. These criteria were used for identifying initial NHS connections 
to major intermodal terminals. The primary criteria are based on annual 
passenger volumes, annual freight volumes, or daily vehicular traffic on 
one or more principal routes that serve the intermodal facility. The 
secondary criteria include factors which underscore the importance of an 
intermodal facility within a specific State.

                            Primary Criteria

                      Commercial Aviation Airports

    1. Passengers--scheduled commercial service with more than 250,000 
annual enplanements.
    2. Cargo--100 trucks per day in each direction on the principal 
connecting route, or 100,000 tons per year arriving or departing by 
highway mode.

                                  Ports

    1. Terminals that handle more than 50,000 TEUs (a volumetric measure 
of containerized cargo which stands for twenty-foot equivalent units) 
per year, or other units measured that would convert to more than 100 
trucks per day in each direction. (Trucks are defined as large single-
unit trucks or combination vehicles handling freight.)
    2. Bulk commodity terminals that handle more than 500,000 tons per 
year by highway or 100 trucks per day in each direction on the principal 
connecting route. (If no individual terminal handles this amount of 
freight, but a cluster of terminals in close proximity to each other 
does, then the cluster of terminals could be considered in meeting the 
criteria. In such cases, the connecting route might terminate at a point 
where the traffic to several terminals begins to separate.)
    3. Passengers--terminals that handle more than 250,000 passengers 
per year or 1,000 passengers per day for at least 90 days during the 
year.

                               Truck/Rail

    1. 50,000 TEUs per year, or 100 trucks per day, in each direction on 
the principal connecting route, or other units measured that would 
convert to more than 100 trucks per day in each direction. (Trucks are 
defined as large single-unit trucks or combination vehicles carrying 
freight.)

                                Pipelines

    1. 100 trucks per day in each direction on the principal connecting 
route.

[[Page 123]]

                                 Amtrak

    1. 100,000 passengers per year (entrainments and detrainments). 
Joint Amtrak, intercity bus and public transit terminals should be 
considered based on the combined passenger volumes. Likewise, two or 
more separate facilities in close proximity should be considered based 
on combined passenger volumes.

                              Intercity Bus

    1. 100,000 passengers per year (boardings and deboardings).

                             Public Transit

    1. Stations with park and ride lots with more than 500 vehicle 
parking spaces, or 5,000 daily bus or rail passengers, with significant 
highway access (i.e., a high percentage of the passengers arrive by cars 
and buses using a route that connects to another NHS route), or a major 
hub terminal that provides for the transfer of passengers among several 
bus routes. (These hubs should have a significant number of buses using 
a principal route connecting with the NHS.)

                                 Ferries

    1. Interstate/international--1,000 passengers per day for at least 
90 days during the year. (A ferry which connects two terminals within 
the same metropolitan area should be considered as local, not 
interstate.)
    2. Local--see public transit criteria above.

                           Secondary Criteria

    Any of the following criteria could be used to justify an NHS 
connection to an intermodal terminal where there is a significant 
highway interface:
    1. Intermodal terminals that handle more than 20 percent of 
passenger or freight volumes by mode within a State;
    2. Intermodal terminals identified either in the Intermodal 
Management System or the State and metropolitan transportation plans as 
a major facility;
    3. Significant investment in, or expansion of, an intermodal 
terminal; or
    4. Connecting routes targeted by the State, MPO, or others for 
investment to address an existing, or anticipated, deficiency as a 
result of increased traffic.

                          Proximate Connections

    Intermodal terminals, identified under the secondary criteria noted 
above, may not have sufficient highway traffic volumes to justify an NHS 
connection to the terminal. States and MPOs should fully consider 
whether a direct connection should be identified for such terminals, or 
whether being in the proximity (2 to 3 miles) of an NHS route is 
sufficient.

Subparts B-C [Reserved]

[[Page 124]]


<R03>
          SUBCHAPTER F_TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT




<R03>
PART 500_MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING SYSTEMS--Table of Contents




                      Subpart A_Management systems

Sec.
500.101 Purpose.
500.102 Policy.
500.103 Definitions.
500.104 State option.
500.105 Requirements.
500.106 PMS.
500.107 BMS.
500.108 SMS.
500.109 CMS.
500.110 PTMS.
500.111 IMS.

                   Subpart B_Traffic Monitoring System

Sec.
500.201 Purpose.
500.202 TMS definitions.
500.203 TMS general requirements.
500.204 TMS components for highway traffic data.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 134, 135, 303 and 315; 49 U.S.C. 5303-5305; 23 
CFR 1.32; and 49 CFR 1.48 and 1.51.

    Source: 61 FR 67170, Dec. 19, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A_Management Systems


<R05>
Sec. 500.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to implement the requirements of 23 
U.S.C. 303(a) which directs the Secretary of Transportation (the 
Secretary) to issue regulations for State development, establishment, 
and implementation of systems for managing highway pavement of Federal-
aid highways (PMS), bridges on and off Federal-aid highways (BMS), 
highway safety (SMS), traffic congestion (CMS), public transportation 
facilities and equipment (PTMS), and intermodal transportation 
facilities and systems (IMS). This regulation also implements 23 U.S.C. 
303(b) which directs the Secretary to issue guidelines and requirements 
for State development, establishment, and implementation of a traffic 
monitoring system for highways and public transportation facilities and 
equipment (TMS).


<R05>
Sec. 500.102  Policy.

    (a) Federal, State, and local governments are under increasing 
pressure to balance their budgets and, at the same time, respond to 
public demands for quality services. Along with the need to invest in 
America's future, this leaves transportation agencies with the task of 
trying to manage current transportation systems as cost-effectively as 
possible to meet evolving, as well as backlog needs. The use of existing 
or new transportation management systems provides a framework for cost-
effective decision making that emphasizes enhanced service at reduced 
public and private life-cycle cost. The primary outcome of 
transportation management systems is improved system performance and 
safety. The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and the Federal 
Transit Administration (FTA) strongly encourage implementation of 
transportation management systems consistent with State, metropolitan 
planning organization, transit operator, or local government needs.
    (b) Whether the systems are developed under the provisions of this 
part or under a State's own procedures, the following categories of FHWA 
administered funds may be used for development, establishment, and 
implementation of any of the management systems and the traffic 
monitoring system: National highway system; surface transportation 
program; State planning and research and metropolitan planning funds 
(including the optional use of minimum allocation funds authorized under 
23 U.S.C. 157(c) and restoration funds authorized under Sec. 202(f) of 
the National Highway System Designation Act of 1995 (Pub.L. 104-59) for 
carrying out the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 307(c)(1) and 23 U.S.C. 
134(a)); congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program funds 
for those management systems that can be shown to contribute to the 
attainment of a national ambient air quality standard; and apportioned 
bridge funds for development

[[Page 125]]

and establishment of the bridge management system. The following 
categories of FTA administered funds may be used for development, 
establishment, and implementation of the CMS, PTMS, IMS, and TMS: 
Metropolitan planning; State planning and research, and formula transit 
funds.


<R05>
Sec. 500.103  Definitions.

    Unless otherwise specified in this part, the definitions in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) are applicable to this part. As used in this part:
    Federal-aid highways means those highways eligible for assistance 
under title 23, U.S.C., except those functionally classified as local or 
rural minor collectors.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decision making for a metropolitan planning 
area.
    National Highway System (NHS) means the system of highways 
designated and approved in accordance with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 
103(b).
    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.
    Transportation management area (TMA) means an urbanized area with a 
population over 200,000 (as determined by the latest decennial census) 
or other area when TMA designation is requested by the Governor and the 
MPO (or affected local officials), and officially designated by the 
Administrators of the FHWA and the FTA. The TMA designation applies to 
the entire metropolitan planning area(s).


<R05>
Sec. 500.104  State option.

    Except as specified in Sec. 500.105 (a) and (b), a State may elect 
at any time not to implement any one or more of the management systems 
required under 23 U.S.C. 303, in whole or in part.


<R05>
Sec. 500.105  Requirements.

    (a) The metropolitan transportation planning process (23 U.S.C. 134 
and 49 U.S.C. 5303-5005) in TMAs shall include a CMS that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 500.109 of this regulation.
    (b) States shall develop, establish, and implement a TMS that meets 
the requirements of subpart B of this regulation.
    (c) Any of the management systems that the State chooses to 
implement under 23 U.S.C. 303 and this regulation shall be developed in 
cooperation with MPOs in metropolitan areas, affected agencies receiving 
assistance under the Federal Transit Act (49 U.S.C., Chapter 53), and 
other agencies (including private owners and operators) that have 
responsibility for operation of the affected transportation systems or 
facilities.
    (d) The results (e.g., policies, programs, projects, etc.) of any of 
the management systems that a State chooses to develop under 23 U.S.C. 
303 and this regulation shall be considered in the development of 
metropolitan and statewide transportation plans and improvement programs 
and in making project selection decisions under title 23, U.S.C., and 
under the Federal Transit Act. Plans and programs adopted after 
September 30, 1997, shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement.


<R05>
Sec. 500.106  PMS.

    An effective PMS for Federal-aid highways is a systematic process 
that provides information for use in implementing cost-effective 
pavement reconstruction, rehabilitation, and preventative maintenance 
programs and that results in pavements designed to accommodate current 
and forecasted traffic in a safe, durable, and cost-effective manner. 
The PMS should be based on the ``AASHTO Guidelines for Pavement 
Management Systems.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ AASHTO Guidelines for Pavement Management Systems, July 1990, 
can be purchased from the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials, 444 N. Capitol Street, NW., Suite 249, 
Washington, D.C. 20001. Available for inspection as prescribed in 49 CFR 
part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 500.107  BMS.

    An effective BMS for bridges on and off Federal-aid highways that 
should be based on the ``AASHTO Guidelines for Bridge Management 
Systems'' \2\ and

[[Page 126]]

that supplies analyses and summaries of data, uses mathematical models 
to make forecasts and recommendations, and provides the means by which 
alternative policies and programs may be efficiently considered. An 
effective BMS should include, as a minimum, formal procedures for:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ AASHTO Guidelines for Bridge Management Systems, 1992, can be 
purchased from the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials, 444 N. Capitol Street, NW., Suite 249, 
Washington, D.C. 20001. Available for inspection as prescribed in 49 CFR 
part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (a) Collecting, processing, and updating data;
    (b) Predicting deterioration;
    (c) Identifying alternative actions;
    (d) Predicting costs;
    (e) Determining optimal policies;
    (f) Performing short- and long-term budget forecasting; and
    (g) Recommending programs and schedules for implementation within 
policy and budget constraints.


<R05>
Sec. 500.108  SMS.

    An SMS is a systematic process with the goal of reducing the number 
and severity of traffic crashes by ensuring that all opportunities to 
improve highway safety are identified, considered, implemented as 
appropriate, and evaluated in all phases of highway planning, design, 
construction, maintenance, and operation and by providing information 
for selecting and implementing effective highway safety strategies and 
projects. The development of the SMS may be based on the guidance in 
``Safety Management Systems: Good Practices for Development and 
Implementation.'' \3\ An effective SMS should include, at a minimum:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ Safety Management Systems: Good Practices for Development and 
Implementation, FHWA and NHTSA, May 1996. Available for inspection and 
copying as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (a) Communication, coordination, and cooperation among the 
organizations responsible for the roadway, human, and vehicle safety 
elements;
    (b) A focal point for coordination of the development, 
establishment, and implementation of the SMS among the agencies 
responsible for these major safety elements;
    (c) Establishment of short- and long-term highway safety goals to 
address identified safety problems;
    (d) Collection, analysis, and linkage of highway safety data;
    (e) Identification of the safety responsibilities of units and 
positions;
    (f) Public information and education activities; and
    (g) Identification of skills, resources, and training needs to 
implement highway safety programs.


<R05>
Sec. 500.109  CMS.

    (a) For purposes of this regulation, congestion means the level at 
which transportation system performance is no longer acceptable due to 
traffic interference. The level of system performance deemed acceptable 
by State and local officials may vary by type of transportation 
facility, geographic location (metropolitan area or subarea, rural 
area), and/or time of day. An effective CMS is a systematic process for 
managing congestion that provides information on transportation system 
performance and on alternative strategies for alleviating congestion and 
enhancing the mobility of persons and goods to levels that meet State 
and local needs. The CMS results in serious consideration of 
implementation of strategies that provide the most efficient and 
effective use of existing and future transportation facilities. In both 
metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas, consideration needs to be given 
to strategies that reduce SOV travel and improve existing transportation 
system efficiency. Where the addition of general purpose lanes is 
determined to be an appropriate strategy, explicit consideration is to 
be given to the incorporation of appropriate features into the SOV 
project to facilitate future demand management and operational 
improvement strategies that will maintain the functional integrity of 
those lanes.
    (b) In addition to the criteria in paragraph (a) of this section, in 
all TMAs, the CMS shall be developed, established and implemented as 
part of the metropolitan planning process in accordance with 23 CFR 
450.320(c) and shall include:
    (1) Methods to monitor and evaluate the performance of the 
multimodal transportation system, identify the causes of congestion, 
identify and evaluate alternative actions, provide

[[Page 127]]

information supporting the implementation of actions, and evaluate the 
efficiency and effectiveness of implemented actions;
    (2) Definition of parameters for measuring the extent of congestion 
and for supporting the evaluation of the effectiveness of congestion 
reduction and mobility enhancement strategies for the movement of people 
and goods. Since levels of acceptable system performance may vary among 
local communities, performance measures and service thresholds should be 
tailored to the specific needs of the area and established cooperatively 
by the State, affected MPO(s), and local officials in consultation with 
the operators of major modes of transportation in the coverage area;
    (3) Establishment of a program for data collection and system 
performance monitoring to define the extent and duration of congestion, 
to help determine the causes of congestion, and to evaluate the 
efficiency and effectiveness of implemented actions. To the extent 
possible, existing data sources should be used, as well as appropriate 
application of the real-time system performance monitoring capabilities 
available through Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) technologies;
    (4) Identification and evaluation of the anticipated performance and 
expected benefits of appropriate traditional and nontraditional 
congestion management strategies that will contribute to the more 
efficient use of existing and future transportation systems based on the 
established performance measures. The following categories of 
strategies, or combinations of strategies, should be appropriately 
considered for each area: Transportation demand management measures, 
including growth management and congestion pricing; traffic operational 
improvements; public transportation improvements; ITS technologies; and, 
where necessary, additional system capacity.
    (5) Identification of an implementation schedule, implementation 
responsibilities, and possible funding sources for each strategy (or 
combination of strategies) proposed for implementation; and
    (6) Implementation of a process for periodic assessment of the 
efficiency and effectiveness of implemented strategies, in terms of the 
area's established performance measures. The results of this evaluation 
shall be provided to decision makers to provide guidance on selection of 
effective strategies for future implementation.
    (c) In a TMA designated as nonattainment for carbon monoxide and/or 
ozone, the CMS shall provide an appropriate analysis of all reasonable 
(including multimodal) travel demand reduction and operational 
management strategies for the corridor in which a project that will 
result in a significant increase in capacity for SOVs (adding general 
purpose lanes to an existing highway or constructing a new highway) is 
proposed. If the analysis demonstrates that travel demand reduction and 
operational management strategies cannot fully satisfy the need for 
additional capacity in the corridor and additional SOV capacity is 
warranted, then the CMS shall identify all reasonable strategies to 
manage the SOV facility effectively (or to facilitate its management in 
the future). Other travel demand reduction and operational management 
strategies appropriate for the corridor, but not appropriate for 
incorporation into the SOV facility itself shall also be identified 
through the CMS. All identified reasonable travel demand reduction and 
operational management strategies shall be incorporated into the SOV 
project or committed to by the State and MPO for implementation.
    (d)(1) Compliance with the requirement that the planning process in 
all TMAs include a CMS will be addressed during metropolitan planning 
process certification reviews for all TMAs specified in 23 CFR 450.334. 
If the metropolitan planning process in a TMA does not include a CMS 
that meets the requirements of this section, deficiencies will be noted 
and corrections will need to be made in accordance with the schedule 
established in the certification review.
    (2) Until October 1, 1997, the interim CMS procedures in 23 CFR 
450.336(b) may be used to meet the requirement in 23 U.S.C. 134(l) that 
Federal funds may not be programmed in a carbon

[[Page 128]]

monoxide and/or ozone nonattainment TMA for any highway project that 
will result in a significant increase in single-occupant-vehicle 
capacity unless the project is based on an approved CMS. After September 
30, 1997, such projects must be based on a CMS that meets the 
requirements of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 500.110  PTMS.

    An effective PTMS for public transportation facilities (e.g., 
maintenance facilities, stations, terminals, transit related 
structures), equipment, and rolling stock is a systematic process that 
collects and analyzes information on the condition and cost of transit 
assets on a continual basis, identifies needs, and enables decision 
makers to select cost-effective strategies for providing and maintaining 
transit assets in serviceable condition. The PTMS should cover public 
transportation systems operated by the State, local jurisdictions, 
public transportation agencies and authorities, and private (for profit 
and non-profit) transit operators receiving funds under the Federal 
Transit Act and include, at a minimum:
    (a) Development of transit asset condition measures and standards;
    (b) An inventory of the transit assets including age, condition, 
remaining useful life, and replacement cost; and
    (c) Identification, evaluation, and implementation of appropriate 
strategies and projects.


<R05>
Sec. 500.111  IMS.

    An effective IMS for intermodal facilities and systems provides 
efficient, safe, and convenient movement of people and goods through 
integration of transportation facilities and systems and improvement in 
the coordination in planning, and implementation of air, water, and the 
various land-based transportation facilities and systems. An IMS should 
include, at a minimum:
    (a) Establishment of performance measures;
    (b) Identification of key linkages between one or more modes of 
transportation, where the performance or use of one mode will affect 
another;
    (c) Definition of strategies for improving the effectiveness of 
these modal interactions; and
    (d) Evaluation and implementation of these strategies to enhance the 
overall performance of the transportation system.


<R04>
                   Subpart B_Traffic Monitoring System


<R05>
Sec. 500.201  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to set forth requirements for 
development, establishment, implementation, and continued operation of a 
traffic monitoring system for highways and public transportation 
facilities and equipment (TMS) in each State in accordance with the 
provisions of 23 U.S.C. 303 and subpart A of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 500.202  TMS definitions.

    Unless otherwise specified in this part, the definitions in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) and Sec. 500.103 are applicable to this subpart. As used 
in this part:
    Highway traffic data means data used to develop estimates of the 
amount of person or vehicular travel, vehicle usage, or vehicle 
characteristics associated with a system of highways or with a 
particular location on a highway. These types of data support the 
estimation of the number of vehicles traversing a section of highway or 
system of highways during a prescribed time period (traffic volume), the 
portion of such vehicles that may be of a particular type (vehicle 
classification), the weights of such vehicles including the weight of 
each axle and associated distances between axles on a vehicle (vehicle 
weight), or the average number of persons being transported in a vehicle 
(vehicle occupancy).
    Traffic monitoring system means a systematic process for the 
collection, analysis, summary, and retention of highway and transit 
related person and vehicular traffic data.
    Transit traffic data means person and vehicular data for public 
transportation on public highways and streets and the number of vehicles 
and ridership for dedicated transit rights-of-way (e.g., rail and 
busways), at the maximum load points for the peak period in the peak 
direction and for the daily time period.

[[Page 129]]


<R05>
Sec. 500.203  TMS general requirements.

    (a) Each State shall develop, establish, and implement, on a 
continuing basis, a TMS to be used for obtaining highway traffic data 
when:
    (1) The data are supplied to the U.S. Department of Transportation 
(U.S. DOT);
    (2) The data are used in support of transportation management 
systems;
    (3) The data are used in support of studies or systems which are the 
responsibility of the U.S. DOT;
    (4) The collection of the data is supported by the use of Federal 
funds provided from programs of the U.S. DOT;
    (5) The data are used in the apportionment or allocation of Federal 
funds by the U.S. DOT;
    (6) The data are used in the design or construction of an FHWA 
funded project; or
    (7) The data are required as part of a federally mandated program of 
the U.S. DOT.
    (b) The TMS for highway traffic data should be based on the concepts 
described in the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) ``AASHTO Guidelines for Traffic Data 
Programs'' \4\ and the FHWA ``Traffic Monitoring Guide (TMG),'' \5\ and 
shall be consistent with the FHWA ``Highway Performance Monitoring 
System Field Manual.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ AASHTO Guidelines for Traffic Data Programs, 1992, ISBN 1-56051-
054-4, can be purchased from the American Association of State Highway 
and Transportation Officials, 444 N. Capitol Street, NW., Suite 249, 
Washington, D.C. 20001. Available for inspection as prescribed in 49 CFR 
part 7, appendix D.
    \5\ Traffic Monitoring Guide, DOT/FHWA, publication No. FHWA-PL-95-
031, February 1995. Available for inspection and copying as prescribed 
in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
    \6\ Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS) Field Manual for 
the Continuing Analytical and Statistical Data Base, DOT/FHWA, August 
30, 1993 (FHWA Order M5600.1B). Available for inspection and copying as 
prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The TMS shall cover all public roads except those functionally 
classified as local or rural minor collector or those that are federally 
owned. Coverage of federally owned public roads shall be determined 
cooperatively by the State, the FHWA, and the agencies that own the 
roads.
    (d) The State's TMS shall apply to the activities of local 
governments and other public or private non-State government entities 
collecting highway traffic data within the State if the collected data 
are to be used for any of the purposes enumerated in Sec. 500.203(a) of 
this subpart.
    (e) Procedures other than those referenced in this subpart may be 
used if the alternative procedures are documented by the State to 
furnish the precision levels as defined for the various purposes 
enumerated in Sec. 500.203(a) of this subpart and are found acceptable 
by the FHWA.
    (f) Nothing in this subpart shall prohibit the collection of 
additional highway traffic data if such data are needed in the 
administration or management of a highway activity or are needed in the 
design of a highway project.
    (g) Transit traffic data shall be collected in cooperation with MPOs 
and transit operators.
    (h) The TMS for highways and public transportation facilities and 
equipment shall be fully operational and in use by October 1, 1997.


<R05>
Sec. 500.204  TMS components for highway traffic data.

    (a) General. Each State's TMS, including those using alternative 
procedures, shall address the components in paragraphs (b) through (h) 
of this section.
    (b) Precision of reported data. Traffic data supplied for the 
purposes identified in Sec. 500.203(a) of this subpart shall be to the 
statistical precision applicable at the time of the data's collection as 
specified by the data users at various levels of government. A State's 
TMS shall meet the statistical precisions established by FHWA for the 
HPMS.
    (c) Continuous counter operations. Within each State, there shall be 
sufficient continuous counters of traffic volumes, vehicle 
classification, and vehicle weight to provide estimates of changes in 
highway travel patterns and to provide for the development of day-of-
week, seasonal, axle correction, growth factors, or other comparable 
factors approved by the FHWA that

[[Page 130]]

support the development of traffic estimates to meet the statistical 
precision requirements of the data uses identified in Sec. 500.203(a) 
of this subpart. As appropriate, sufficient continuous counts of vehicle 
classification and vehicle weight should be available to address traffic 
data program needs.
    (d) Short term traffic monitoring. (1) Count data for traffic 
volumes collected in the field shall be adjusted to reflect annual 
average conditions. The estimation of annual average daily traffic will 
be through the appropriate application of only the following: Seasonal 
factors, day-of-week factors, and, when necessary, axle correction and 
growth factors or other comparable factors approved by the FHWA. Count 
data that have not been adjusted to represent annual average conditions 
will be noted as being unadjusted when they are reported. The duration 
and frequency of such monitoring shall comply to the data needs 
identified in Sec. 500.203(a) of this subpart.
    (2) Vehicle classification activities on the National Highway System 
(NHS), shall be sufficient to assure that, on a cycle of no greater than 
three years, every major system segment (i.e., segments between 
interchanges or intersections of principal arterials of the NHS with 
other principal arterials of the NHS) will be monitored to provide 
information on the numbers of single-trailer combination trucks, 
multiple-trailer combination trucks, two-axle four-tire vehicles, buses 
and the total number of vehicles operating on an average day. If it is 
determined that two or more continuous major system segments have both 
similar traffic volumes and distributions of the vehicle types 
identified above, a single monitoring session will be sufficient to 
monitor these segments.
    (e) Vehicle occupancy monitoring. As deemed appropriate to support 
the data uses identified in Sec. 500.203(a) of this subpart, data will 
be collected on the average number of persons per automobile, light two-
axle truck, and bus. The duration, geographic extent, and level of 
detail shall be consistent with the intended use of the data, as 
cooperatively agreed to by the organizations that will use the data and 
the organizations that will collect the data. Such vehicle occupancy 
data shall be reviewed at least every three years and updated as 
necessary. Acceptable data collection methods include roadside 
monitoring, traveler surveys, the use of administrative records (e.g., 
accident reports or reports developed in support of public 
transportation programs), or any other method mutually acceptable to the 
responsible organizations and the FHWA.
    (f) Field operations. (1) Each State's TMS for highway traffic data 
shall include the testing of equipment used in the collection of the 
data. This testing shall be based on documented procedures developed by 
the State. This documentation will describe the test procedure as well 
as the frequency of testing. Standards of the American Society for 
Testing and Materials or guidance from the AASHTO may be used. Only 
equipment passing the test procedures will be used for the collection of 
data for the purposes identified in Sec. 500.203(a) of this subpart.
    (2) Documentation of field operations shall include the number of 
counts, the period of monitoring, the cycle of monitoring, and the 
spatial and temporal distribution of count sites. Copies of the State's 
documentation shall be provided to the FHWA Division Administrator when 
it is initially developed and after each revision.
    (g) Source data retention. For estimates of traffic or travel, the 
value or values collected during a monitoring session, as well as 
information on the date(s) and hour(s) of monitoring, will remain 
available until the traffic or travel estimates based on the count 
session are updated. Data shall be available in formats that conform to 
those in the version of the TMG current at the time of data collection 
or as then amended by the FHWA.
    (h) Office factoring procedures. (1) Factors to adjust data from 
short term monitoring sessions to estimates of average daily conditions 
shall be used to adjust for month, day of week, axle correction, and 
growth or other comparable factors approved by the FHWA. These factors 
will be reviewed annually and updated at least every three years.
    (2) The procedures used by a State to edit and adjust highway 
traffic data collected from short term counts at field locations to 
estimates of average

[[Page 131]]

traffic volume shall be documented. The documentation shall include the 
factors discussed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. The documentation 
shall remain available as long as the traffic or travel estimates 
discussed in paragraph (g) of this section remain current. Copies of the 
State's documentation shall be provided to the FHWA Division 
Administrator when it is initially developed and after each revision.

                           PART 511 [RESERVED]

[[Page 132]]


<R03>
             SUBCHAPTER G_ENGINEERING AND TRAFFIC OPERATIONS




<R03>
PART 620_ENGINEERING--Table of Contents




       Subpart A_Highway Improvements in the Vicinity of Airports

Sec.
620.101 Purpose.
620.102 Applicability.
620.103 Policy.
620.104 Standards.

             Subpart B_Relinquishment of Highway Facilities

620.201 Purpose.
620.202 Applicability.
620.203 Procedures.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 315 and 318; 49 CFR 1.48, 23 CFR 1.32.

    Source: 39 FR 33311, Sept. 17, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
       Subpart A_Highway Improvements in the Vicinity of Airports

    Source: 39 FR 35145, Sept. 30, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 620.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of this section is to implement title 23 U.S.C., section 
318 which requires coordination of airport and highway developments to 
insure (a) that airway-highway clearances are adequate for the safe 
movement of air and highway traffic, and (b) that the expenditure of 
public funds for airport and highway improvements is in the public 
interest.


<R05>
Sec. 620.102  Applicability.

    The requirements of this section apply to all projects on which 
Federal-aid highway funds are to be expended and to both civil and 
military airports.


<R05>
Sec. 620.103  Policy.

    (a) Federal-aid highway funds shall not participate in the costs of 
reconstruction or relocation of any highway to which this section 
applies unless the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and State 
officials, in cooperation with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
or appropriate military authority, or in the case of privately owned 
airports, the owner of that airport, determine that the location or 
extension of the airport in question and the consequent relocation or 
reconstruction of the highway is in the public interest.
    (b) In addition to complying with 23 U.S.C. 318 and insuring the 
prudent use of public funds, it is the policy of FHWA to provide a high 
degree of safety in the location, design, construction and operation of 
highways and airports.
    (c) Federal-aid funds shall not participate in projects where 
substandard clearances are created or will continue to exist.


<R05>
Sec. 620.104  Standards.

    A finding of public interest by FHWA will be based on compliance 
with airway-highway clearances which conform to FAA standards for 
aeronautical safety.


<R04>
             Subpart B_Relinquishment of Highway Facilities

    Source: 39 FR 33311, Sept. 17, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 620.201  Purpose.

    To prescribe Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) procedures 
relating to relinquishment of highway facilities.


<R05>
Sec. 620.202  Applicability.

    The provisions of this subpart apply to highway facilities where 
Federal-aid funds have participated in either right-of-way or physical 
construction costs of a project. The provisions of this subpart apply 
only to relinquishment of facilities for continued highway purposes. 
Other real property disposals and modifications or disposal of access 
rights are governed by the requirements of 23 CFR part 710.

[64 FR 71289, Dec. 21, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 620.203  Procedures.

    (a) After final acceptance of a project on the Federal-aid primary, 
urban, or

[[Page 133]]

secondary system or after the date that the plans, specifications and 
estimates (PS&E) for the physical construction on the right-of-way for a 
Federal-aid Interstate project have been approved by the FHWA, 
relinquishment of the right-of-way or any change made in control of 
access shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. For 
the purposes of this section, final acceptance for a project involving 
physical construction is the date of the acceptance of the physical 
construction by the FHWA and for right-of-way projects, the date the 
division engineer determines to be the date of the completion of the 
acquisition of the right-of-way shown on the final plans.
    (b) For the purposes of this section, relinquishment is defined as 
the conveyance of a portion of a highway right-of-way or facility by a 
State highway agency (SHA) to another Government agency for highway use.
    (c) The following facilities may be relinquished in accordance with 
paragraph 203(f):
    (1) Sections of a State highway which have been superseded by 
construction on new location and removed from the Federal-aid system and 
the replaced section thereof is approved by the FHWA as the new location 
of the Federal-aid route. Federal-aid funds may not participate in 
rehabilitation work performed for the purpose of placing the superseded 
section of the highway in a condition acceptable to the local authority. 
The relinquishment of any Interstate mileage shall be submitted to the 
Federal Highway Administrator as a special case for prior approval.
    (2) Sections of reconstructed local facilities that are located 
outside the control of access lines, such as turn-arounds of severed 
local roads or streets adjacent to the Federal-aid project's right-of-
way, and local roads and streets crossing over or under said project 
that have been adjusted in grade and/or alignment, including new right-
of-way required for adjustments. Eligibility for Federal-aid 
participation in the costs of the foregoing adjustments is as determined 
at the time of PS&E approval under policies of the FHWA.
    (3) Frontage roads or portions thereof that are constructed 
generally parallel to and outside the control of access lines of a 
Federal-aid project for the purpose of permitting access to private 
properties rather than to serve as extensions of ramps to connect said 
Federal-aid project with the nearest crossroad or street.
    (d) The following facilities may be relinquished only with the 
approval of the Federal Highway Administrator in accordance with 
paragraph 203(g).
    (1) Frontage roads or portions thereof located outside the access 
control lines of a Federal-aid project that are constructed to service 
(in lieu of or in addition to the purposes outlined under paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section) as connections between ramps to or from the 
Federal-aid project and existing public roads or streets.
    (2) Ramps constructed to serve as connections for interchange of 
traffic between the Federal-aid project and local roads or streets.
    (e) Where a frontage road is not on an approved Federal-aid system 
title to the right-of-way may be acquired initially in the name of the 
political subdivision which is to assume control thus eliminating the 
necessity of a formal transfer later. Such procedure would be subject to 
prior FHWA approval and would be limited to those facilities which meet 
the criteria set forth in paragraphs (c) (2) and (3) of this section.
    (f) Upon presentation by a State that it intends to relinquish 
facilities such as described in paragraph (c) (1), (2) or (3) of this 
section to local authorities, the division engineer of the FHWA shall 
have appropriate field and office examination made thereof to assure 
that such relinquishments are in accordance with the provisions of the 
cited paragraphs. Relinquishments of the types described in paragraph 
(c) (1), (2) or (3) of this section may be made on an individual basis 
or on a project or route basis subject to the following conditions and 
understandings:
    (1) Immediately following action by the State in approving a 
relinquishment, it shall furnish to the Division Administrator for 
record purposes a copy of a suitable map or maps identified by the 
Federal-aid project number, with the facilities to be relinquished

[[Page 134]]

and the date of such relinquishment action clearly delineated thereon.
    (2) If it is found at any time after relinquishment that a 
relinquished facility is in fact required for the safe and proper 
operation of the Federal-aid highway, the State shall take immediate 
action to restore such facility to its jurisdiction without cost to 
Federal-aid highway funds.
    (3) If it is found at any time that a relinquished frontage road or 
portion thereof or any part of the right-of-way therefor has been 
abandoned by local governmental authority and a showing cannot be made 
that such abandoned facility is no longer required as a public road, it 
is to be understood that the Federal Highway Administrator may cause to 
be withheld from Federal-aid highway funds due to the State an amount 
equal to the Federal-aid participation in the abandoned facility.
    (4) In no case shall any relinquishment include any portion of the 
right-of-way within the access control lines as shown on the plans for a 
Federal-aid project approved by the FHWA, without the prior approval of 
the Federal Highway Administrator.
    (5) There cannot be additional Federal-aid participation in future 
construction or reconstruction on any relinquished ``off the Federal-aid 
system'' facility unless the underlying reason for such future work is 
caused by future improvement of the associated Federal-aid highway.
    (g) In the event that a State desires to apply for approval by the 
Federal Highway Administrator for the relinquishment of a facility such 
as described in paragraph (d) (1) and (2) of this section, the facts 
pertinent to such proposal are to be presented to the division engineer 
of the FHWA. The division engineer shall have appropriate review made of 
such presentation and forward the material presented by the State 
together with his findings thereon through the Regional Federal Highway 
Administrator for consideration by the Federal Highway Administrator and 
determination of action to be taken.
    (h) No change may be made in control of access, without the joint 
determination and approval of the SHA and FHWA. This would not prevent 
the relinquishment of title, without prior approval of the FHWA, of a 
segment of the right-of-way provided there is an abandonment of a 
section of highway inclusive of such segment.
    (i) Relinquishments must be justified by the State's finding 
concurred in by the FHWA, that:
    (1) The subject land will not be needed for Federal-aid highway 
purposes in the foreseeable future;
    (2) That the right-of-way being retained is adequate under present 
day standards for the facility involved;
    (3) That the release will not adversely affect the Federal-aid 
highway facility or the traffic thereon;
    (4) That the lands to be relinquished are not suitable for retention 
in order to restore, preserve, or improve the scenic beauty adjacent to 
the highway consonant with the intent of 23 U.S.C. 319 and Pub. L. 89-
285, Title III, sections 302-305 (Highway Beautification Act of 1965).
    (j) If a relinquishment is to a Federal, State, or local government 
agency for highway purposes, there need not be a charge to the said 
agency, nor in such event any credit to Federal funds. If for any reason 
there is a charge, the STD may retain the Federal share of the proceeds 
if used for projects eligible under title 23 of the United States Code.

[39 FR 33311, Sept. 17, 1974, as amended at 64 FR 71289, Dec. 21, 1999]


<R03>
PART 625_DESIGN STANDARDS FOR HIGHWAYS--Table of Contents




Sec.
625.1 Purpose.
625.2 Policy.
625.3 Application.
625.4 Standards, policies, and standard specifications.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 109, 315, and 402; Sec. 1073 of Pub. L. 102-
240, 105 Stat. 1914, 2012; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and (n).

    Source: 62 FR 15397, Apr. 1, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 625.1  Purpose.

    To designate those standards, policies, and standard specifications 
that are acceptable to the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) for 
application

[[Page 135]]

in the geometric and structural design of highways.


<R05>
Sec. 625.2  Policy.

    (a) Plans and specifications for proposed National Highway System 
(NHS) projects shall provide for a facility that will--
    (1) Adequately serve the existing and planned future traffic of the 
highway in a manner that is conducive to safety, durability, and economy 
of maintenance; and
    (2) Be designed and constructed in accordance with criteria best 
suited to accomplish the objectives described in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section and to conform to the particular needs of each locality.
    (b) Resurfacing, restoration, and rehabilitation (RRR) projects, 
other than those on the Interstate system and other freeways, shall be 
constructed in accordance with standards which preserve and extend the 
service life of highways and enhance highway safety. Resurfacing, 
restoration, and rehabilitation work includes placement of additional 
surface material and/or other work necessary to return an existing 
roadway, including shoulders, bridges, the roadside, and appurtenances 
to a condition of structural or functional adequacy.
    (c) An important goal of the FHWA is to provide the highest 
practical and feasible level of safety for people and property 
associated with the Nation's highway transportation systems and to 
reduce highway hazards and the resulting number and severity of 
accidents on all the Nation's highways.


<R05>
Sec. 625.3  Application.

    (a) Applicable Standards. (1) Design and construction standards for 
new construction, reconstruction, resurfacing (except for maintenance 
resurfacing), restoration, or rehabilitation of a highway on the NHS 
(other than a highway also on the Interstate System or other freeway) 
shall be those approved by the Secretary in cooperation with the State 
highway departments. These standards may take into account, in addition 
to the criteria described in Sec. 625.2(a), the following:
    (i) The constructed and natural environment of the area;
    (ii) The environmental, scenic, aesthetic, historic, community, and 
preservation impacts of the activity; and
    (iii) Access for other modes of transportation.
    (2) Federal-aid projects not on the NHS are to be designed, 
constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with State laws, 
regulations, directives, safety standards, design standards, and 
construction standards.
    (b) The standards, policies, and standard specifications cited in 
Sec. 625.4 of this part contain specific criteria and controls for the 
design of NHS projects. Deviations from specific minimum values therein 
are to be handled in accordance with procedures in paragraph (f) of this 
section. If there is a conflict between criteria in the documents 
enumerated in Sec. 625.4 of this part, the latest listed standard, 
policy, or standard specification will govern.
    (c) Application of FHWA regulations, although cited in Sec. 625.4 
of this part as standards, policies, and standard specifications, shall 
be as set forth therein.
    (d) This regulation establishes Federal standards for work on the 
NHS regardless of funding source.
    (e) The Division Administrator shall determine the applicability of 
the roadway geometric design standards to traffic engineering, safety, 
and preventive maintenance projects which include very minor or no 
roadway work. Formal findings of applicability are expected only as 
needed to resolve controversies.
    (f) Exceptions. (1) Approval within the delegated authority provided 
by FHWA Order M1100.1A may be given on a project basis to designs which 
do not conform to the minimum criteria as set forth in the standards, 
policies, and standard specifications for:
    (i) Experimental features on projects; and
    (ii) Projects where conditions warrant that exceptions be made.
    (2) The determination to approve a project design that does not 
conform to the minimum criteria is to be made only after due 
consideration is given to all project conditions such as maximum service 
and safety benefits for the dollar invested, compatibility with adjacent 
sections of roadway and the probable time before reconstruction of

[[Page 136]]

the section due to increased traffic demands or changed conditions.


<R05>
Sec. 625.4  Standards, policies, and standard specifications.

    The documents listed in this section are incorporated by reference 
with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 and are on file at the Office of 
the Federal Register in Washington, DC. They are available as noted in 
paragraph (d) of this section. The other CFR references listed in this 
section are included for cross-reference purposes only.
    (a) Roadway and appurtenances. (1) A Policy on Geometric Design of 
Highways and Streets, AASHTO 2001. [See Sec. 625.4(d)(1)]
    (2) A Policy on Design Standards--Interstate System, AASHTO 1991. 
[See Sec. 625.4(d)(1)]
    (3) The geometric design standards for resurfacing, restoration, and 
rehabilitation (RRR) projects on NHS highways other than freeways shall 
be the procedures and the design or design criteria established for 
individual projects, groups of projects, or all nonfreeway RRR projects 
in a State, and as approved by the FHWA. The other geometric design 
standards in this section do not apply to RRR projects on NHS highways 
other than freeways, except as adopted on an individual State basis. The 
RRR design standards shall reflect the consideration of the traffic, 
safety, economic, physical, community, and environmental needs of the 
projects.
    (4) Erosion and Sediment Control on Highway Construction Projects, 
refer to 23 CFR part 650, subpart B.
    (5) Location and Hydraulic Design of Encroachments on Flood Plains, 
refer to 23 CFR part 650, subpart A.
    (6) Procedures for Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise and 
Construction Noise, refer to 23 CFR part 772.
    (7) Accommodation of Utilities, refer to 23 CFR part 645, subpart B.
    (8) Pavement Design, refer to 23 CFR part 626.
    (b) Bridges and structures. (1) Standard Specifications for Highway 
Bridges, Fifteenth Edition, AASHTO 1992. [See Sec. 625.4(d)(1)]
    (2) Interim Specifications--Bridges, AASHTO 1993. [See Sec. 
625.4(d)(1)]
    (3) Interim Specifications--Bridges, AASHTO 1994. [See Sec. 
625.4(d)(1)]
    (4) Interim Specifications--Bridges, AASHTO 1995. [See Sec. 
625.4(d)(1)]
    (5) AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, First Edition, AASHTO 
1994 (U.S. Units). [See Sec. 625.4(d)(1)]
    (6) AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, First Edition, AASHTO 
1994 (SI Units). [See Sec. 625.4(d)(1)]
    (7) Standard Specifications for Movable Highway Bridges, AASHTO 
1988. [See Sec. 625.4(d)(1)]
    (8) Bridge Welding Code, ANSI/AASHTO/AWS D1.5-95, AASHTO. [See Sec. 
625.4(d) (1) and (2)]
    (9) Structural Welding Code--Reinforcing Steel, ANSI/AWS D1.4-92, 
1992. [See Sec. 625.4(d)(2)]
    (10) Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway 
Signs, Luminaires and Traffic Signals, AASHTO 1994. [See Sec. 
625.4(d)(1)]
    (11) Navigational Clearances for Bridges, refer to 23 CFR part 650, 
subpart H.
    (c) Materials. (1) General Materials Requirements, refer to 23 CFR 
part 635, subpart D.
    (2) Standard Specifications for Transportation Materials and Methods 
of Sampling and Testing, parts I and II, AASHTO 1995. [See Sec. 
625.4(d)(1)]
    (3) Sampling and Testing of Materials and Construction, refer to 23 
CFR part 637, subpart B.
    (d) Availability of documents incorporated by reference. The 
documents listed in Sec. 625.4 are incorporated by reference and are on 
file and available for inspection at the Office of the Federal Register, 
800 North Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC. These 
documents may also be reviewed at the Department of Transportation 
Library, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC, in Room 2200. These 
documents are also available for inspection and copying as provided in 
49 CFR part 7, appendix D. Copies of these documents may be obtained 
from the following organizations:
    (1) American Association of State Highway and Transportation 
Officials (AASHTO), Suite 249, 444 North Capitol Street, NW., 
Washington, DC 20001.

[[Page 137]]

    (2) American Welding Society (AWS), 2501 Northwest Seventh Street, 
Miami, FL 33125.

[62 FR 15397, Apr. 1, 1997, as amended at 67 FR 6395, Feb. 12, 2002]


<R03>
PART 626_PAVEMENT POLICY--Table of Contents




Sec.
626.1 Purpose.
626.2 Definitions.
626.3 Policy.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101(e), 109, and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b)

    Source: 61 FR 67174, Dec. 19, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 626.1  Purpose.

    To set forth pavement design policy for Federal-aid highway 
projects.


<R05>
Sec. 626.2  Definitions.

    Unless otherwise specified in this part, the definitions in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) are applicable to this part. As used in this part:
    Pavement design means a project level activity where detailed 
engineering and economic considerations are given to alternative 
combinations of subbase, base, and surface materials which will provide 
adequate load carrying capacity. Factors which are considered include: 
Materials, traffic, climate, maintenance, drainage, and life-cycle 
costs.


<R05>
Sec. 626.3  Policy.

    Pavement shall be designed to accommodate current and predicted 
traffic needs in a safe, durable, and cost effective manner.


<R03>
PART 627_VALUE ENGINEERING--Table of Contents




Sec.
627.1 Purpose and applicability.
627.3 Definitions.
627.5 General principles and procedures.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 106(d), 106(f), 112(b), 302, 307, and 315; 49 
CFR 18.

    Source: 62 FR 6868, Feb. 14, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 627.1  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) This regulation will establish a program to improve project 
quality, reduce project costs, foster innovation, eliminate unnecessary 
and costly design elements, and ensure efficient investments by 
requiring the application of value engineering (VE) to all Federal-aid 
highway projects on the National Highway System (NHS) with an estimated 
cost of $25 million or more.
    (b) In accordance with the Federal-State relationship established 
under the Federal-aid highway program, State transportation departments 
(STDs) shall assure that a VE analysis has been performed on all 
applicable projects and that all resulting, approved recommendations are 
incorporated into the plans, specifications and estimate.

[62 FR 6868, Feb. 14, 1997, as amended at 67 FR 75924, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 627.3  Definitions.

    Project. A portion of a highway that a State proposes to construct, 
reconstruct, or improve as described in the preliminary design report or 
applicable environmental document. A project may consist of several 
contracts or phases over several years.
    Value engineering. The systematic application of recognized 
techniques by a multi-disciplined team to identify the function of a 
product or service, establish a worth for that function, generate 
alternatives through the use of creative thinking, and provide the 
needed functions to accomplish the original purpose of the project, 
reliably, and at the lowest life-cycle cost without sacrificing safety, 
necessary quality, and environmental attributes of the project.


<R05>
Sec. 627.5  General principles and procedures.

    (a) State VE programs. State transportation departments must 
establish programs to assure that VE studies are performed on all 
Federal-aid highway projects on the NHS with an estimated cost of $25 
million or more. Program procedures should provide for the 
identification of candidate projects for VE studies early in the 
development of the State's multi-year Statewide Transportation 
Improvement Program.
    (1) Project selection. The program may, at the State's discretion, 
establish specific criteria and guidelines for

[[Page 138]]

selecting other highway projects for VE studies.
    (2) Studies. Value engineering studies shall follow the widely 
recognized systematic problem-solving analysis process that is used 
throughout private industry and governmental agencies. Studies must be 
performed using multi-disciplined teams of individuals not personally 
involved in the design of the project. Study teams should consist of a 
team leader and individuals from different speciality areas, such as 
design, construction, environment, planning, maintenance, right-of-way, 
and other areas depending upon the type of project being reviewed. 
Individuals from the public and other agencies may also be included on 
the team when their inclusion is found to be in the public interest.
    (i) Each team leader should be trained and knowledgeable in VE 
techniques and be able to serve as the coordinator and facilitator of 
the team.
    (ii) Studies should be employed as early as possible in the project 
development or design process so that accepted VE recommendations can be 
implemented without delaying the progress of the project.
    (iii) Studies should conclude with a formal report outlining the 
study team's recommendations for improving the project and reducing its 
overall cost.
    (3) Recommendations. The program should include procedures to 
approve or reject recommendations and ensure the prompt review of VE 
recommendations by staff offices whose speciality areas are implicated 
in proposed changes and by offices responsible for implementing accepted 
recommendations. Reviews by these offices should be performed promptly 
to minimize delays to the project.
    (4) Incentives. The program may include a VE or cost reduction 
incentive clause in an STD's standard specifications or project special 
provisions that allows construction contractors to submit change 
proposals and share the resulting cost savings with the STD.
    (5) Monitoring. The program should include procedures for monitoring 
the implementation of VE study team recommendations and VE change 
proposal recommendations submitted by construction contractors.
    (b) State VE coordinators. Individuals knowledgeable in VE shall be 
assigned responsibilities to coordinate and monitor the STD's program 
and be actively involved in all phases of the program.
    (c) Use of consultants. Consultants or firms with experience in VE 
may be retained by STDs to conduct the studies of Federal-aid highway 
projects or elements of Federal-aid highway projects required under 
Sec. 627.1(a) of this part. Consultants or firms should not be retained 
to conduct studies of their own designs unless they maintain separate 
and distinct organizational separation of their VE and design sections.
    (d) Funding eligibility. The cost of performing VE studies is 
project related and is, therefore, eligible for reimbursement with 
Federal-aid highway funds at the appropriate pro-rata share for the 
project studied.
    (e) In the case of a Federal-aid design-build project meeting the 
project criteria in 23 CFR 627.1(a), the STDs shall fulfill the value 
engineering analysis requirement by performing a value engineering 
analysis prior to the release of the Request for Proposals document.

[62 FR 6868, Feb. 14, 1997, as amended at 67 FR 75924, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R03>
PART 630_PRECONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES--Table of Contents




             Subpart A_Project Authorization and Agreements

Sec.
630.102 Purpose.
630.104 Applicability.
630.106 Authorization to proceed.
630.108 Preparation of agreement.
630.110 Modification of original agreement.
630.112 Agreement provisions.

             Subpart B_Plans, Specifications, and Estimates

630.201 Purpose.
630.203 Applicability.
630.205 Preparation, submission, and approval.

Subpart C [Reserved]

                       Subpart D_Geodetic Markers

630.401 Purpose.

[[Page 139]]

630.402 Policy.
630.403 Initiation of projects.
630.404 Standards.

Subparts E-F [Reserved]

         Subpart G_Advance Construction of Federal-Aid Projects

630.701 Purpose.
630.703 Eligibility.
630.705 Procedures.
630.707 [Reserved]
630.709 Conversion to a regular Federal-aid project.

                    Subpart H_Bridges on Federal Dams

630.801 Purpose.
630.802 Applicability.
630.803 Procedures.

Subpart I [Reserved]

        Subpart J_Traffic Safety in Highway and Street Work Zones

630.1002 Purpose.
630.1004 Background.
630.1006 Policy.
630.1008 Implementation.
630.1010 Contents of the agency procedures.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 106, 109, 115, 315, 320, and 402(a); 23 CFR 
1.32; and 49 CFR 1.48(b).


<R04>
             Subpart A_Project Authorization and Agreements

    Source: 66 FR 23847, May 10, 2001, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 630.102  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe policies for authorizing 
Federal-aid projects through execution of the project agreement required 
by 23 U.S.C. 106(a)(2).


<R05>
Sec. 630.104  Applicability.

    (a) This subpart is applicable to all Federal-aid projects unless 
specifically exempted.
    (b) Other projects which involve special procedures are to be 
approved, or authorized as set out in the implementing instructions or 
regulations for those projects.


<R05>
Sec. 630.106  Authorization to proceed.

    (a)(1) The State transportation department (STD) must obtain an 
authorization to proceed from the FHWA before beginning work on any 
Federal-aid project. The STD may request an authorization to proceed in 
writing or by electronic mail for a project or a group of projects.
    (2) The FHWA will issue the authorization to proceed either through 
or after the execution of a formal project agreement with the State. The 
agreement can be executed only after applicable prerequisite 
requirements of Federal laws and implementing regulations and directives 
are satisfied. Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(4) of 
this section, the FHWA will obligate Federal funds in the project or 
group of projects upon execution of the project agreement.
    (b) Federal funds shall not participate in costs incurred prior to 
the date of a project agreement except as provided by 23 CFR 1.9(b).
    (c) The execution of the project agreement shall be deemed a 
contractual obligation of the Federal government under 23 U.S.C. 106 and 
shall require that appropriate funds be available at the time of 
authorization for the agreed Federal share, either pro rata or lump sum, 
of the cost of eligible work to be incurred by the State except as 
follows:
    (1) Advance construction projects authorized under 23 U.S.C. 115.
    (2) Projects for preliminary studies for the portion of the 
preliminary engineering and right-of-way (ROW) phase(s) through the 
selection of a location.
    (3) Projects for ROW acquisition in hardship and protective buying 
situations through the selection of a particular location. This includes 
ROW acquisition within a potential highway corridor under consideration 
where necessary to preserve the corridor for future highway purposes. 
Authorization of work under this paragraph shall be in accord with the 
provisions of 23 CFR part 710.
    (4) In special cases where the Federal Highway Administrator 
determines it to be in the best interest of the Federal-aid highway 
program.
    (d) For projects authorized to proceed under paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (c)(4) of this section, the executed project agreement shall 
contain the following statement: ``Authorization to proceed is

[[Page 140]]

not a commitment or obligation to provide Federal funds for that portion 
of the undertaking not fully funded herein.''
    (e) For projects authorized under paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3) of 
this section, subsequent authorizations beyond the location stage shall 
not be given until appropriate available funds have been obligated to 
cover eligible costs of the work covered by the previous authorization.
    (f)(1) The Federal-aid share of eligible project costs shall be 
established at the time the project agreement is executed in one of the 
following manners:
    (i) Pro rata, with the agreement stating the Federal share as a 
specified percentage; or
    (ii) Lump sum, with the agreement stating that Federal funds are 
limited to a specified dollar amount not to exceed the legal pro rata.
    (2) The pro-rata or lump sum share may be adjusted before or shortly 
after contract award to reflect any substantive change in the bids 
received as compared to the STD's estimated cost of the project at the 
time of FHWA authorization, provided that Federal funds are available.
    (3) Federal participation is limited to the agreed Federal share of 
eligible costs actually incurred by the State, not to exceed the maximum 
permitted by enabling legislation.
    (g) The State may contribute more than the normal non-Federal share 
of title 23, U.S.C. projects. In general, financing proposals that 
result in only minimal amounts of Federal funds in projects should be 
avoided unless they are based on sound project management decisions.
    (h)(1) Donations of cash, land, material or services may be credited 
to the State's non-Federal share of the participating project work in 
accordance with title 23, U.S.C., and implementing regulations.
    (2) Contributions may not exceed the total costs incurred by the 
State on the project. Cash contributions from all sources plus the 
Federal funds may not exceed the total cost of the project.


<R05>
Sec. 630.108  Preparation of agreement.

    (a) The STD shall prepare a project agreement for each Federal-aid 
project.
    (b) The STD may develop the project agreement in a format acceptable 
to both the STD and the FHWA provided the following are included:
    (1) A description of each project location including State and 
project termini;
    (2) The Federal-aid project number;
    (3) The work covered by the agreement;
    (4) The total project cost and amount of Federal funds under 
agreement;
    (5) The Federal-aid share of eligible project costs expressed as 
either a pro rata percentage or a lump sum as set forth in Sec. 
630.106(f)(1);
    (6) A statement that the State accepts and will comply with the 
agreement provisions set forth in Sec. 630.112;
    (7) A statement that the State stipulates that its signature on the 
project agreement constitutes the making of the certifications set for 
in Sec. 630.112; and
    (8) Signatures of officials from both the State and the FHWA, and 
the date executed.
    (c) The project agreement should also document, by comment, 
instances where:
    (1) The State is applying amounts of credits from special accounts 
(such as the 23 U.S.C. 120(j) toll credits, 23 U.S.C. 144(n) off-system 
bridge credits and 23 U.S.C. 323 land value credits) to cover all or a 
portion of the normal percent non-Federal share of the project;
    (2) The project involves other arrangements affecting Federal 
funding or non-Federal matching provisions, including tapered match, 
donations, or use of other Federal agency funds, if known at the time 
the project agreement is executed; and
    (3) The State is claiming finance related costs for bond and other 
debt instrument financing (such as payments to States under 23 U.S.C. 
122).
    (d) The STD may use an electronic version of the agreement as 
provided by the FHWA.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2125-0529)

[[Page 141]]


<R05>
Sec. 630.110  Modification of original agreement.

    (a) When changes are needed to the original project agreement, a 
modification of agreement shall be prepared. Agreements should not be 
modified to replace one Federal fund category with another unless 
specifically authorized by statute.
    (b) The STD may develop the modification of project agreement in a 
format acceptable to both the STD and the FHWA provided the following 
are included:
    (1) The Federal-aid project number and State;
    (2) A sequential number identifying the modification;
    (3) A reference to the date of the original project agreement to be 
modified;
    (4) The original total project cost and the original amount of 
Federal funds under agreement;
    (5) The revised total project cost and the revised amount of Federal 
funds under agreement;
    (6) The reason for the modifications; and,
    (7) Signatures of officials from both the State and the FHWA and 
date executed.
    (c) The STD may use an electronic version of the modification of 
project agreement as provided by the FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 630.112  Agreement provisions.

    (a) The State, through its transportation department, accepts and 
agrees to comply with the applicable terms and conditions set forth in 
title 23, U.S.C., the regulations issued pursuant thereto, the policies 
and procedures promulgated by the FHWA relative to the designated 
project covered by the agreement, and all other applicable Federal laws 
and regulations.
    (b) Federal funds obligated for the project must not exceed the 
amount agreed to on the project agreement, the balance of the estimated 
total cost being an obligation of the State. Such obligation of Federal 
funds extends only to project costs incurred by the State after the 
execution of a formal project agreement with the FHWA.
    (c) The State must stipulate that as a condition to payment of the 
Federal funds obligated, it accepts and will comply with the following 
applicable provisions:
    (1) Project for acquisition of rights-of-way. In the event that 
actual construction of a road on this right-of-way is not undertaken by 
the close of the twentieth fiscal year following the fiscal year in 
which the project is authorized, the STD will repay to the FHWA the sum 
or sums of Federal funds paid to the transportation department under the 
terms of the agreement. The State may request a time extension beyond 
the 20-year limit with no repayment of Federal funds, and the FHWA may 
approve this request if it is considered reasonable.
    (2) Preliminary engineering project. In the event that right-of-way 
acquisition for, or actual construction of, the road for which this 
preliminary engineering is undertaken is not started by the close of the 
tenth fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the project is 
authorized, the STD will repay to the FHWA the sum or sums of Federal 
funds paid to the transportation department under the terms of the 
agreement. The State may request a time extension for any preliminary 
engineering project beyond the 10-year limit with no repayment of 
Federal funds, and the FHWA may approve this request if it is considered 
reasonable.
    (3) Drug-free workplace certification. By signing the project 
agreement, the STD agrees to provide a drug-free workplace as required 
by 49 CFR part 29, subpart F. In signing the project agreement, the 
State is providing the certification required in appendix C to 49 CFR 
part 29, unless the State provides an annual certification.
    (4) Suspension and debarment certification. By signing the project 
agreement, the STD agrees to fulfill the responsibility imposed by 49 
CFR 29.510 regarding debarment, suspension, and other responsibility 
matters. In signing the project agreement, the State is providing the 
certification for its principals required in appendix A to 49 CFR part 
29.
    (5) Lobbying certification. By signing the project agreement, the 
STD agrees to abide by the lobbying restrictions set forth in 49 CFR 
part 20. In signing the project agreement, the State is

[[Page 142]]

providing the certification required in appendix A to 49 CFR part 20.


<R04>
             Subpart B_Plans, Specifications, and Estimates

    Source: 43 FR 58564, Dec. 15, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 630.201  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) procedures relating to the preparation, 
submission, and approval of plans, specifications and estimates (PS&E), 
and supporting documents for Federal-aid projects.


<R05>
Sec. 630.203  Applicability.

    The provisions of this regulation apply to all highway construction 
projects financed in whole or in part with Federal-aid highway funds and 
to be undertaken by a State or political subdivision.

[69 FR 7118, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 630.205  Preparation, submission, and approval.

    (a) The contents and number of copies of the PS&E assembly shall be 
determined by the FHWA.
    (b) Plans and specifications shall describe the location and design 
features and the construction requirements in sufficient detail to 
facilitate the construction, the contract control and the estimation of 
construction costs of the project. The estimate shall reflect the 
anticipated cost of the project in sufficient detail to provide an 
initial prediction of the financial obligations to be incurred by the 
State and FHWA and to permit an effectice review and comparison of the 
bids received.
    (c) PS&E assemblies for Federal-aid highway projects shall be 
submitted to the FHWA for approval.
    (d) The State highway agency (SHA) shall be advised of approval of 
the PS&E by the FHWA.
    (e) No project or part thereof for actual construction shall be 
advertised for contract nor work commenced by force account until the 
PS&E has been approved by the FHWA and the SHA has been so notified.

Subpart C [Reserved]


<R04>
                       Subpart D_Geodetic Markers

    Source: 39 FR 26414, July 19, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 630.401  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe procedures for 
conducting geodetic control surveys when participation with Federal-aid 
highway funds in the cost thereof is proposed and to encourage inter-
agency cooperation in setting station markers, surveying to measure 
their position, and preserving the control so established.


<R05>
Sec. 630.402  Policy.

    (a) Geodetic surveys along Federal-aid highway routes may be 
programmed as Federal-aid highway projects.
    (b) All geodetic survey work performed as a Federal-aid highway 
project will conform to National Ocean Survey (NOS) specifications. NOS 
will, as the representative of FHWA, be responsible for the inspection 
and verification of the work to ascertain that the specifications for 
the work have been met. Final project acceptance by FHWA will be 
predicated on a finding of acceptability by NOS.


<R05>
Sec. 630.403  Initiation of projects.

    All projects shall be coordinated by the FHWA Division 
Administrator, the State highway department and the National Ocean 
Survey.


<R05>
Sec. 630.404  Standards.

    (a) Highway purposes may best be served by the establishment of 
station markings for horizontal control along Federal-aid highway routes 
at spacings of three to eight kilometers (about 2 to 5 miles) and 
station markers for vertical control of spacings no closer than one 
kilometer. These requirements may be waived only with the approval of 
the Administrator.
    (b) Projects should be of sufficient scope to permit efficient use 
of field parties. Projects should extend at least 30 kilometers. 
Projects may be coordinated with adjoining States to attain greater 
efficiency.

[[Page 143]]

    (c) Where geodetic station markers cannot be established inititally 
at points readily accessible from the Federal-aid route, or where 
unavoidable circumstances result in their being established within 
construction limits, supplemental projects may later be approved to set 
and survey markers at satisfactory permanent points, preferably within 
the right-of-way but at points where their use does not introduce 
traffic hazards.

Subparts E-F [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart G_Advance Construction of Federal-Aid Projects

    Source: 60 FR 36993, July 19, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 630.701  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe procedures for advancing 
the construction of Federal-aid highway projects without obligating 
Federal funds apportioned or allocated to the State.


<R05>
Sec. 630.703  Eligibility.

    (a) The State Highway Agency (SHA) may proceed with a highway 
substitute, congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program, 
surface transportation program, bridge replacement and rehabilitation, 
or planning and research project in accordance with this subpart, 
provided the SHA:
    (1) Has obligated all funds apportioned or allocated to it under 23 
U.S.C. 103(e)(4)(H), 104(b)(2), 104(b)(3), 104(f), 144, or 307, as the 
case may be for the proposed project, or
    (2) Has used all obligation authority distributed to it, or
    (3) Demonstrates that it will use all obligation authority 
distributed to it.
    (b) The SHA may proceed with a National Highway System (NHS) or 
Interstate project in accordance with this subpart without regard to 
apportionment or obligation authority balances. Interstate projects 
include Interstate construction and Interstate maintenance.


<R05>
Sec. 630.705  Procedures.

    (a) An advance construction project shall meet the same requirements 
and be processed in the same manner as a regular Federal-aid project, 
except,
    (1) The FHWA authorization does not constitute any commitment of 
Federal funds on the project, and
    (2) The FHWA shall not reimburse the State until the project is 
converted under Sec. 630.709.
    (b) Project numbers shall be identified by the letters ``AC'' 
preceding the regular project number prefix.

[60 FR 36993, July 19, 1995, as amended at 68 FR 60033, Oct. 21, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 630.707  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 630.709  Conversion to a regular Federal-aid project.

    (a) The SHA may submit a written request to the FHWA that a project 
be converted to a regular Federal-aid project at any time provided that 
sufficient Federal-aid funds and obligation authority are available.
    (b) Subsequent to FHWA approval the SHA may claim reimbursement for 
the Federal share of project costs incurred, provided the project 
agreement has been executed. If the SHA has previously submitted a final 
voucher, the FHWA will process the voucher for payment.


<R04>
                    Subpart H_Bridges on Federal Dams

    Source: 39 FR 36474, Oct. 10, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 630.801  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe procedures for the 
construction and financing, by an agency of the Federal Government, of 
public highway bridges over dams constructed and owned by or for the 
United States.


<R05>
Sec. 630.802  Applicability.

    A proposed bridge over a dam, together with the approach roads to 
connect the bridge with existing public highways, must be eligible for 
inclusion in the Federal-aid highway system, if not already a part 
thereof.

[[Page 144]]


<R05>
Sec. 630.803  Procedures.

    A State's application to qualify a project under this subpart will 
include:
    (a) A certification that the bridge is economically desirable and 
needed as a link in the Federal-aid highway system.
    (b) A statement showing the source and availability of funds to be 
used in construction of the roadway approaches.
    (c) A statement of any obligation on the part of the agency 
constructing the dam to provide such bridge or approach roads to satisfy 
a legal liability incurred independently of this subpart.

Subpart I [Reserved]


<R04>
        Subpart J_Traffic Safety in Highway and Street Work Zones

    Source: 43 FR 47140, Oct. 12, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 630.1002  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to provide guidance and establish 
procedures to assure that adequate consideration is given to motorists, 
pedestrians, and construction workers on all Federal-aid construction 
projects.


<R05>
Sec. 630.1004  Background.

    Part VI of the manual on uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD) \1\ 
sets forth basic priniciples and prescribes standards for the design, 
application, installation, and maintenance of the various types of 
traffic control devices for highway and street construction, maintenance 
operation, and utility work. The manual cannot address in depth the 
variety of situations that occur in providing traffic control in work 
zones. Although agencies responsible for traffic control and work area 
protection have attempted to develop some guidelines, a coordinated and 
comprehensive effort to develop greater uniformity is desirable. 
National reviews have shown that more attention is needed to insure that 
the MUTCD is properly implemented on all highway projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The MUTCD is available from the Superintendent of Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. It is 
incorporated by reference at 23 CFR 655, subpart F.

[43 FR 47140, Oct. 12, 1978, as amended at 51 FR 16834, May 7, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 630.1006  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Federal Highway Administration that each 
highway agency shall develop and implement procedures consonant with the 
requirements of this regulation that will assure the safety of 
motorists, pedestrians, and construction workers on Federal-aid highway 
construction projects. The procedures shall be consistent with the 
provisions of the MUTCD. Highway agencies should be encouraged to 
implement these procedures for non-Federal-aid projects and maintenance 
operations as well.


<R05>
Sec. 630.1008  Implementation.

    The FHWA Division Administrator shall review and approve the highway 
agency's implementation of its procedures at appropriate intervals. The 
FHWA shall take appropriate action to assure that the highway agency's 
procedures are being followed and achieve the results intended. Major 
revisions in established procedures shall be submitted to the FHWA 
Division Administrator for information.


<R05>
Sec. 630.1010  Contents of the agency procedures.

    The agency's procedures shall include, but not necessarily be 
limited to the following:
    (a) Traffic control plan (TCP). (1) A traffic control plan is a plan 
for handling traffic through a specific highway or street work zone or 
project. These plans may range in scope from a very detailed TCP 
designed solely for a specific project, to a reference to standard 
plans, a section of the MUTCD, or a standard highway agency manual. The 
degree of detail in the TCP will depend on the project complexity and 
traffic interference with construction activity.
    (2) Traffic control plans shall be developed for all projects and be 
included in plans, specifications, and estimates (P.S. & E.'s) and shall 
be consistent with part VI of the MUTCD.

[[Page 145]]

    (3) The scope of the TCP should be determined during planning and 
design phases of a project.
    (4) Provisions may be made to permit contractors to develop their 
own TCP's and use them if the highway agency and FHWA find that these 
plans are as good as or better than those provided in the P.S. & E.
    (5)(i) Two-lane, two-way operation on one roadway of a normally 
divided highway (TLTWO) shall be used only after careful consideration 
of other available methods of traffic control. Where the TLTWO is used, 
the TCP shall include provisions for the separation of opposing traffic 
except:
    (A) Where the TLTWO is located on an urban type street or arterial 
where operating speeds are low;
    (B) Where drivers entering the TLTWO can see the transition back to 
normal one-way operation on each roadway; or
    (C) Where FHWA approves nonuse of separation devices based on 
unusual circumstances.
    (ii) Center line striping, raised pavement markers, and 
complementary signing, either alone or in combination, are not 
considered acceptable for separation purposes.
    (b) Responsible person. The highway agency shall designate a 
qualified person at the project level who will have the primary 
responsibility and sufficient authority for assuring that the TCP and 
other safety aspects of the contract are effectively administered. While 
the project or resident engineer may have this responsibility, on large 
complex projects another person should be assigned at the proj ect level 
to handle traffic control on a full-time basis.
    (c) Pay items. The P.S. & E. should include unit pay items for 
providing, installing, moving, replacing, maintaining, and cleaning 
traffic control devices required by the TCP. Suitable force account 
procedures may be utilized for traffic control items. Lump-sum method of 
payment should be used only to cover very small projects, projects of 
short duration, contingency, and general items. Payment for traffic 
control items as incidental to other items of work should be 
discouraged.
    (d) Training. All persons responsible for the development, design, 
implementation, and inspection of traffic control shall be adequately 
trained.
    (e) Process review and evaluation. (1) A review team consisting of 
appropriate highway agency personnel shall annually review randomly 
selected projects throughout its jurisdiction for the purpose of 
assessing the effectiveness of its procedures. The agency may elect to 
include an FHWA representative as a member of the team. The results of 
this review are to be forwarded to the FHWA Division Administrator for 
his review and approval of the highway agency's annual traffic safety 
effort.
    (2) Construction zone accidents and accident data shall be analyzed 
and used to continually correct deficiencies which are found to exist on 
individual projects, and to improve the content of future traffic 
control plans.

[43 FR 47140, Oct. 12, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 21780, May 20, 1982]


<R03>
PART 633_REQUIRED CONTRACT PROVISIONS--Table of Contents




  Subpart A_Federal-Aid Construction Contracts (Other Than Appalachian 
                               Contracts)

Sec.
633.101 Purpose.
633.102 Applicability.
633.103 Regulatory authority.
633.104 Availability.

         Subpart B_Federal-Aid Contracts (Appalachian Contracts)

633.201 Purpose.
633.202 Definitions.
633.203 Applicability of existing laws, regulations, and directives.
633.204 Fiscal allocation and obligations.
633.205 Prefinancing.
633.206 Project agreements.
633.207 Construction labor and materials.
633.208 Maintenance.
633.209 Notices to prospective Federal-aid construction contractors.
633.210 Termination of contract.
633.211 Implementation of the Clean Air Act and the Federal Water 
          Pollution Control Act.

Appendix A to Subpart B--Types of Contracts to Which the Civil Rights 
          Act of 1964 Is Applicable

[[Page 146]]

Appendix B to Subpart B--Required Contract Provisions, Appalachian 
          Development Highway System and Local Access Roads Construction 
          Contracts
Appendix C to Subpart B--Additional Required Contract Provisions, 
          Appalachian Development Highway System and Local Access Roads 
          Contracts Other Than Construction Contracts
Appendix D to Subpart B--Federal-Aid Proposal Notices


<R04>
  Subpart A_Federal-Aid Construction Contracts (Other Than Appalachian 
                               Contracts)

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 114 and 315; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 52 FR 36920, Oct. 2, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 633.101  Purpose.

    To prescribe for Federal-aid highway proposals and construction 
contracts the method for inclusion of required contract provisions of 
existing regulations which cover employment, nonsegregated facilities, 
record of materials and supplies, subletting or assigning the contract, 
safety, false statements concerning highway projects, termination of a 
contract, and implementation of the Clean Air Act and the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act, and other provisions as shall from time-to-time 
be required by law and regulation as conditions of Federal assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 633.102  Applicability.

    (a) The required contract provisions and the required proposal 
notices apply to all Federal-aid construction contracts other than 
Appalachian construction contracts.
    (b) Form FHWA-1273, ``Required Contract Provisions, Federal-aid 
Construction Contracts,'' contains required contract provisions and 
required proposal notices that are required by regulations promulgated 
by the FHWA or other Federal agencies. The required contract provisions 
of Form FHWA-1273 shall be physically incorporated in each Federal-aid 
highway construction contract other than Appalachian construction 
contracts (see Sec. 633.104 for availability of form).
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) The required contract provisions contained in Form FHWA-1273 
shall apply to all work performed on the contract by the contractor's 
own organization and to all work performed on the contract by piecework, 
station work, or by subcontract.
    (e) The contractor shall insert in each subcontract, except as 
excluded by law or regulation, the required contract provisions 
contained in Form FHWA-1273 and further require their inclusion in any 
lower tier subcontract that may in turn be made. The required contract 
provisions of Form FHWA-1273 shall not be incorporated by reference in 
any case. The prime contractor shall be responsible for compliance by 
any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor with the requirements 
contained in the provisions of Form FHWA-1273.
    (f) The State highway agency (SHA) shall include the notices 
concerning certification of nonsegregated facilities and implementation 
of the Clean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act, pursuant 
to 40 CFR part 15, in all bidding proposals for Federal-aid highway 
construction projects. As the notices are reproduced in Form FHWA-1273, 
the SHA may include Form FHWA-1273 in its entirety to meet this 
requirement.

[52 FR 36920, Oct. 2, 1987, as amended at 69 FR 7118, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 633.103  Regulatory authority.

    All required contract provisions contained in Form FHWA-1273 are 
requirements of regulations promulgated by the FHWA or other Federal 
agencies.The authority for each provision will be cited in the text of 
Form FHWA-1273.


<R05>
Sec. 633.104  Availability.

    (a) Form FHWA-1273 will be maintained by the FHWA and as regulatory 
revisions occur, the form will be updated.
    (b) Current copies of Form FHWA-1273, Required Contract Provisions, 
will be made available to the SHAs by the FHWA.

[[Page 147]]


<R04>
         Subpart B_Federal-Aid Contracts (Appalachian Contracts)

    Authority: 40 U.S.C. App. 201, 402; 23 U.S.C. 315; 49 CFR 
1.48(b)(35).

    Source: 39 FR 35146, Sept. 30, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 633.201  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subpart is to establish 
policies and outline procedures for administering projects and funds for 
the Appalachian Development Highway System and Appalachian local access 
roads.


<R05>
Sec. 633.202  Definitions.

    (a) The word Commission means the Appalachian Regional Commission 
(ARC) established by the Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965, 
as amended (Act).
    (b) The term division administrator'' means the chief Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA) official assigned to conduct FHWA business 
in a particular State.

[39 FR 35156, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 49084, Oct. 21, 1975; 
41 FR 8769, Mar. 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 633.203  Applicability of existing laws, regulations, and directives.

    The provisions of title 23 U.S.C., that are applicable to the 
construction and maintenance of Federal-aid primary and secondary 
highways, and which the Secretary of Transportation determines are not 
inconsistent with the Act, shall apply, respectively, to the development 
highway system and the local access roads. In addition, the Regulations 
for the Administration of Federal-aid for Highways (title 23, Code of 
Federal Regulations) and directives implementing applicable provisions 
of title 23 U.S.C., where not inconsistent with the Act, shall be 
applicable to such projects.


<R05>
Sec. 633.204  Fiscal allocation and obligations.

    (a) Federal assistance to any project under the Act shall be as 
determined by the Commission, but in no event shall such Federal 
assistance exceed 70 per centum of the cost of such a project.
    (b) The division administrator's authorization to proceed with the 
proposed work shall establish obligation of Federal funds with regard to 
a particular project.

[39 FR 35156, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 49084, Oct. 21, 1975; 
41 FR 8769, Mar. 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 633.205  Prefinancing.

    (a) Under the provisions of subsection 201(h) of the Act, projects 
located on the Appalachian Development Highway System including 
preliminary engineering, right-of-way, and/or construction may be 
programed and advanced with interim State financing.
    (b) Program approvals, plans, specifications, and estimates (PS&E) 
approval, authorizations to proceed, concurrence in award of contracts, 
and all other notifications to the State of advancement of a project 
shall include the statement, ``There is no commitment or obligation on 
the part of the United States to provide funds for this highway 
improvement. However, this project is eligible for Federal reimbursement 
when sufficient funds are available from the amounts allocated by the 
Appalachian Regional Commission.''


<R05>
Sec. 633.206  Project agreements.

    (a) Project agreements executed for projects under the Appalachian 
program shall contain the following paragraphs:
    (1) ``For projects constructed under section 201 of the Appalachian 
Regional Development Act of 1965, as amended, the State highway 
department agrees to comply with all applicable provisions of said Act, 
regulations issued thereunder, and policies and procedures promulgated 
by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and the Federal Highway 
Administration. Inasmuch as a primary objective of the Appalachian 
Regional Development Act of 1965 is to provide employment, the State 
highway department further agrees that in addition to the other 
applicable provisions of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, part 21, 
Sec. 21.5(c)(1), and paragraphs (2)(iii) and (2)(v) of appendix C 
thereof, shall be applicable to all employment practices in connection 
with

[[Page 148]]

this project, and to the State's employment practices with respect to 
those employees connected with the Appalachian Highway Program.''
    (2) ``For projects constructed on a section of an Appalachian 
development route not already on the Federal-aid Primary System, the 
State highway department agrees to add the section to the Federal-aid 
Primary System prior to, or upon completion of, construction 
accomplished with Appalachian funds.''
    (b) For prefinanced projects, the following additional provision 
shall be incorporated into the project agreement: ``Project for 
Construction on the Appalachian Development Highway System in Advance of 
the Appropriation of Funds. This project, to be constructed pursuant to 
subsection 201(h) of the Appalachian Regional Development Act Amendments 
of 1967, will be constructed in accordance with all procedures and 
requirements and standards applicable to projects on the Appalachian 
Development Highway System financed with the aid of Appalachian funds. 
No obligation of Appalachian funds is created by this agreement, its 
purpose and intent being to provide that, upon application by the State 
highway department, and approval thereof by the Federal Highway 
Administration, any Appalachian development highway funds made available 
to the State by the Appalachian Regional Commission subsequent to the 
date of this agreement may be used to reimburse the State for the 
Federal share of the cost of work done on the project.''


<R05>
Sec. 633.207  Construction labor and materials.

    (a) Construction and materials shall be in accordance with the State 
highway department standard construction specifications approved for use 
on Federal-aid primary projects and special provisions and supplemental 
specifications amendatory thereto approved for use on the specific 
projects.
    (b) The provisions of 23 U.S.C. 324 and of title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (78 Stat. 252; 42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4) and the 
implementing regulations in 49 CFR part 21, including the provisions of 
Sec. 21.5(c)(1), and paragraphs (2)(iii) and (2)(v) of appendix C 
thereof relative to employment practices, shall be applicable to all 
types of contracts listed in appendix A.
    (c) The ``Required Contract Provisions, Appalachian Development 
Highway System and Local Access Roads Construction Contracts,'' Form PR-
1316 (appendix B), shall be included in all construction contracts 
awarded under the Act.
    (d) The required contract provisions set forth in Form PR-1317 
(appendix C) shall be included in all types of contracts described in 
appendix A, other than construction contracts.
    (e) In the design and construction of highways and roads under the 
Act, the State may give special preference to the use of mineral 
resource materials native to the Appalachian region. The provisions of 
Sec. 635.409 of this chapter shall not apply to projects under the Act 
to the extent such provisions are inconsistent with sections 201(d) and 
(e) of the Act.

[39 FR 35146, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 49084, Oct. 21, 1975; 
41 FR 36204, Aug. 27, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 633.208  Maintenance.

    Maintenance of all highway projects constructed under the Act, 
whether on the development system or local access roads, shall be the 
responsibility of the State. The State may arrange for maintenance of 
such roads or portions thereof, by agreement with a local governmental 
unit.


<R05>
Sec. 633.209  Notices to prospective Federal-aid construction contractors.

    The State highway department shall include the notices set forth in 
appendix D in all future bidding proposals for Appalachian Development 
System and Appalachian local access roads construction contracts.


<R05>
Sec. 633.210  Termination of contract.

    All contracts exceeding $2,500 shall contain suitable provisions for 
termination by the State, including the manner in which the termination 
will be effected and the basis for settlement. In addition, such 
contracts shall describe conditions under which the contract may be 
terminated for default

[[Page 149]]

as well as conditions where the contract may be terminated because of 
circumstances beyond the control of the contractor.


<R05>
Sec. 633.211  Implementation of the Clean Air Act and the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act.

    Pursuant to regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (40 
CFR part 15) implementing requirements with respect to the Clean Air Act 
and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act are included in appendix B 
to this part.

[40 FR 49084, Oct. 21, 1975]

  Appendix A to Subpart B of Part 633--Types of Contracts to Which the 
                 Civil Rights Act of 1964 Is Applicable

    Section 324 of title 23 U.S.C., the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and 
the implementing regulations of the Department of Transportation (49 CFR 
part 21), including the provisions of paragraphs (2)(iii) and (2)(v) of 
appendix C thereof relative to employment practices, are applicable to 
the following types of contracts awarded by State highway departments, 
contractors, and first tier subcontractors, including those who supply 
materials and lease equipment:
    1. Construction.
    2. Planning.
    3. Research.
    4. Highway Safety.
    5. Engineering.
    6. Property Management.
    7. Fee contracts and other commitments with persons for services 
incidental to the acquisition of right-of-way including, but not limited 
to:
    a. Advertising contracts.
    b. Agreements for economic studies.
    c. Contracts for surveys and plats.
    d. Contracts for abstracts of title certificates and title 
insurance.
    e. Contracts for appraisal services and expert witness fees.
    f. Contracts to negotiate for the acquisition of right-of-way.
    g. Contracts for disposal of improvements and property management 
services.
    h. Contracts for employment of fee attorneys for right-of-way 
procurement, or preparation and trial of condemnation cases.
    i. Contracts for escrow and closing services.

[40 FR 49084, Oct. 21, 1975]

   Appendix B to Subpart B of Part 633--Required Contract Provisions, 
     Appalachian Development Highway System and Local Access Roads 
                         Construction Contracts

     I.  Application.
    II.  Employment Preference.
   III.  Equal Opportunity: Employment Practices.
    IV.  Equal Opportunity: Selection of Subcontractors, Procurement of
          Materials, and Leasing of Equipment.
     V.  Nonsegregated Facilities.
    VI.  Payment of Predetermined Minimum Wages.
   VII.  Statements and Payrolls.
  VIII.  Record of Materials, Supplies and Labor.
    IX.  Subletting or Assigning the Contract.
     X.  Safety: Accident Prevention.
    XI.  False Statements Concerning Highway Projects.
   XII.  Implementation of Clean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution
          Control Act.
 

I. Application.
    1. These contract provisions shall apply to all work performed on 
the contract by the contractor with his own organization and with the 
assistance of workmen under his immediate superintendence and to all 
work performed on the contract by piecework, station work, or by 
subcontract.
    2. Except as otherwise provided in sections II, III, and IV hereof, 
the contractor shall insert in each of his subcontracts all of the 
stipulations contained in these Required Contract Provisions and also a 
clause requiring his subcontractors to include these Required Contract 
Provisions in any lower tier subcontracts which they may enter into, 
together with a clause requiring the inclusion of these provisions in 
any further subcontracts that may in turn be made. The Required Contract 
Provisions shall in no instance be incorporated by reference.
    3. A breach of any of the stipulations contained in these Required 
Contract Provisions may be grounds for termination of the contract.
    4. A breach of the following clauses may also be grounds for 
debarment as provided in 29 CFR 5.6(b):
    Section 1, paragraph 2.
    Section VI, paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 8a.
    Section VII, paragraphs 1, 5a, 5b and 5d.

II. Employment preference.
    1. During the performance of this contract, the contractor 
undertaking to do work which is, or reasonably may be, done as on-site 
work, shall give preference to qualified persons who regularly reside in 
the labor area as designated by the United States Department of Labor 
wherein the contract work is situated, or the subregion, or the 
Appalachian counties of the State wherein the contract work is situated, 
except:
    a. To the extent that qualified persons regularly residing in the 
area are not available.
    b. For the reasonable needs of the contractor to employ supervisory 
or specially

[[Page 150]]

experienced personnel necessary to assure an efficient execution of the 
contract work.
    c. For the obligation of the contractor to offer employment to 
present or former employees as the result of a lawful collective 
bargaining contract, provided that the number of nonresident persons 
employed under this subparagraph 1c shall not exceed 20 percent of the 
total number of employees employed by the contractor on the contract 
work, except as provided in subparagraph 4 below.
    2. The contractor shall place a job order with the State Employment 
Service indicating (a) the classifications of laborers, mechanics and 
other employees he anticipates will be required to perform the contract 
work, (b) the number of employees required in each classification, (c) 
the date on which he estimates such employees will be required, and (d) 
any other pertinent information required by the State Employment Service 
to complete the job order form. The job order may be placed with the 
State Employment Service in writing or by telephone. If during the 
course of the contract work, the information submitted by the contractor 
in the original job order is substantially modified, he shall promptly 
notify the State Employment Service.
    3. The contractor shall give full consideration to all qualified job 
applicants referred to him by the State Employment Service. The 
contractor is not required to grant employment to any job applicants 
who, in his opinion, are not qualified to perform the classification of 
work required.
    4. If, within one week following the placing of a job order by the 
contractor with the State Employment Service, the State Employment 
Service is unable to refer any qualified job applicants to the 
contractor, or less than the number requested, the State Employment 
Service will forward a certificate to the contractor indicating the 
unavailability of applicants. Such certificate shall be made a part of 
the contractor's permanent project records. Upon receipt of this 
certificate, the contractor may employ persons who do not normally 
reside in the labor area to fill the positions covered by the 
certificate, notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph 1c above.
    5. The contractor shall include the provisions of section II-1 
through II-4 in every subcontract for work which is, or reasonably may 
be, done as on-site work.

III. Equal opportunity: employment practices.

    During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as 
follows:
    a. The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or 
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or 
national origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure 
that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during 
employment without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, or 
national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to the 
following: Employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or 
recruitment advertising; layoffs or termination; rates of pay or other 
forms of compensation; and selection of training, including 
apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, 
available to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be 
provided by the State highway department setting forth the provisions of 
this nondiscrimination clause.
    b. The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisements for 
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all 
qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without 
regard to race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
    c. The contractor will send to each labor union or representative of 
workers with which he has a collective bargaining agreement or other 
contract or understanding, a notice to be provided by the State highway 
department advising the said labor union or workers' representative of 
the contractor's commitments under this section III and shall post 
copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and 
applicants for employment.
    d. The contractor will comply with all provisions of Executive Order 
11246 of September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations and relevant 
orders of the Secretary of Labor.
    e. The contractor will furnish all information and reports required 
by Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by rules, 
regulations and orders of the Secretary of Labor or pursuant thereto, 
and will permit access to his books, records and accounts by the Federal 
Highway Administration and the Secretary of Labor for purposes of 
investigation to ascertain compliance with such rules, regulations and 
orders.
    f. In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the 
nondiscrimination clauses of this contract or with any of the said 
rules, regulations or orders, this contract may be canceled, terminated 
or suspended in whole or in part and the contractor may be declared 
ineligible for further Government contracts or federally-assisted 
construction contracts in accordance with procedures authorized in 
Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and such other sanctions 
may be imposed and remedies invoked as provided in Executive Order 11246 
of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation or order of the Secretary 
of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
    g. The contractor will include the provisions of this section III in 
every subcontract or purchase order unless exempted by rules, 
regulations or orders of the Secretary of

[[Page 151]]

Labor issued pursuant to section 204 of Executive Order 11246 of 
September 24, 1965, so that such provisions will be binding upon each 
subcontractor or vendor. The contractor will take such action with 
respect to any subcontract or purchase order as the State Highway 
Department or the Federal Highway Administration may direct as a means 
of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for noncompliance: 
Provided, however, That in the event a contractor becomes involved in, 
or is threatened with litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a 
result of such direction by the Federal Highway Administration, the 
contractor may request the United States to enter into such litigation 
to protect the interests of the United States.

IV. Equal opportunity selection of subcontractors, procurement of 
          materials, and leasing of equipment.

    During the performance of this contract, the contractor, for itself, 
its assignees and successors in interest (hereinafter referred to as the 
contractor), agrees as follows:
    1. Compliance with regulations. The contractor shall comply with the 
provisions of 23 U.S.C. 324 and with the regulations relative to 
nondiscrimination in Federally-assisted programs of the Department of 
Transportation (hereinafter, ``DOT'') title 49, Code of Federal 
Regulations, part 21, as they may be amended from time to time 
(hereinafter referred to as the Regulations), which are herein 
incorporated by reference and made a part of this contract.
    2. Nondiscrimination. The contractor, with regard to the work 
performed by it during the contract, shall not discriminate on the 
grounds of race, color, sex, or national origin in the selection and 
retention of subcontractors, including procurements of materials and 
leases of equipments. The contractor shall not participate either 
directly or indirectly in the discrimination prohibited by section 21.5 
of the Regulations, including employment practices.
    3. Solicitations for subcontracts including procurement of materials 
and equipment. In all solicitations either by competitive bidding or 
negotiation made by the contractor for work to be performed under a 
subcontract, including procurements of materials or leases of equipment, 
each potential subcontractor or supplier, shall be notified by the 
contractor of the contractor's obligations under this contract and the 
Regulations relative to nondiscrimination on the grounds of race, color, 
sex, or national origin.
    4. Information and reports. The contractor shall provide all 
information and reports required by the Regulations, or directives 
issued pursuant thereto, and shall permit access to its books, records, 
accounts, other sources of information, and its facilities as may be 
determined by the State highway department or the Federal Highway 
Administration to be pertinent to ascertain compliance with such 
Regulations, orders and instructions. Where any information required of 
a contractor is in the exclusive possession of another who fails or 
refuses to furnish this information, the contractor shall so certify to 
the State highway department, or the Federal Highway Administration, as 
appropriate, and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the 
information.
    5. Sanctions for noncompliance. In the event of the contractor's 
noncompliance with the nondiscrimination provisions of this contract, 
the State highway department shall impose such contract sanctions as it 
or the Federal Highway Administration may determine to be appropriate, 
including, but not limited to:
    a. Withholding of payments to the contractor under the contract 
until the contractor complies, and/or
    b. Cancellation, termination or suspension of the contract, in whole 
or in part.
    6. Incorporation of provisions. The contractor will include the 
provisions of paragraphs (1) through (6) in every subcontract, including 
procurements of materials and leases of equipment, unless exempt by the 
Regulations, or directives issued pursuant thereto. The contractor shall 
take such action with respect to any subcontract or procurement, as the 
State highway department or the Federal Highway Administration may 
direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for 
noncompliance: Provided, however, That, in the event a contractor 
becomes involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a 
subcontractor or supplier, as a result of such direction, the contractor 
may request the State to enter into such litigation to protect the 
interests of the State, and, in addition, the contractor may request the 
United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of 
the United States.

V. Nonsegregated facilities.

    (Applicable to Federal-aid construction contracts and related 
subcontracts exceeding $10,000 which are not exempt from the Equal 
Opportunity clause.)
    By submission of this bid, the execution of this contract or 
subcontract, or the consummation of this material supply agreement, as 
appropriate, the bidder, Federal-aid construction contractor, 
subcontractor, or material supplier, as appropriate, certifies that he 
does not maintain or provide for his employees any segregated facilities 
at any of his establishments, and that he does not permit his employees 
to perform their services at any location, under his control, where 
segregated facilities are maintained. He certifies further that he will 
not maintain or provide for his employees any segregated facilities at 
any of his establishments, and

[[Page 152]]

that he will not permit his employees to perform their services at any 
location, under his control, where segregated facilities are maintained. 
He agrees that a breach of this certification is a violation of the 
Equal Opportunity clause in this contract. As used in this 
certification, the term segregated facilities means any waiting rooms, 
work areas, restrooms and washrooms, restaurants and other eating areas, 
timeclocks, locker rooms and other storage or dressing areas, parking 
lots, drinking fountains, recreation or entertainment areas, 
transportation, and housing facilities provided for employees which are 
segregated by explicit directive or are in fact segregated on the basis 
of race, creed, color, or national origin, because of habit, local 
custom, or otherwise. He agrees that (except where he has obtained 
identical certifications from proposed subcontractors and material 
suppliers for specific time periods), he will obtain identical 
certifications from proposed subcontractors or material suppliers prior 
to the award of subcontracts or the consummation of material supply 
agreements, exceeding $10,000 which are not exempt from the provisions 
of the Equal Opportunity clause, and that he will retain such 
certification in his files.

VI. Payment of predetermined minimum wages.

    1. General. All mechanics and laborers employed or working upon the 
site of the work will be paid unconditionally and not less than once a 
week, and without subsequent deduction or rebate on any account, except 
such payroll deductions as are permitted by regulations issued by the 
Secretary of Labor under the Copeland Act (29 CFR part 3), the full 
amounts due at time of payment computed at wage rates not less than 
those contained in the wage determination decision of the Secretary of 
Labor which is attached hereto and made a part thereof, regardless of 
any contractual relationship which may be alleged to exist between the 
contractor and such laborers and mechanics; and the wage determination 
decision shall be posted by the contractor at the site of the work in a 
prominent place where it can be easily seen by the workers. For the 
purpose of this clause, contributions made or costs reasonably 
anticipated under section 1(b)(2) of the Davis-Bacon Act on behalf of 
laborers or mechanics are considered wages paid to such laborers or 
mechanics, subject to the provisions of section VI, paragraph 3b, 
hereof. Also for the purpose of this clause, regular contributions made 
or costs incurred for more than a weekly period under plans, funds, or 
programs, but covering the particular weekly period, are deemed to be 
constructively made or incurred during such weekly period.
    2. Classifications--a. The State highway department contracting 
officer shall require that any class of laborers or mechanics which is 
not listed in the wage determination and which is to be employed under 
the contract, shall be classified or reclassified conformably to the 
wage determination, and a report of the action taken shall be sent by 
the State highway department contracting officer to the Secretary of 
Labor.
    b. In the event the interested parties cannot agree on the proper 
classification or reclassification of a particular class of laborers and 
mechanics to be used, the question accompanied by the recommendation of 
the State highway department contracting officer shall be referred to 
the Secretary for final determination.
    3. Payment of fringe benefits--a. The State highway department 
contracting officer shall require, whenever the minimum wage rate 
prescribed in the contract for a class of laborers or mechanics includes 
a fringe benefit which is not expressed as an hourly wage rate and the 
contractor is obligated to pay a cash equivalent of such a fringe 
benefit, an hourly cash equivalent thereof to be established. In the 
event the interested parties cannot agree upon a cash equivalent of the 
fringe benefits, the question, accompanied by the recommendation of the 
contracting officer, shall be referred to the Secretary of Labor for 
determination.
    b. If the contractor does not make payments to a trustee or other 
third person, he may consider as part of the wage of any laborer or 
mechanic the amount of any costs reasonably anticipated in providing 
benefits under a plan or program of a type expressly listed in the wage 
determination decision of the Secretary of Labor which is part of this 
contract: Provided, however, The Secretary of Labor has found, upon the 
written request of the contractor, that the applicable standards of the 
Davis-Bacon Act have been met. The Secretary of Labor may require the 
contractor to set aside in a separate account assets for the meeting of 
obligations under the plan or program.
    4. Payment of excess wages. While the wage rates shown are the 
minimum rates required by the contract to be paid during its life, this 
is not a representation that labor can be obtained at these rates. No 
increase in the contract price shall be allowed or authorized on account 
of the payment of wage rates in excess of those listed herein.
    5. Apprentices and trainees (Programs of Department of Labor). a. 
Apprentices will be permitted to work at less than the predetermined 
rate for the work they performed when they are employed and individually 
registered in a bona fide apprenticeship program registered with the 
U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower Administration, Bureau of 
Apprenticeship and Training, or with a State Apprenticeship Agency 
recognized by the Bureau, or if a person is employed in his first 90 
days of probationary employment as an apprentice in such an 
apprenticeship program,

[[Page 153]]

who is not individually registered in the program, but who has been 
certified by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training or a State 
Apprenticeship Agency (where appropriate) to be eligible for 
probationary employment as an apprentice. The allowable ratio of 
apprentices to journeymen in any craft classification shall not be 
greater than the ratio permitted to the contractor as to his entire work 
force under the registered program. Any employee listed on a payroll at 
an apprentice wage rate, who is not a trainee as defined in 29 CFR 
5.2(c)(2) or is not registered or otherwise employed as stated above, 
shall be paid the wage rate determined by the Secretary of Labor for the 
classification of work he actually performed. The contractor or 
subcontractor will be required to furnish to the State highway 
department or to a representative of the Wage-Hour Division of the U.S. 
Department of Labor written evidence of the registration of his program 
and apprentices as well as the appropriate ratios and wage rates 
(expressed in percentages of the journeyman hourly rates), for the area 
of construction prior to using any apprentices on the contract work. The 
wage rate paid apprentices shall be not less than the appropriate 
percentage of the journeyman's rate contained in the applicable wage 
determination.
    b. Trainees, except as provided in 29 CFR 5.15, will not be 
permitted to work at less than the predetermined rate for the work 
performed unless they are employed pursuant to and individually 
registered in a program which has received prior approval, evidenced by 
formal certification, by the U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower 
Administration, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training. The ratio of 
trainees to journeymen shall not be greater than permitted under the 
plan approved by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training. Every 
trainee must be paid at not less than the rate specified in the approved 
program for his level of progress. Any employee listed on the payroll at 
a trainee rate who is not registered and participating in a training 
plan approved by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training shall be paid 
not less than the wage rate determined by the Secretary of Labor for the 
classification of work he actually performed. The contractor or 
subcontractor will be required to furnish the State highway department 
or a representative of the Wage-Hour Division of the U.S. Department of 
Labor written evidence of the certification of his program, the 
registration of the trainees, and the ratios and wage rates prescribed 
in that program. In the event the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training 
withdraws approval of a training program, the contractor will no longer 
be permitted to utilize trainees at less than the applicable 
predetermined rate for the work performed until an acceptable program is 
approved.
    c. The utilization of apprentices, trainees and journeymen shall be 
in conformity with the equal employment opportunity requirements of 
Executive Order 11246, as amended, and 29 CFR part 30.
    6. Apprentices and trainees (Programs of Department of 
Transportation). Apprentices and trainees working under apprenticeship 
and skill training programs which have been certified by the Secretary 
of Transportation as promoting equal opportunity in connection with 
Federal-aid highway construction programs are not subject to the 
requirements of section VI, paragraph 5 above. The straight time hourly 
wage rates for apprentices and trainees under such programs will be 
established by the particular programs.
    7. Withholding for unpaid wages. The State highway department 
contracting officer may withhold or cause to be withheld from the 
contractor so much of the accrued payments or advances as may be 
considered necessary to pay laborers, mechanics, (including apprentices 
and trainees) watchmen, or guards employed by the contractor or any 
subcontractor on the work the full amount of wages required by the 
contract. In the event of failure to pay any laborer, mechanic, 
(including apprentices and trainees) watchman or guard employed or 
working on the site of the work, all or part of the wages required by 
the contract, the State highway department contracting officer may, 
after written notice to the contractor, take such action as may be 
necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment, advance, or 
guarantee of funds until such violations have ceased.
    8. Overtime requirements. a. No contractor or subcontractor 
contracting for any part of the contract work which may require or 
involve the employment of laborers, mechanics, watchmen or guards 
(including apprentices and trainees described in paragraphs 5 and 6 
above) shall require or permit any laborer, mechanic, watchman or guard 
in any workweek in which he is employed on such work, to work in excess 
of eight hours in any calendar day or in excess of forty hours in such 
workweek unless such laborer, mechanic, watchman or guard receives 
compensation at a rate not less than one and one-half times his basic 
rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of eight hours in any 
calendar day or in excess of forty hours in such workweek, as the case 
may be.
    b. In the event of any violation of paragraph 8a, the contractor and 
any subcontractor responsible therefor shall be liable to any affected 
employee for his unpaid wages. In addition, such contractor and 
subcontractor shall be liable to the United States for liquidated 
damages. Such liquidated damages shall be computed with respect to each 
individual laborer, mechanic, watchman or guard employed in violation of 
paragraph 8a, in the sum of $10 for each calendar day on which such 
employee was required or

[[Page 154]]

permitted to work in excess of eight hours or in excess of the standard 
workweek of forty hours without payment of the overtime wages required 
by paragraph 8a.
    c. The State highway department contracting officer may withhold or 
cause to be withheld, from any moneys payable on account of work 
performed by the contractor or subcontractor, such sums as may 
administratively be determined to be necessary to satisfy any 
liabilities of such contractor or subcontractor for liquidated damages 
as provided in paragraph 8b.

VII. Statements and payrolls.

    1. Compliance with Copeland Regulations (29 CFR part 3). The 
contractor shall comply with the Copeland Regulations (29 CFR part 3) of 
the Secretary of Labor which are herein incorporated by reference.
    2. Weekly statement. Each contractor or subcontractor shall furnish 
each week a statement to the State highway department resident engineer 
with respect to the wages paid each of its employees, including 
apprentices and trainees described in section VI, paragraphs 5 and 6, 
and watchmen and guards on work covered by the Copeland Regulations 
during the preceding weekly payroll period. The statement shall be 
executed by the contractor or subcontractor or by an authorized officer 
or employee of the contractor or subcontractor who supervises the 
payment of wages. Contractors and subcontractors must use the 
certification set forth on U.S. Department of Labor Form WH-348, or the 
same certification appearing on the reverse of Optional U.S. Department 
of Labor Form WH-347, or on any form with identical wording.
    3. Final labor summary. The contractor and each subcontractor shall 
furnish, upon the completion of the contract, a summary of all 
employment, indicating for the completed project the total hours worked 
and the total amount earned. This data shall be submitted to the State 
highway department resident engineer on Form PR-47 together with the 
data required in section VIII, hereof, relative to materials and 
supplies.
    4. Final certificate. Upon completion of the contract, the 
contractor shall submit to the State highway department contracting 
officer, for transmission to the Federal Highway Administration with the 
voucher for final payment for any work performed under the contract, a 
certificate concerning wages and classifications for laborers, 
mechanics, watchmen and guards employed on the project, in the following 
form:

                                * * * * *

    The undersigned, contractor on

                              (Project No.)

hereby certifies that all laborers, mechanics, apprentices, trainees, 
watchmen and guards employed by him or by any subcontractor performing 
work under the contract on the project have been paid wages at rates not 
less than those required by the contract provisions, and that the work 
performed by each such laborer, mechanic, apprentice or trainee 
conformed to the classifications set forth in the contract or training 
program provisions applicable to the wage rate paid.

Signature and title_____________________________________________________

                                * * * * *

    5. Payrolls and payroll records--a. Payrolls and basic records 
relating thereto will be maintained during the course of the work and 
preserved for a period of three years thereafter for all laborers, 
mechanics, apprentices, trainees, watchmen and guards working at the 
site of the work.
    b. The payroll records shall contain the name, social security 
number and address of each such employee, his correct classification, 
rates of pay (including rates of contributions or costs anticipated of 
the types described in section 1(b)(2) of the Davis-Bacon Act), daily 
and weekly number of hours worked, deductions made and actual wages 
paid. Whenever the Secretary of Labor, pursuant to section VI, paragraph 
3.b., has found that the wages of any laborer or mechanic include the 
amount of any costs reasonably anticipated in providing benefits under a 
plan or program described in section I(b)(2)(B) of the Davis-Bacon Act, 
the contractor shall maintain records which show that the commitment to 
provide such benefits is enforceable, that the plan or program is 
financially responsible, and that the plan or program has been 
communicated in writing to the laborers or mechanics affected, and 
records which show the costs anticipated or the actual cost incurred in 
providing such benefits.
    c. The payrolls shall contain the following information:
    1. The employee's full name, address and social security number and 
a notation indicating whether the employee does, or does not, normally 
reside in the labor area as defined in section II, paragraph 1.a. (The 
employee's full name and social security number need only appear on the 
first payroll on which his name appears. The employee's address need 
only be shown on the first submitted payroll on which the employee's 
name appears, unless a change of address necessitates a submittal to 
reflect the new address.)
    2. The employee's classification.
    3. Entries indicating the employee's basic hourly wage rate and, 
where applicable, the overtime hourly wage rate. The payroll

[[Page 155]]

should indicate separately the amounts of employee and employer 
contributions to fringe benefits funds and/or programs. Any fringe 
benefits paid to the employee in cash must be indicated. There is no 
prescribed or mandatory form for showing the above information on 
payrolls.
    4. The employee's daily and weekly hours worked in each 
classification, including actual overtime hours worked (not adjusted).
    5. The itemized deductions made and
    6. The net wages paid.
    d. The contractor will submit weekly a copy of all payrolls to the 
State highway department resident engineer. The copy shall be 
accompanied by a statement signed by the employer or his agent 
indicating that the payrolls are correct and complete, that the wage 
rates contained therein are not less than those determined by the 
Secretary of Labor and the classifications set forth for each laborer or 
mechanic conform with the work he performed. Submission of a weekly 
statement which is required under this contract by section VII, 
paragraph 2, and the Copeland Regulations of the Secretary of Labor (29 
CFR part 3) and the filing with the initial payroll or any subsequent 
payroll of a copy of any findings by the Secretary of Labor pursuant to 
section VI, paragraph 3b, shall satisfy this requirement. The prime 
contractor shall be responsible for the submission of copies of payrolls 
of all subcontractors. The contractor will make the records required 
under the labor standards clauses of the contract available for 
inspection by authorized representatives of the State highway 
department, the Federal Highway Administration and the Department of 
Labor, and will permit such representatives to interview employees 
during working hours on the job.
    e. The wages of labor shall be paid in legal tender of the United 
States, except that this condition will be considered satisfied if 
payment is made by negotiable check, on a solvent bank, which may be 
cashed readily by the employee in the local community for the full 
amount, without discount or collection charges of any kind. Where checks 
are used for payment, the contractor shall make all necessary 
arrangements for them to be cashed and shall given information regarding 
such arrangements.
    f. No fee of any kind shall be asked or accepted by the contractor 
or any of his agents from any person as a condition of employment on the 
project.
    g. No laborers shall be charged for any tools used in performing 
their respective duties except for reasonably avoidable loss or damage 
thereto.
    h. Every employee on the work covered by this contract shall be 
permitted to lodge, board and trade where and with whom he elects and 
neither the contractor nor his agents, nor his employees shall, directly 
or indirectly, require as a condition of employment that an employee 
shall lodge, board or trade at a particular place or with a particular 
person.
    i. No charge shall be made for any transportation furnished by the 
contractor, or his agents, to any person employed on the work.
    j. No individual shall be employed as a laborer or mechanic on this 
contract except on a wage basis, but this shall not be construed to 
prohibit the rental of teams, trucks, or other equipment from 
individuals.

VIII. Record of materials, supplies and labor.

    1. The contractor shall maintain a record of the total cost of all 
materials and supplies purchased for and incorporated in the work, and 
also of the quantities of those specific materials and supplies listed 
on Form PR-47 and in the units shown. Upon completion of the contract, 
this record, together with the final labor summary required in section 
VII, paragraph 3, hereof, shall be transmitted to the State highway 
department resident engineer for the project on Form PR-47 in accordance 
with instructions attached thereto, which will be furnished for this 
purpose upon request. The quantities for the listed items shall be 
reported separately for roadway and for structures over 20 feet long as 
measured along the centerline of the roadway.
    2. The contractor shall become familiar with the list of specific 
materials and supplies contained in Form PR-47 prior to the commencement 
of work under this contract. Any additional materials information 
required will be solicited through revisions of Form PR-47 with 
attendant explanations.
    3. Where subcontracts are involved the contractor shall submit 
either a single report covering work both by himself and all his 
subcontractors, or he may submit separate reports for himself and for 
each of his subcontractors.

IX. Subletting or assigning the contract.

    1. The contractor shall perform with his own organization contract 
work amounting to not less than 50 percent of the original total 
contract price, except that any items designated by the State as 
Specialty Items may be performed by subcontract and the amount of any 
such Specialty Items so performed may be deducted from the original 
total contract price before computing the amount of work required to be 
performed by the contractor with his own organization.
    a. His own organization shall be construed to include only workmen 
employed and paid directly by the prime contractor and equipment owned 
or rented by him, with or without operators.
    b. Specialty items shall be construed to be limited to work that 
requires highly specialized knowledge, craftsmanship or equipment not 
ordinarily available in contracting organizations qualified to bid on 
the contract as

[[Page 156]]

a whole and in general are to be limited to minor components of the 
overall contract.
    2. In addition to the 50 percent requirements set forth in paragraph 
1 above, the contractor shall furnish (a) a competent superintendent or 
foreman who is employed by him, who has full authority to direct 
performance of the work in accordance with the contract requirements, 
and who is in charge of all construction operations (regardless of who 
performs the work), and (b) such other of his own organizational 
capability and responsibility (supervision, management, and engineering 
services) as the State highway department contracting officer determines 
is necessary to assure the performance of the contract.
    3. The contract amount upon which the 50 percent requirement set 
forth in paragraph 1 is computed includes the cost of materials and 
manufactured products which are to be purchased or produced by the 
contractor under the contract provisions.
    4. Any items that have been selected as Specialty Items for the 
contract are listed as such in the Special Provisions, bid schedule, or 
elsewhere in the contract documents.
    5. No portion of the contract shall be sublet, assigned or otherwise 
disposed of except with the written consent of the State highway 
department contracting officer, or his authorized representative, and 
such consent when given shall not be construed to relieve the contractor 
of any responsibility for the fulfillment of the contract. Request for 
permission to sublet, assign or otherwise dispose of any portion of the 
contract shall be in writing and accompanied by (a) a showing that the 
organization which will perform the work is particularly experienced and 
equipped for such work, and (b) an assurance by the contractor that the 
labor standards provisions set forth in thiscontract shall apply to 
labor performed on all work encompassed by the request.

X. Safety: Accident prevention.

    In the performance of this contract, the contractor shall comply 
with all applicable Federal, State and local laws governing safety, 
health and sanitation. The contractor shall provide all safeguards, 
safety devices and protective equipment and take any other needed 
actions, on his own responsibility, or as the State highway department 
contracting officer may determine, reasonably necessary to protect the 
life and health of employees on the job and the safety of the public and 
to protect property in connection with the performance of the work 
covered by the contract.
    It is a condition of this contract, and shall be made a condition of 
each subcontract entered into pursuant to this contract, that the 
contractor and any subcontractor shall not require any laborer or 
mechanic employed in performance of the contract to work in surroundings 
or under working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous, or 
dangerous to his health or safety, as determined under construction 
safety and health standards (title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, part 
1926, formerly part 1518, as revised from time to time), promulgated by 
the United States Secretary of Labor, in accordance with section 107 of 
the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (83 Stat. 96).

XI. False statements concerning highway projects.

    In order to assure high quality and durable construction in 
conformity with approved plans and specifications and a high degree of 
reliability on statements and representations made by engineers, 
contractors, suppliers, and workers on Federal-aid highway projects, it 
is essential that all persons concerned with the project perform their 
functions as carefully, thoroughly and honestly as possible. Willfull 
falsification, distortion, or misrepresentation with respect to any 
facts related to the project is a violation of Federal law. To prevent 
any misunderstanding regarding the seriousness of these and similar 
acts, the following notice shall be posted on each Federal-aid highway 
proj ect in one or more places where it is readily available to all 
personnel concerned with the project:

                                * * * * *

     Notice to All Personnel Engaged on Federal-Aid Highway Projects

    Title 18 U.S.C., section 1020, reads as follows:
    ``Whoever, being an officer, agent, or employee of the United 
States, or of any State or Territory, or whoever, whether a person, 
association, firm, or corporation, knowingly makes any false statement, 
false representation, or false report as to the character, quality, 
quantity, or cost of the material used or to be used, or the quantity or 
quality of the work performed or to be performed or the costs thereof in 
connection with the submission of plans, maps, specifications, 
contracts, or costs of construction of any highway or related project 
submitted for approval to the Secretary of Transportation; or
    ``Whoever knowingly makes any false statement, false representation, 
false report, or false claim with respect to the character, quality, 
quantity, or cost of any work performed or to be performed, or materials 
furnished or to be furnished, in connection with the construction of any 
highway or related project approved by the Secretary of Transportation; 
or
    ``Whoever knowingly makes any false statement or false 
representation as to a material fact in any statement, certificate, or 
report submitted pursuant to provisions of

[[Page 157]]

the Federal-Aid Road Act approved July 1, 1916 (39 Stat. 355), as 
amended and supplemented;
    ``Shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than 
five years, or both.''

XII. Implementation of Clean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution Control 
          Act (applicable to contracts and subcontracts which exceed 
          $100,000).

    1. The contractor stipulates that any facility to be utilized in the 
performance of this contract, unless such contract is exempt under the 
Clean Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1857 et seq., as amended by Pub. L. 
91-604), and under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended 
(33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended by Pub. L. 92-500), Executive Order 
11738, and regulations in implementation thereof (40 CFR part 15), is 
listed not on the date of contract award, on the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) List of Violating Facilities Pursuant to 40 CFR 
part 15.20.
    2. The contractor agrees to comply with all the requirements of 
section 114 of the Clean Air Act and section 308 of the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act and all regulations and guidelines listed 
thereunder.
    3. The contractor shall promptly notify the State highway department 
of the receipt of any communication from the Director, Office of Federal 
Activities, EPA, indicating that a facility to be utilized for the 
contract is under consideration to be listed on the EPA List of 
Violating Facilities.
    4. The contractor agrees to include or cause to be included the 
requirements of subparagraphs 1 through 4 of this paragraph XII in every 
subcontract which exceeds $100,000, and further agrees to take such 
action as Government may direct as a means of enforcing such 
requirements.

[40 FR 49084, Oct. 21, 1975]

   Appendix C to Subpart B of Part 633--Additional Required Contract 
  Provisions, Appalachian Development Highway System and Local Access 
            Roads Contracts Other Than Construction Contracts

Equal Opportunity: Employment Practices and Selection of Subcontractors, 
            Suppliers of Materials, and Lessors of Equipment

    During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as 
follows:

1. Compliance with regulations.
    The contractor will comply with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 324 and 
with the Regulations of the Department of Transportation relative to 
nondiscrimination in Federally-assisted programs of the Department of 
Transportation (Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, part 21, 
hereinafter referred to as the regulations), which are herein 
incorporated by reference and made a part of this contract.

2. Employment practices
    a. The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or 
applicant for employment because of race, color, sex, or national 
origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that 
applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during 
employment without regard to their race, color, sex, or national origin. 
Such action shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
recruitment or recruitment advertising, hiring, firing, upgrading, 
promotion, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, rates of pay or 
other forms of compensation or benefits, selection for training or 
apprenticeship, use of facilities and treatment of employees. The 
contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees 
and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of 
this employment practices clause.
    b. The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisements for 
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all 
qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without 
regard to race, color, sex, or national origin.
    c. The contractor will send to each labor union or representative of 
workers with which he has a collective bargaining agreement or other 
contract or understanding, a notice advising the said labor union or 
workers representative of the contractor's commitments under the 
employment practices provision, and shall post copies of the notice in 
conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment.

3. Selection of subcontractors, procurement of materials and leasing of 
          equipment.
    a. The contractor, with regard to the work performed by him after 
award and prior to completion of the contract work, will not 
discriminate on the ground of race, color, sex, or national origin in 
the selection and retention of subcontractors, including procurements of 
materials and leases of equipment. The contractor will not participate 
either directly or indirectly in the discrimination prohibited by 
Section 21.5 of the Regulations.
    b. In all solicitations either by competitive bidding or negotiation 
made by the contractor for work to be performed under a subcontract, 
including procurements of materials or leases of equipment, each 
potential subcontractor, supplier, or lessor shall be notified by the 
contractor of the contractor's obligations under this contract and the 
Regulations relative to nondiscrimination on the ground of race, color, 
sex, or national origin.


[[Page 158]]


4. Information and reports.
    The contractor will provide all information and reports required by 
the Regulations, or orders and instructions issued pursuant thereto, and 
will permit access to its books, records, accounts, other sources of 
information, and its facilities as may be determined by the State 
highway department or the Federal Highway Administration to be pertinent 
to ascertain compliance with such Regulations, orders and instructions. 
Where any information required of a contractor is in the exclusive 
possession of another who fails or refuses to furnish this information, 
the contractor shall so certify to the State highway department, or the 
Federal Highway Administration as appropriate, and shall set forth what 
efforts it has made to obtain the information.

5. Incorporation of provisions.
    The contractor will include these additional required contract 
provisions in every subcontract, including procurements of materials and 
leases of equipment, unless exempt by the Regulations or orders, or 
instructions issued pursuant thereto. The contractor will take such 
action with respect to any subcontract, procurement, or lease as the 
State highway department or the Federal Highway Administration may 
direct as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for 
non-compliance: Provided, however, That, in the event a contractor 
becomes involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a 
subcontractor, supplier, or lessor as a result of such directed action, 
the contractor may request the State to enter into such litigation to 
protect the interest of the State, and, in addition, the contractor may 
request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the 
interest of the United States.

6. Sanctions for noncompliance.
    In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with sections 1 
through 5 above, the State highway department shall impose such contract 
sanctions as it or the Federal Highway Administration may determine to 
be appropriate, including but not limited to.
    a. Withholding of payments to the contractor under the contract 
until the contractor complies, and/or
    b. Cancellation, termination or suspension of the contract in whole 
or in part.

[40 FR 49088, Oct. 21, 1975]

    Appendix D to Subpart B of Part 633--Federal-Aid Proposal Notices

       Notices to Prospective Federal-Aid Construction Contractors

I. Certification of nonsegregated facilities.
    (a) A Certification of Nonsegregated Facilities, as required by the 
May 9, 1967, Order of the Secretary of Labor (32 FR 7439, May 19, 1967) 
on Elimination of Segregated Facilities (is included in the proposal and 
must be submitted prior to the award of a Federal-aid highway 
construction contract exceeding $10,000 which is not exempt from the 
provisions of the Equal Opportunity clause).
    (b) Bidders are cautioned as follows: By signing this bid, the 
bidder will be deemed to have signed and agreed to the provisions of the 
``Certification of Nonsegregated Facilities'' in this proposal. This 
certification provides that the bidder does not maintain or provide for 
his employees facilities which are segregated on a basis of race, creed, 
color, or national origin, whether such facilities are segregated by 
directive or on a de facto basis. The certification also provides that 
the bidder will not maintain such segregated facilities.
    (c) Bidders receiving Federal-aid highway construction contract 
awards exceeding $10,000 which are not exempt from the provisions of the 
Equal Opportunity clause, will be required to provide for the forwarding 
of the following notice to prospective subcontractors for construction 
contracts and material suppliers where the subcontracts or material 
supply agreements exceed $10,000 and are not exempt from the provisions 
of the Equal Opportunity clause.

     Notice to Prospective Subcontractors and Material Suppliers of 
        Requirement for Certification of Nonsegregated Facilities

    (a) A Certification of Nonsegregated Facilities is required by the 
May 9, 1967, Order of the Secretary of Labor (32 FR 7431, May 19, 1967) 
on Elimination of Segregated Facilities, which is included in the 
proposal, or attached hereto, must be submitted by each subcontractor 
and material supplier prior to the award of the subcontract or 
consummation of a material supply agreement if such subcontract or 
agreement exceeds $10,000 and is not exempt from the provisions of the 
Equal Opportunity clause.
    (b) Subcontractors and material suppliers are cautioned as follows: 
By signing the subcontract or entering into a material supply agreement, 
the subcontractor or material supplier will be deemed to have signed and 
agreed to the provisions of the ``Certification of Nonsegregated 
Facilities'' in the subcontract or material supply agreement. This 
certification provides that the subcontractor or material supplier does 
not maintain or provide for his employees facilities which are 
segregated on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin, 
whether such facilities are segregated by directive or on a de facto 
basis. The certification also provides that the subcontractor or 
material supplier will not maintain such segregated facilities.
    (c) Subcontractors or material suppliers receiving subcontract 
awards or material

[[Page 159]]

supply agreements exceeding $10,000 which are not exempt from the 
provisions of the Equal Opportunity clause will be required to provide 
for the forwarding of this notice to prospective subcontractors for 
construction contracts and material suppliers where the subcontracts or 
material supply agreements exceed $10,000 and are not exempt from the 
provisions of the Equal Opportunity clause.

II. Implementation of Clean Air Act.
    (a) By signing this bid, the bidder will be deemed to have 
stipulated as follows:
    (1) That any facility to be utilized in the performance of this 
contract, unless such contract is exempt under the Clean Air Act, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 1857 et seq., as by Pub. L. 91-604), Executive order 
11738, and regulations in implementation thereof (40 CFR part 15, is not 
listed on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) List of 
Violating Facilities pursuant to 40 CFR 15.20.
    (2) That the State highway department shall be promptly notified 
prior to contract award of the receipt by the bidder of any 
communication from the Director, Office of Federal Activities, EPA, 
indicating that a facility to be utilized for the contract is under 
consideration to be listed on the EPA List of Violating Facilities.


<R03>
PART 635_CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE--Table of Contents




                      Subpart A_Contract Procedures

Sec.
635.101 Purpose.
635.102 Definitions.
635.103 Applicability.
635.104 Method of construction.
635.105 Supervising agency.
635.106 Use of publicly owned equipment.
635.107 Participation by disadvantaged business enterprises.
635.108 Health and safety.
635.109 Standardized changed condition clauses.
635.110 Licensing and qualification of contractors.
635.111 Tied bids.
635.112 Advertising for bids and proposals.
635.113 Bid opening and bid tabulations.
635.114 Award of contract and concurrence in award.
635.115 Agreement estimate.
635.116 Subcontracting and contractor responsibilities.
635.117 Labor and employment.
635.118 Payroll and weekly statements.
635.119 False statements.
635.120 Changes and extra work.
635.121 Contract time and contract time extensions.
635.122 Participation in progress payments.
635.123 Determination and documentation of pay quantities.
635.124 Participation in contract claim awards and settlements.
635.125 Termination of contract.
635.126 Record of materials, supplies, and labor.
635.127 Agreement provisions regarding overruns in contract time.

                  Subpart B_Force Account Construction

635.201 Purpose.
635.202 Applicability.
635.203 Definitions.
635.204 Determination of more cost effective method or an emergency.
635.205 Finding of cost effectiveness.

              Subpart C_Physical Construction Authorization

635.301 Purpose.
635.303 Applicability.
635.305 Physical construction.
635.307 Coordination.
635.309 Authorization.

                 Subpart D_General Material Requirements

635.401 Purpose.
635.403 Definitions.
635.405 Applicability.
635.407 Use of materials made available by a public agency.
635.409 Restrictions upon materials.
635.410 Buy America requirements.
635.411 Material or product selection.
635.413 Guaranty and warranty clauses.
635.417 Convict produced materials.

Appendix A to Subpart D--Summary of Acceptable Criteria for Specifying 
          Types of Culvert Pipes

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101 (note), 109, 112, 113, 114, 116, 119, 128, 
and 315; 31 U.S.C. 6505; 42 U.S.C. 3334, 4601 et seq.; Sec. 1041 (a), 
Pub. L. 102-240, 105 Stat. 1914; 23 CFR 1.32; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 635 appear at 67 FR 
75924, Dec. 10, 2002.


<R04>
                      Subpart A_Contract Procedures

    Source: 56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 635.101  Purpose.

    To prescribe policies, requirements, and procedures relating to 
Federal-aid highway projects, from the time of authorization to proceed 
to the construction stage, to the time of final acceptance by the 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).

[[Page 160]]


<R05>
Sec. 635.102  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Administrator means the Federal Highway Administrator.
    Calendar day means each day shown on the calendar but, if another 
definition is set forth in the State contract specifications, that 
definition will apply.
    Contract time means the number of workdays or calendar days 
specified in a contract for completion of the contract work. The term 
includes authorized time extensions.
    Design-build project means a project to be developed using one or 
more design-build contracts.
    Division Administrator means the chief FHWA official assigned to 
conduct business in a particular State. A State is as defined in 23 
U.S.C. 101.
    Force account means a basis of payment for the direct performance of 
highway construction work with payment based on the actual cost of 
labor, equipment, and materials furnished and consideration for overhead 
and profit.
    Formal approval means approval in writing or the electronic 
transmission of such approval.
    Incentive/disincentive for early completion as used in this subpart, 
describes a contract provision which compensates the contractor a 
certain amount of money for each day identified critical work is 
completed ahead of schedule and assesses a deduction for each day the 
contractor overruns the incentive/disincentive time. Its use is 
primarily intended for those critical projects where traffic 
inconvenience and delays are to be held to a minimum. The amounts are 
based upon estimates of such items as traffic safety, traffic 
maintenance, and road user delay costs.
    Liquidated damages means the daily amount set forth in the contract 
to be deducted from the contract price to cover additional costs 
incurred by a State transportation department because of the 
contractor's failure to complete the contract work within the number of 
calendar days or workdays specified. The term may also mean the total of 
all daily amounts deducted under the terms of a particular contract.
    Local public agency means any city, county, township, municipality, 
or other political subdivision that may be empowered to cooperate with 
the State transportation department in highway matters.
    Major change or major extra work means a change which will 
significantly affect the cost of the project to the Federal Government 
or alter the termini, character or scope of the work.
    Materially unbalanced bid means a bid which generates a reasonable 
doubt that award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced 
bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the Federal Government.
    Mathematically unbalanced bid means a bid containing lump sum or 
unit bid items which do not reflect reasonable actual costs plus a 
reasonable proportionate share of the bidder's anticipated profit, 
overhead costs, and other indirect costs.
    Public agency means any organization with administrative or 
functional responsibilities which are directly or indirectly affiliated 
with a governmental body of any nation, State, or local jurisdiction.
    Publicly owned equipment means equipment previously purchased or 
otherwise acquired by the public agency involved primarily for use in 
its own operations.
    Specialty items means work items identified in the contract which 
are not normally associated with highway construction and require highly 
specialized knowledge, abilities or equipment not ordinarily available 
in the type of contracting organizations qualified and expected to bid 
on the contract; in general, these items are to be limited to minor 
components of the overall contract.
    State transportation department (STD) means that department, 
commission, board, or official of any State charged by its laws with the 
responsibility for highway construction. The term ``State'' should be 
considered equivalent to ``State transportation department'' if the 
context so implies.
    Workday means a calendar day during which construction operations 
could

[[Page 161]]

proceed for a major part of a shift, normally excluding Saturdays, 
Sundays, and State-recognized legal holidays.

[62 FR 6873, Feb. 14, 1997, as amended at 67 FR 75924, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.103  Applicability.

    The policies, requirements, and procedures prescribed in this 
subpart shall apply to all Federal-aid highway projects.

[69 FR 7118, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 635.104  Method of construction.

    (a) Actual construction work shall be performed by contract awarded 
by competitive bidding; unless, as provided in Sec. 635.104(b), the STD 
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Division Administrator that some 
other method is more cost effective or that an emergency exists. The STD 
shall assure opportunity for free, open, and competitive bidding, 
including adequate publicity of the advertisements or calls for bids. 
The advertising or calling for bids and the award of contracts shall 
comply with the procedures and requirements set forth in Sec. Sec. 
635.112 and 635.114.
    (b) Approval by the Division Administrator for construction by a 
method other than competitive bidding shall be requested by the State in 
accordance with subpart B of part 635 of this chapter. Before such 
finding is made, the STD shall determine that the organization to 
undertake the work is so staffed and equipped as to perform such work 
satisfactorily and cost effectively.
    (c) In the case of a design-build project, the requirements of 23 
CFR part 636 and the appropriate provisions pertaining to design-build 
contracting in this part will apply. However, no justification of cost 
effectiveness is necessary in selecting projects for the design-build 
delivery method.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.105  Supervising agency.

    (a) The STD has responsibility for the construction of all Federal-
aid projects, and is not relieved of such responsibility by authorizing 
performance of the work by a local public agency or other Federal 
agency. The STD shall be responsible for insuring that such projects 
receive adequate supervision and inspection to insure that projects are 
completed in conformance with approved plans and specifications.
    (b) Although the STD may employ a consultant to provide construction 
engineering services, such as inspection or survey work on a project, 
the STD shall provide a full-time employed State engineer to be in 
responsible charge of the project.
    (c) When a project is located on a street or highway over which the 
STD does not have legal jurisdiction, or when special conditions 
warrant, the STD, while not relieved of overall project responsibility, 
may arrange for the local public agency having jurisdiction over such 
street or highway to perform the work with its own forces or by 
contract; provided the following conditions are met and the Division 
Administrator approves the arrangements in advance.
    (1) In the case of force account work, there is full compliance with 
subpart B of this part.
    (2) When the work is to be performed under a contract awarded by a 
local public agency, all Federal requirements including those prescribed 
in this subpart shall be met.
    (3) The local public agency is adequately staffed and suitably 
equipped to undertake and satisfactorily complete the work; and
    (4) In those instances where a local public agency elects to use 
consultants for construction engineering services, the local public 
agency shall provide a full-time employee of the agency to be in 
responsible charge of the project.


<R05>
Sec. 635.106  Use of publicly owned equipment.

    (a) Publicly owned equipment should not normally compete with 
privately owned equipment on a project to be let to contract. There may 
be exceptional cases, however, in which the use of equipment of the 
State or local public agency for highway construction purposes may be 
warranted or justified. A proposal by any STD for the use of publicly 
owned equipment on such a project must be supported by a showing that it 
would clearly be cost effective

[[Page 162]]

to do so under the conditions peculiar to the individual project or 
locality.
    (b) Where publicly owned equipment is to be made available in 
connection with construction work to be let to contract, Federal funds 
may participate in the cost of such work provided the following 
conditions are met:
    (1) The proposed use of such equipment is clearly set forth in the 
Plans, Specifications and Estimate (PS&E) submitted to the Division 
Administrator for approval.
    (2) The advertised specifications specify the items of publicly 
owned equipment available for use by the successful bidder, the rates to 
be charged, and the points of availability or delivery of the equipment; 
and
    (3) The advertised specifications include a notification that the 
successful bidder has the option either of renting part or all of such 
equipment from the State or local public agency or otherwise providing 
the equipment necessary for the performance of the contract work.
    (c) In the rental of publicly owned equipment to contractors, the 
State or local public agency shall not profit at the expense of Federal 
funds.
    (d) Unforeseeable conditions may make it necessary to provide 
publicly owned equipment to the contractor at rental rates agreed to 
between the contractor and the State or local public agency after the 
work has started. Any such arrangement shall not form the basis for any 
increase in the cost of the project on which Federal funds are to 
participate.
    (e) When publicly owned equipment is used on projects constructed on 
a force account basis, costs may be determined by agreed unit prices or 
on an actual cost basis. When agreed unit prices are applied the 
equipment need not be itemized nor rental rates shown in the estimate. 
However, if such work is to be performed on an actual cost basis, the 
STD shall submit to the Division Administrator for approval the scheduie 
of rates proposed to be charged, exclusive of profit, for the publicly 
owned equipment made available for use.


<R05>
Sec. 635.107  Participation by disadvantaged business enterprises.

    (a) The STD shall schedule contract lettings in a balanced program 
providing contracts of such size and character as to assure an 
opportunity for all sizes of contracting organizations to compete. In 
accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, subsequent 
Federal-aid Highway Acts, and 49 CFR part 26, the STD shall ensure equal 
opportunity for disadvantaged business enterprises (DBEs) participating 
in the Federal-aid highway program.
    (b) In the case of a design-build project funded with title 23 
funds, the requirements of 49 CFR part 26 and the State's approved DBE 
plan apply. If DBE goals are set, DBE commitments above the goal must 
not be used as a proposal evaluation factor in determining the 
successful offeror.

[67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.108  Health and safety.

    Contracts for projects shall include provisions designed:
    (a) To insure full compliance with all applicable Federal, State, 
and local laws governing safety, health and sanitation; and
    (b) To require that the contractor shall provide all safeguards, 
safety devices, and protective equipment and shall take any other 
actions reasonably necessary to protect the life and health of persons 
working at the site of the project and the safety of the public and to 
protect property in connection with the performance of the work covered 
by the contract.


<R05>
Sec. 635.109  Standardized changed condition clauses.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
following changed conditions contract clauses shall be made part of, and 
incorporated in, each highway construction project approved under 23 
U.S.C. 106:
    (1) Differing site conditions. (i) During the progress of the work, 
if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site 
differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown 
physical conditions of an unusual nature, differing

[[Page 163]]

materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as 
inherent in the work provided for in the contract, are encountered at 
the site, the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify 
the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before 
the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed.
    (ii) Upon written notification, the engineer will investigate the 
conditions, and if it is determined that the conditions materially 
differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required 
for the performance of any work under the contract, an adjustment, 
excluding anticipated profits, will be made and the contract modified in 
writing accordingly. The engineer will notify the contractor of the 
determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted.
    (iii) No contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the 
contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the 
required written notice.
    (iv) No contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause for 
any effects caused on unchanged work. (This provision may be omitted by 
the STD's at their option.)
    (2) Suspensions of work ordered by the engineer. (i) If the 
performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by 
the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time (not 
originally anticipated, customary, or inherent to the construction 
industry) and the contractor believes that additional compensation and/
or contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay, the 
contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for 
adjustment within 7 calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume 
work. The request shall set forth the reasons and support for such 
adjustment.
    (ii) Upon receipt, the engineer will evaluate the contractor's 
request. If the engineer agrees that the cost and/or time required for 
the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such 
suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the 
control of and not the fault of the contractor, its suppliers, or 
subcontractors at any approved tier, and not caused by weather, the 
engineer will make an adjustment (excluding profit) and modify the 
contract in writing accordingly. The contractor will be notified of the 
engineer's determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is 
warranted.
    (iii) No contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor 
has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed.
    (iv) No contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the 
extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any 
other cause, or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under 
any other term or condition of this contract.
    (3) Significant changes in the character of work. (i) The engineer 
reserves the right to make, in writing, at any time during the work, 
such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are 
necessary to satisfactorily complete the project. Such changes in 
quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release 
the surety, and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered.
    (ii) If the alterations or changes in quantities significantly 
change the character of the work under the contract, whether such 
alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the 
character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work 
to become significantly different in character, an adjustment, excluding 
anticipated profit, will be made to the contract. The basis for the 
adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work. If 
a basis cannot be agreed upon, then an adjustment will be made either 
for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may 
determine to be fair and equitable.
    (iii) If the alterations or changes in quantities do not 
significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the 
contract, the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the 
contract.
    (iv) The term ``significant change'' shall be construed to apply 
only to the following circumstances:
    (A) When the character of the work as altered differs materially in 
kind or

[[Page 164]]

nature from that involved or included in the original proposed 
construction; or
    (B) When a major item of work, as defined elsewhere in the contract, 
is increased in excess of 125 percent or decreased below 75 percent of 
the original contract quantity. Any allowance for an increase in 
quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of 125 percent of 
original contract item quantity, or in case of a decrease below 75 
percent, to the actual amount of work performed.
    (b) The provisions of this section shall be governed by the 
following:
    (1) Where State statute does not permit one or more of the contract 
clauses included in paragraph (a) of this section, the State statute 
shall prevail and such clause or clauses need not be made applicable to 
Federal-aid highway contracts.
    (2) Where the State transportation department has developed and 
implemented one or more of the contract clauses included in paragraph 
(a) of this section, such clause or clauses, as developed by the State 
transportation department may be included in Federal-aid highway 
contracts in lieu of the corresponding clause or clauses in paragraph 
(a) of this section. The State's action must be pursuant to a specific 
State statute requiring differing contract conditions clauses. Such 
State developed clause or clauses, however, must be in conformance with 
23 U.S.C., 23 CFR and other applicable Federal statutes and regulations 
as appropriate and shall be subject to the Division Administrator's 
approval as part of the PS&E.
    (c) In the case of a design-build project, STDs are strongly 
encouraged to use ``suspensions of work ordered by the engineer'' 
clauses, and may consider ``differing site condition'' clauses and 
``significant changes in the character of work'' clauses which are 
appropriate for the risk and responsibilities that are shared with the 
design-builder.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991; 57 FR 10062, Mar. 23, 1992, as amended at 67 
FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.110  Licensing and qualification of contractors.

    (a) The procedures and requirements a STD proposes to use for 
qualifying and licensing contractors, who may bid for, be awarded, or 
perform Federal-aid highway contracts, shall be submitted to the 
Division Administrator for advance approval. Only those procedures and 
requirements so approved shall be effective with respect to Federal-aid 
highway projects. Any changes in approved procedures and requirements 
shall likewise be subject to approval by the Division Administrator.
    (b) No procedure or requirement for bonding, insurance, 
prequalification, qualification, or licensing of contractors shall be 
approved which, in the judgment of the Division Administrator, may 
operate to restrict competition, to prevent submission of a bid by, or 
to prohibit the consideration of a bid submitted by, any responsible 
contractor, whether resident or nonresident of the State wherein the 
work is to be performed.
    (c) No contractor shall be required by law, regulation, or practice 
to obtain a license before submission of a bid or before the bid may be 
considered for award of a contract. This, however, is not intended to 
preclude requirements for the licensing of a contractor upon or 
subsequent to the award of the contract if such requirements are 
consistent with competitive bidding. Prequalification of contractors may 
be required as a condition for submission of a bid or award of contract 
only if the period between the date of issuing a call for bids and the 
date of opening of bids affords sufficient time to enable a bidder to 
obtain the required prequalification rating.
    (d) Requirements for the prequalification, qualification or 
licensing of contractors, that operate to govern the amount of work that 
may be bid upon by, or may be awarded to, a contractor, shall be 
approved only if based upon a full and appropriate evaluation of the 
contractor's capability to perform the work.
    (e) Contractors who are currently suspended, debarred or voluntarily 
excluded under 49 CFR part 29 or otherwise determined to be ineligible, 
shall

[[Page 165]]

be prohibited from participating in the Federal-aid highway program.
    (f) In the case of a design-build project, the STDs may use their 
own bonding, insurance, licensing, qualification or prequalification 
procedure for any phase of design-build procurement.
    (1) The STDs may not impose statutory or administrative requirements 
which provide an in-State or local geographical preference in the 
solicitation, licensing, qualification, pre-qualification, short listing 
or selection process. The geographic location of a firm's office may not 
be one of the selection criteria. However, the STDs may require the 
successful design-builder to establish a local office after the award of 
contract.
    (2) If required by State statute, local statute, or administrative 
policy, the STDs may require prequalification for construction 
contractors. The STDs may require offerors to demonstrate the ability of 
their engineering staff to become licensed in that State as a condition 
of responsiveness; however, licensing procedures may not serve as a 
barrier for the consideration of otherwise responsive proposals. The 
STDs may require compliance with appropriate State or local licensing 
practices as a condition of contract award.

 [56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.111  Tied bids.

    (a) The STD may tie or permit the tying of Federal-aid highway 
projects or Federal-aid and State-financed highway projects for bidding 
purposes where it appears that by so doing more favorable bids may be 
received. To avoid discrimination against contractors desiring to bid 
upon a lesser amount of work than that included in the tied 
combinations, provisions should be made to permit bidding separately on 
the individual projects whenever they are of such character as to be 
suitable for bidding independently.
    (b) When Federal-aid and State-financed highway projects are tied or 
permitted to be tied together for bidding purposes, the bid schedule 
shall set forth the quantities separately for the Federal-aid work and 
the State-financed work. All proposals submitted for the tied projects 
must contain separate bid prices for each project individually. Federal 
participation in the cost of the work shall be on the basis of the 
lowest overall responsive bid proposal unless the analysis of bids 
reveals that mathematical unbalancing has caused an unsupported shift of 
cost liability to the Federal-aid work. If such a finding is made, 
Federal participation shall be based on the unit prices represented in 
the proposal by the individual contractor who would be the lowest 
responsive and responsible bidder if only the Federal-aid project were 
considered.
    (c) Federal-aid highway projects and State-financed highway projects 
may be combined in one contract if the conditions of the projects are so 
similar that the unit costs on the Federal-aid projects should not be 
increased by such combinations of projects. In such cases, like 
quantities should be combined in the proposal to avoid the possibility 
of unbalancing of bids in favor of either of the projects in the 
combination.


<R05>
Sec. 635.112  Advertising for bids and proposals.

    (a) No work shall be undertaken on any Federal-aid project, nor 
shall any project be advertised for bids, prior to authorization by the 
Division Administrator.
    (b) The advertisement and approved plans and specifications shall be 
available to bidders a minimum of 3 weeks prior to opening of bids 
except that shorter periods may be approved by the Division 
Administrator in special cases when justified.
    (c) The STD shall obtain the approval of the Division Administrator 
prior to issuing any addenda which contain a major change to the 
approved plans or specifications during the advertising period. Minor 
addenda need not receive prior approval but should be identified by the 
STD at the time of or prior to requesting FHWA concurrence in award. The 
STD shall provide assurance that all bidders have received all issued 
addenda.
    (d) Nondiscriminatory bidding procedures shall be afforded to all 
qualified bidders regardless of National, State or local boundaries and 
without regard to

[[Page 166]]

race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or handicap. If any 
provisions of State laws, specifications, regulations, or policies may 
operate in any manner contrary to Federal requirements, including title 
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, to prevent submission of a bid, or 
prohibit consideration of a bid submitted by any responsible bidder 
appropriately qualified in accordance with Sec. 635.110, such 
provisions shall not be applicable to Federal-aid projects. Where such 
nonapplicable provisions exist, notices of advertising, specifications, 
special provisions or other governing documents shall include a positive 
statement to advise prospective bidders of those provisions that are not 
applicable.
    (e) No public agency shall be permitted to bid in competition or to 
enter into subcontracts with private contractors.
    (f) The STD shall include a noncollusion provision substantially as 
follows in the bidding documents:

    Each bidder shall file a statement executed by, or on behalf of the 
person, firm, association, or corporation submitting the bid certifying 
that such person, firm, association, or corporation has not, either 
directly or indirectly, entered into any agreement, participated in any 
collusion, or otherwise taken any action, in restraint of free 
competitive bidding in connection with the submitted bid. Failure to 
submit the executed statement as part of the bidding documents will make 
the bid nonresponsive and not eligible for award consideration.

    (1) The required form for the statement will be provided by the 
State to each prospective bidder.
    (2) The statement shall either be in the form of an affidavit 
executed and sworn to by the bidder before a person who is authorized by 
the laws of the State to administer oaths or in the form of an unsworn 
declaration executed under penalty of perjury of the laws of the United 
States.
    (g) The STD shall include the lobbying certification requirement 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 20 and the requirements of 49 CFR part 29 
regarding suspension and debarment certification in the bidding 
documents.
    (h) The STD shall clearly identify in the bidding documents those 
requirements which the bidder must assure are complied with to make the 
bid responsive. Failure to comply with these identified bidding 
requirements shall make the bid nonresponsive and not eligible for award 
consideration.
    (i) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
requirements apply:
    (1) The FHWA Division Administrator's approval of the Request for 
Proposals document will constitute the FHWA's project authorization and 
the FHWA's approval of the STD's request to release the document. This 
approval will carry the same significance as plan, specification and 
estimate approval on a design-bid-build Federal-aid project.
    (2) The STD may decide the appropriate solicitation schedule for all 
design-build requests. This includes all project advertising, the 
release of the Request for Qualifications document, the release of the 
Request for Proposals document and all deadlines for the receipt of 
qualification statements and proposals. Typical advertising periods 
range from six to ten weeks and can be longer for large, complicated 
projects.
    (3) The STD must obtain the approval of the Division Administrator 
prior to issuing addenda which result in major changes to the Request 
for Proposals document. Minor addenda need not receive prior approval 
but may be identified by the STD at the time of or prior to requesting 
the FHWA's concurrence in award. The STD must provide assurance that all 
offerors have received all issued addenda.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.113  Bid opening and bid tabulations.

    (a) All bids received in accordance with the terms of the 
advertisement shall be publicly opened and announced either item by item 
or by total amount. If any bid received is not read aloud, the name of 
the bidder and the reason for not reading the bid aloud shall be 
publicly announced at the letting. Negotiation with contractors, during 
the period following the opening of bids and before the award of the 
contract shall not be permitted.

[[Page 167]]

    (b) The STD shall prepare and forward tabulations of bids to the 
Division Administrator. These tabulations shall be certified by a 
responsible STD official and shall show:
    (1) Bid item details for at least the low three acceptable bids and
    (2) The total amounts of all other acceptable bids.
    (c) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
requirements apply:
    (1) All proposals received must be opened and reviewed in accordance 
with the terms of the solicitation. The STD must use its own procedures 
for the following:
    (i) The process of handling proposals and information;
    (ii) The review and evaluation of proposals;
    (iii) The submission, modification, revision and withdrawal of 
proposals; and
    (iv) The announcement of the successful offeror.
    (2) The STD must submit a post-award tabulation of proposal prices 
to the FHWA Division Administrator. The tabulation of price proposal 
information may include detailed pricing information when available or 
lump sum price information if itemized prices are not used.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.114  Award of contract and concurrence in award.

    (a) Federal-aid contracts shall be awarded only on the basis of the 
lowest responsive bid submitted by a bidder meeting the criteria of 
responsibility as may have been established by the STD in accordance 
with Sec. 635.110. Award shall be within the time established by the 
STD and subject to the prior concurrence of the Division Administrator.
    (b) The STD shall formally request concurrence by the Division 
Administrator in the award of all Federal-aid contracts. Concurrence in 
award by the Division Administrator is a prerequisite to Federal 
participation in construction costs and is considered as authority to 
proceed with construction, unless specifically stated otherwise. 
Concurrence in award shall be formally approved and shall only be given 
after receipt and review of the tabulation of bids.
    (c) Following the opening of bids, the STD shall examine the unit 
bid prices of the apparent low bid for reasonable conformance with the 
engineer's estimated prices. A bid with extreme variations from the 
engineer's estimate, or where obvious unbalancing of unit prices has 
occurred, shall be thoroughly evaluated.
    (d) Where obvious unbalanced bid items exist, the STD's decision to 
award or reject a bid shall be supported by written justification. A bid 
found to be mathematically unbalanced, but not found to be materially 
unbalanced, may be awarded.
    (e) When a low bid is determined to be both mathematically and 
materially unbalanced, the Division Administrator will take appropriate 
steps to protect the Federal interest. This action may be concurrence in 
a STD decision not to award the contract. If, however, the STD decides 
to proceed with the award and requests FHWA concurrence, the Division 
Administrator's action may range from nonconcurrence to concurrence with 
contingency conditions limiting Federal participation.
    (f) If the STD determines that the lowest bid is not responsive or 
the bidder is not responsible, it shall so notify and obtain the 
Division Administrator's concurrence before making an award to the next 
lowest bidder.
    (g) If the STD rejects or declines to read or consider a low bid on 
the grounds that it is not responsive because of noncompliance with a 
requirement which was not clearly identified in the bidding documents, 
it shall submit justification for its action. If such justification is 
not considered by the Division Administrator to be sufficient, 
concurrence will not be given to award to another bidder on the contract 
at the same letting.
    (h) Any proposal by the STD to reject all bids received for a 
Federal-aid contract shall be submitted to the Division Administrator 
for concurrence, accompanied by adequate justification.
    (i) In the event the low bidder selected by the STD for contract 
award forfeits the bid guarantee, the STD may dispose of the amounts of 
such

[[Page 168]]

forfeited guarantees in accordance with its normal practices.
    (j) A copy of the executed contract between the STD and the 
construction contractor should be furnished to the Division 
Administrator as soon as practicable after execution.
    (k) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
requirements apply: Design-build contracts shall be awarded in 
accordance with the Request for Proposals document. See 23 CFR Part 636, 
Design-build Contracting, for details.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.115  Agreement estimate.

    (a) Following the award of contract, an agreement estimate based on 
the contract unit prices and estimated quantities shall be prepared by 
the STD and submitted to the Division Administrator as soon as 
practicable for use in the preparation of the project agreement. The 
agreement estimate shall also include the actual or best estimated costs 
of any other items to be included in the project agreement.
    (b) An agreement estimate shall be submitted by the STD for each 
force account project (see 23 CFR part 635, subpart B) when the plans 
and specifications are submitted to the Division Administrator for 
approval. It shall normally be based on the estimated quantities and the 
unit prices agreed upon in advance between the STD and the Division 
Administrator, whether the work is to be done by the STD or by a local 
public agency. Such agreed unit prices shall constitute a commitment as 
the basis for Federal participation in the cost of the project. The unit 
prices shall be based upon the estimated actual cost of performing the 
work but shall in no case exceed unit prices currently being obtained by 
competitive bidding on comparable highway construction work in the same 
general locality. In special cases involving unusual circumstances, the 
estimate may be based upon the estimated costs for labor, materials, 
equipment rentals, and supervision to complete the work rather than upon 
agreed unit prices. This paragraph shall not be applicable to agreement 
estimates for railroad and utility force account work.


<R05>
Sec. 635.116  Subcontracting and contractor responsibilities.

    (a) Contracts for projects shall specify the minimum percentage of 
work that a contractor must perform with its own organization. This 
percentage shall be not less than 30 percent of the total original 
contract price excluding any identified specialty items. Specialty items 
may be performed by subcontract and the amount of any such specialty 
items so performed may be deducted from the total original contract 
before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the 
contractor's own organization. The contract amount upon which the above 
requirement is computed includes the cost of materials and manufactured 
products which are to be purchased or produced by the contractor under 
the contract provisions.
    (b) The STD shall not permit any of the contract work to be 
performed under a subcontract, unless such arrangement has been 
authorized by the STD in writing. Prior to authorizing a subcontract, 
the STD shall assure that each subcontract is evidenced in writing and 
that it contains all pertinent provisions and requirements of the prime 
contract. The Division Administrator may permit the STD to satisfy the 
subcontract assurance requirements by concurrence in a STD process which 
requires the contractor to certify that each subcontract arrangement 
will be in the form of a written agreement containing all the 
requirements and pertinent provisions of the prime contract. Prior to 
the Division Administrator's concurrence, the STD must demonstrate that 
it has an acceptable plan for monitoring such certifications.
    (c) To assure that all work (including subcontract work) is 
performed in accordance with the contract requirements, the contractor 
shall be required to furnish:
    (1) A competent superintendent or supervisor who is employed by the 
firm, has full authority to direct performance of the work in accordance 
with the contract requirements, and is in charge of all construction 
operations

[[Page 169]]

(regardless of who performs the work), and;
    (2) Such other of its own organizational resources (supervision, 
management, and engineering services) as the STD contracting officer 
determines are necessary to assure the performance of the contract.
    (d) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
requirements apply:
    (1) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section are not 
applicable to design-build contracts;
    (2) At their discretion, the STDs may establish a minimum percentage 
of work that must be done by the design-builder. For the purpose of this 
section, the term design-builder may include any firms that are equity 
participants in the design-builder, their sister and parent companies, 
and their wholly owned subsidiaries;
    (3) No procedure, requirement or preference shall be imposed which 
prescribes minimum subcontracting requirements or goals (other than 
those necessary to meet the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise program 
requirements of 49 CFR part 26).

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.117  Labor and employment.

    (a) No construction work shall be performed by convict labor at the 
work site or within the limits of any Federal-aid highway construction 
project from the time of award of the contract or the start of work on 
force account until final acceptance of the work by the STD unless it is 
labor performed by convicts who are on parole, supervised release, or 
probation.
    (b) No procedures or requirement shall be imposed by any State which 
will operate to discriminate against the employment of labor from any 
other State, possession or territory of the United States, in the 
construction of a Federal-aid project.
    (c) The selection of labor to be employed by the contractor on any 
Federal-aid project shall be by the contractor without regard to race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or handicap and in 
accordance with 23 CFR part 230, 41 CFR part 60 and Exec. Order No. 
11246 (Sept. 24, 1965), 3 CFR 339 (1964-1965), as amended.
    (d) Pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 140(d), it is permissible for STD's to 
implement procedures or requirements which will extend preferential 
employment to Indians living on or near a reservation on eligible 
projects as defined in paragraph (e) of this section. Indian preference 
shall be applied without regard to tribal affiliation or place of 
enrollment. In no instance should a contractor be compelled to layoff or 
terminate a permanent core-crew employee to meet a preference goal.
    (e) Projects eligible for Indian employment preference consideration 
are projects located on roads within or providing access to an Indian 
reservation or other Indian lands as defined under the term ``Indian 
Reservation Roads'' in 23 U.S.C. 101 and regulations issued thereunder. 
The terminus of a road ``providing access to'' is that point at which it 
intersects with a road functionally classified as a collector or higher 
classification (outside the reservation boundary) in both urban and 
rural areas. In the case of an Interstate highway, the terminus is the 
first interchange outside the reservation.
    (f) The advertisement or call for bids on any contract for the 
construction of a project located on the Federal-aid system either shall 
include the minimum wage rates determined by the Secretary of Labor to 
be prevailing on the same type of work on similar construction in the 
immediate locality or shall provide that such rates are set out in the 
bidding documents and shall further specify that such rates are a part 
of the contract covering the project.


<R05>
Sec. 635.118  Payroll and weekly statements.

    For all projects, copies of payrolls and statements of wages paid, 
filed with the State as set forth in the required contract provisions 
for the project, are to be retained by the STD for the time period 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 18 for review as needed by the Federal Highway 
Administration, the Department of Labor, the General Accounting Office, 
or other agencies.

[[Page 170]]


<R05>
Sec. 635.119  False statements.

    The following notice shall be posted on each Federal-aid highway 
project in one or more places where it is readily available to and 
viewable by all personnel concerned with the project:

     Notice to All Personnel Engaged on Federal-Aid Highway Projects

    United States Code, title 18, section 1020, reads as follows:
    Whoever, being an officer, agent, or employee of the United States, 
or of any State or Territory, or whoever, whether a person, association, 
firm, or corporation, knowingly makes any false statement, false 
representation, or false report as to the character, quality, quantity, 
or cost of the material used or to be used, or the quantity or quality 
of the work performed or to be performed, or the costs thereof in 
connection with the submission of plans, maps, specifications, 
contracts, or costs of construction of any highway or related project 
submitted for approval to the Secretary of Transportation; or
    Whoever, knowingly makes any false statement, false representation, 
false report, or false claim with respect to the character, quality, 
quantity, or cost of any work performed or to be performed, or materials 
furnished or to be furnished, in connection with the construction of any 
highway or related project approved by the Secretary of Transportation; 
or
    Whoever, knowingly makes any false statement or false representation 
as to a material fact in any statement, certificate, or report submitted 
pursuant to the provisions of the Federal-aid Road Act approved July 11, 
1916 (39 Stat. 355), as amended and supplemented,
    Shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than 
five years, or both.


<R05>
Sec. 635.120  Changes and extra work.

    (a) Following authorization to proceed with a project, all major 
changes in the plans and contract provisions and all major extra work 
shall have formal approval by the Division Administrator in advance of 
their effective dates. However, when emergency or unusual conditions 
justify, the Division Administrator may give tentative advance approval 
orally to such changes or extra work and ratify such approval with 
formal approval as soon thereafter as practicable.
    (b) For non-major changes and non-major extra work, formal approval 
is necessary but such approval may be given retroactively at the 
discretion of the Division Administrator. The STD should establish and 
document with the Division Administrator's concurrence specific 
parameters as to what constitutes a non-major change and non-major extra 
work.
    (c) Changes in contract time, as related to contract changes or 
extra work, should be submitted at the same time as the respective work 
change for approval by the Division Administrator.
    (d) In establishing the method of payment for contract changes or 
extra work orders, force account procedures shall only be used when 
strictly necessary, such as when agreement cannot be reached with the 
contractor on the price of a new work item, or when the extent of work 
is unknown or is of such character that a price cannot be determined to 
a reasonable degree of accuracy. The reason or reasons for using force 
account procedures shall be documented.
    (e) The STD shall perform and adequately document a cost analysis of 
each negotiated contract change or negotiated extra work order. The 
method and degree of the cost analysis shall be subject to the approval 
of the Division Administrator.
    (f) Proposed changes and extra work involved in nonparticipating 
operations that may affect the design or participating construction 
features of a project, shall be subject to review and concurrence by the 
Division Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 635.121  Contract time and contract time extensions.

    (a) The STD should have adequate written procedures for the 
determination of contract time. These procedures should be submitted for 
approval to the Division Administrator within 6 months of the effective 
date of this Final Rule.
    (b) Contract time extensions granted by a STD shall be subject to 
the concurrence of the Division Administrator and will be considered in 
determining the amount of Federal participation. Contract time 
extensions submitted for approval to the Division Administrator, shall 
be fully justified and adequately documented.

[[Page 171]]


<R05>
Sec. 635.122  Participation in progress payments.

    (a) Federal funds will participate in the costs to the STD of 
construction accomplished as the work progresses, based on a request for 
reimbursement submitted by State transportation departments. When the 
contract provisions provide for payment for stockpiled materials, the 
amount of the reimbursement request upon which participation is based 
may include the appropriate value of approved specification materials 
delivered by the contractor at the project site or at another designated 
location in the vicinity of such construction, provided that:
    (1) The material conforms with the requirements of the plans and 
specifications.
    (2) The material is supported by a paid invoice or a receipt for 
delivery of materials. If supported by a receipt of delivery of 
materials, the contractor must furnish the paid invoice within a 
reasonable time after receiving payment from the STD; and
    (3) The quantity of a stockpiled material eligible for Federal 
participation in any case shall not exceed the total estimated quantity 
required to complete the project. The value of the stockpiled material 
shall not exceed the appropriate portion of the value of the contract 
item or items in which such materials are to be incorporated.
    (b) The materials may be stockpiled by the contractor at a location 
not in the vicinity of the project, if the STD determines that because 
of required fabrication at an off-site location, it is not feasible or 
practicable to stockpile the materials in the vicinity of the project.
    (c) In the case of a design-build project, the STD must define its 
procedures for making progress payments on lump sum contracts in the 
Request for Proposal document.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 75925, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.123  Determination and documentation of pay quantities.

    (a) The STD shall have procedures in effect which will provide 
adequate assurance that the quantities of completed work are determined 
accurately and on a uniform basis throughout the State. All such 
determinations and all related source documents upon which payment is 
based shall be made a matter of record.
    (b) Initial source documents pertaining to the determination of pay 
quantities are among those records and documents which must be retained 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 18.


<R05>
Sec. 635.124  Participation in contract claim awards and settlements.

    (a) The eligibility for and extent of Federal-aid participation up 
to the Federal statutory share in a contract claim award made by a State 
to a Federal-aid contractor on the basis of an arbitration or mediation 
proceeding, administrative board determination, court judgment, 
negotiated settlement, or other contract claim settlement shall be 
determined on a case-by-case basis. Federal funds will participate to 
the extent that any contract adjustments made are supported, and have a 
basis in terms of the contract and applicable State law, as fairly 
construed. Further, the basis for the adjustment and contractor 
compensation shall be in accord with prevailing principles of public 
contract law.
    (b) The FHWA shall be made aware by the STD of the details of the 
claim at an early stage so that coordination of efforts can be 
satisfactorily accomplished. It is expected that STDs will diligently 
pursue the satisfactory resolution of claims within a reasonable period 
of time. Claims arising on exempt non-NHS projects should be processed 
in accordance with the State's approved Stewardship Plan.
    (c) When requesting Federal participation, the STD shall set forth 
in writing the legal and contractual basis for the claim, together with 
the cost data and other facts supporting the award or settlement. 
Federal-aid participation in such instances shall be supported by a STD 
audit of the actual costs incurred by the contractor unless waived by 
the FHWA as unwarranted. Where difficult, complex, or novel legal issues 
appear in the claim, such that evaluation of legal controversies is 
critical to consideration of the award or settlement, the STD shall 
include in its submission a legal opinion from its

[[Page 172]]

counsel setting forth the basis for determining the extent of the 
liability under local law, with a level of detail commensurate with the 
magnitude and complexity of the issues involved.
    (d) In those cases where the STD receives an adverse decision in an 
amount more than the STD was able to support prior to the decision or 
settles a claim in an amount more than the STD can support, the FHWA 
will participate up to the appropriate Federal matching share, to the 
extent that it involves a Federal-aid participating portion of the 
contract, provided that:
    (1) The FHWA was consulted and concurred in the proposed course of 
action;
    (2) All appropriate courses of action had been considered; and
    (3) The STD pursued the case diligently and in a professional 
manner.
    (e) Federal funds will not participate:
    (1) If it has been determined that STD employees, officers, or 
agents acted with gross negligence, or participated in intentional acts 
or omissions, fraud, or other acts not consistent with usual State 
practices in project design, plan preparation, contract administration, 
or other activities which gave rise to the claim;
    (2) In such cost items as consequential or punitive damages, 
anticipated profit, or any award or payment of attorney's fees paid by a 
State to an opposing party in litigation; and
    (3) In tort, inverse condemnation, or other claims erroneously 
styled as claims ``under a contract.''
    (f) Payment of interest associated with a claim will be eligible for 
participation provided that the payment to the contractor for interest 
is allowable by State statute or specification and the costs are not a 
result of delays caused by dilatory action of the State or the 
contractor. The interest rates must not exceed the rate provided for by 
the State statute or specification.
    (g) In cases where STD's affirmatively recover compensatory damages 
through contract claims, cross-claims, or counter claims from 
contractors, subcontractors, or their agents on projects on which there 
was Federal-aid participation, the Federal share of such recovery shall 
be equivalent to the Federal share of the project or projects involved. 
Such recovery shall be credited to the project or projects from which 
the claim or claims arose.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 6873, Feb. 14, 1997; 69 
FR 7118, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 635.125  Termination of contract.

    (a) All contracts exceeding $10,000 shall contain suitable 
provisions for termination by the State, including the manner by which 
the termination will be effected and the basis for settlement. In 
addition, such contracts shall describe conditions under which the 
contract may be terminated for default as well as conditions where the 
contract may be terminated because of circumstances beyond the control 
of the contractor.
    (b) The STD prior to termination of a Federal-aid contract shall 
consult with and receive the concurrence of the Division Administrator. 
The extent of Federal-aid participation in contract termination costs, 
including final settlement, will depend upon the merits of the 
individual case. However, under no circumstances shall Federal funds 
participate in anticipated profit on work not performed.
    (c) Except as provided for in paragraph (e) of this section, normal 
Federal-aid plans, specifications, and estimates, advertising, and award 
procedures are to be followed when a STD awards the contract for 
completion of a terminated Federal-aid contract.
    (d) When a STD awards the contract for completion of a Federal-aid 
contract previously terminated for default, the construction amount 
eligible for Federal participation on the project should not exceed 
whichever amount is the lesser, either:
    (1) The amount representing the payments made under the original 
contract plus payments made under the new contract; or
    (2) The amount representing what the cost would have been if the 
construction had been completed as contemplated by the plans and 
specifications under the original contract.
    (e) If the surety awards a contract for completion of a defaulted 
Federal-aid contract or completes it by some other acceptable means, the 
FHWA will consider the terms of the original contract to be in effect 
and that the work will

[[Page 173]]

be completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications 
included therein. No further FHWA approval or concurrence action will 
therefore be needed in connection with any defaulted Federal-aid 
contract awarded by a surety. Under this procedure, the construction 
amount eligible for Federal participation on the project should not 
exceed the amount representing what the cost would have been if the 
construction had been completed as contemplated by the plans and 
specifications under the original contract.


<R05>
Sec. 635.126  Record of materials, supplies, and labor.

    (a) The provisions in this section are required to facilitate FHWA's 
efforts to compile data on Federal-aid contracts for the establishment 
of highway construction usage factors.
    (b) On all Federal-aid construction contracts of $1 million or more 
for projects on the National Highway System, the STD shall require the 
contractor:
    (1) To become familiar with the list of specific materials and 
supplies including labor-hour and gross earning items contained in Form 
FHWA-47, ``Statement of Materials and Labor Used by Contractors on 
Highway Construction Involving Federal Funds,'' prior to the 
commencement of work under this contract;
    (2) To maintain a record of the total cost of all materials and 
supplies purchased for and incorporated in the work, and also of the 
quantities of those specific materials and supplies listed on Form FHWA-
47, and in the units shown; and
    (3) To furnish, upon the completion of the contract, to the STD on 
Form FHWA-47 both the data required in paragraph (b)(2) of this section 
relative to materials and supplies and a final labor summary for all 
contract work indicating the total hours worked and the gross earnings.
    (c) Upon receipt from the contractor, the STD shall review the Form 
FHWA-47 for reasonableness and promptly transmit the form to the 
Division Administrator in accordance with the instructions printed in 
the form.

[56 FR 37004, Aug. 2, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 6873, Feb. 14, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 635.127  Agreement provisions regarding overruns in contract time.

    (a) Each State transportation department (STD) shall establish 
specific liquidated damages rates applicable to projects in that State. 
The rates may be project-specific or may be in the form of a table or 
schedule developed for a range of project costs and/or project types. 
These rates shall, as a minimum, be established to cover the estimated 
average daily construction engineering (CE) costs associated with the 
type of work encountered on the project. The amounts shall be assessed 
by means of deductions, for each calendar day or workday overrun in 
contract time, from payments otherwise due to the contractor for 
performance in accordance with the contract terms.
    (b) The rates established shall be subject to FHWA approval either 
on a project-by-project basis, in the case of project-specific rates, or 
on a periodic basis after initial approval where a rate table or 
schedule is used. In the latter case, the STD shall periodically review 
its cost data to ascertain if the rate table/schedule closely 
approximates, at a minimum, the actual average daily CE costs associated 
with the type and size of the projects in the State. Where rate 
schedules or other means are already included in the STD specifications 
or standard special provisions, verification by the STD that the amounts 
are adequate shall be submitted to the FHWA for review and approval. 
After initial approval by the FHWA of the rates, the STD shall review 
the rates at least every 2 years and provide updated rates, when 
necessary, for FHWA approval. If updated rates are not warranted, 
justification of this fact is to be sent to the FHWA for review and 
acceptance.
    (c) The STD may, with FHWA concurrence, include additional amounts 
as liquidated damages in each contract to cover other anticipated costs 
of project related delays or inconveniences to the STD or the public. 
Costs resulting from winter shutdowns, retaining detours for an extended 
time,

[[Page 174]]

additional demurrage, or similar costs as well as road user delay costs 
may be included.
    (d) In addition to the liquidated damages provisions, the STD may 
also include incentive/disincentive for early completion provisions in 
the contract. The incentive/disincentive amounts shall be shown 
separately from the liquidated damages amounts.
    (e) Where there has been an overrun in contract time, the following 
principles shall apply in determining the cost of a project that is 
eligible for Federal-aid reimbursement:
    (1) A proportional share, as used in this section, is the ratio of 
the final contract construction costs eligible for Federal participation 
to the final total contract construction costs of the project.
    (2) Where CE costs are claimed as a participating item based upon 
actual expenses incurred or where CE costs are not claimed as a 
participating item, and where the liquidated damages rates cover only CE 
expenses, the total CE costs for the project shall be reduced by the 
assessed liquidated damages amounts prior to figuring any Federal pro 
rata share payable. If the amount of liquidated damages assessed is more 
than the actual CE totals for the project, a proportional share of the 
excess shall be deducted from the federally participating contract 
construction cost before determining the final Federal share.
    (3) Where the STD is being reimbursed for CE costs on the basis of 
an approved percentage of the participating construction cost, the total 
contract construction amount that would be eligible for Federal 
participation shall be reduced by a proportional share of the total 
liquidated damages amounts assessed on the project.
    (4) Where liquidated damages include extra anticipated non-CE costs 
due to contractor caused delays, the amount assessed shall be used to 
pay for the actual non-CE expenses incurred by the STD, and, if a 
Federal participating item(s) is involved, to reduce the Federal share 
payable for that item(s). If the amount assessed is more than the actual 
expenses incurred by the STD, a proportional share of the excess shall 
be deducted from the federally participating contract construction cost 
of the project before the Federal share is figured.
    (f) When provisions for incentive/disincentive for early completion 
are used in the contract, a proportion of the increased project costs 
due to any incentive payments to the contractor shall be added to the 
federally participating contract construction cost before calculating 
the Federal share. When the disincentive provision is applicable, a 
proportion of the amount assessed the contractor shall be deducted from 
the federally participating contract construction cost before the 
Federal share calculation. Proportions are to be calculated in the same 
manner as set forth in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.

[52 FR 31390, Aug. 20, 1987. Redesignated at 62 FR 6872, Feb. 14, 1997]


<R04>
                  Subpart B_Force Account Construction


<R05>
Sec. 635.201  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe procedures in accordance 
with 23 U.S.C. 112(b) for a State transportation department to request 
approval that highway construction work be performed by some method 
other than contract awarded by competitive bidding.

[48 FR 22912, May 23, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 635.202  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to all Federal-aid and other highway 
construction projects financed in whole or in part with Federal funds 
and to be constructed by a State transportation department or a 
subdivision thereof in pursuant of agreements between any other State 
transportation department and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).

[69 FR 7119, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 635.203  Definitions.

    The following definitions shall apply for the purpose of this 
subpart:
    (a) A State transportation department is that department, 
commission, board, or official of any State charged by its laws with the 
responsibility for highway construction. The term State

[[Page 175]]

should be considered equivalent to State transportation department if 
the context so implies.
    (b) Except as provided for as emergency repair work in Sec. 
668.105(i) and in Sec. 635.204(b), the term some other method of 
construction as used in 23 U.S.C. 112(b) shall mean the force account 
method of construction as defined herein. In the unlikely event that 
circumstances are considered to justify a negotiated contract or another 
unusual method of construction, the policies and procedures prescribed 
herein for force account work will apply.
    (c) The term force account shall mean the direct performance of 
highway construction work by a State transportation department, a 
county, a railroad, or a public utility company by use of labor, 
equipment, materials, and supplies furnished by them and used under 
their direct control.
    (d) The term county shall mean any county, township, municipality or 
other political subdivision that may be empowered to cooperate with the 
State transportation department in highway matters.
    (e) The term cost effective shall mean the efficient use of labor, 
equipment, materials and supplies to assure the lowest overall cost.
    (f) For the purpose of this part, an emergency shall be deemed to 
exist when emergency repair work as provided for in Sec. 668.105(i) is 
necessary or when a major element or segment of the highway system has 
failed and the situation is such that competitive bidding is not 
possible or is impractical because immediate action is necessary to:
    (1) Minimize the extent of the damage,
    (2) Protect remaining facilities, or
    (3) Restore essential travel.

This definition of emergency has no applicability to the Emergency 
Relief Program of 23 CFR part 668.

[39 FR 35158, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended at 48 FR 22912, May 23, 1983; 
52 FR 45172, Nov. 25, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 635.204  Determination of more cost effective method or an emergency.

    (a) Congress has expressly provided that the contract method based 
on competitive bidding shall be used by a State transportation 
department or county for performance of highway work financed with the 
aid of Federal funds unless the State transportation department 
demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that some other 
method is more cost effective or that an emergency exists.
    (b) When a State transportation department determines it necessary 
due to an emergency to undertake a federally financed highway 
construction project by force account or negotiated contract method, it 
shall submit a request to the Division Administrator identifying and 
describing the project, the kinds of work to be performed, the method to 
be used, the estimated costs, the estimated Federal Funds to be 
provided, and the reason or reasons that an emergency exists.
    (c) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, when a 
State transportation department desires that highway construction work 
financed with the aid of Federal funds, other than the kinds of work 
designated under Sec. 635.205(b), be undertaken by force account, it 
shall submit a request to the Division Administrator identifying and 
describing the project and the kind of work to be performed, the 
estimated costs, the estimated Federal funds to be provided, and the 
reason or reasons that force account for such project is considered cost 
effective.
    (d) The Division Administrator shall notify the State transportation 
department in writing of his/her determination.

[52 FR 45172, Nov. 25, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 635.205  Finding of cost effectiveness.

    (a) It may be found cost effective for a State transportation 
department or county to undertake a federally financed highway 
construction project by force account when a situation exists in which 
the rights or resposibilities of the community at large are so affected 
as to require some special course of action, including situations where 
there is a lack of bids or the bids received are unreasonable.
    (b) Pursuant to authority in 23 U.S.C. 112(b), it is hereby 
determined that by reason of the inherent nature of the operations 
involved, it is cost effective to

[[Page 176]]

perform by force account the adjustment of railroad or utility 
facilities and similar types of facilities owned or operated by a public 
agency, a railroad, or a utility company provided that the organization 
is qualified to perform the work in a satisfactory manner. The 
installation of new facilities shall be undertaken by competitive 
bidding except as provided in Sec. 635.204(c). Adjustment of railroad 
facilities shall include minor work on the railroad's operating 
facilities routinely performed by the railroad with its own forces such 
as the installation of grade crossing warning devices, crossing 
surfaces, and minor track and signal work. Adjustment of utility 
facilities shall include minor work on the utility's existing facilities 
routinely performed by the utility with its own forces and includes 
minor installations of new facilities to provide power, minor lighting, 
telephone, water and similar utility service to a rest area, weigh-
station, movable bridge, or other highway appurtenance, provided such 
installation cannot feasibly be done as incidental to a major 
installation project such as an extensive highway lighting system.

[52 FR 45173, Nov. 25, 1987]


<R04>
              Subpart C_Physical Construction Authorization

    Source: 40 FR 17251, Apr. 18, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 635.301  Purpose.

    To prescribe the policies and procedures under which a State 
transportation department may be authorized to advance a Federal-aid 
highway project to the physical construction stage.


<R05>
Sec. 635.303  Applicability.

    The provisions of this subpart are applicable to all Federal-aid 
highway construction projects.

[69 FR 7119, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 635.305  Physical construction.

    For purposes of this subpart the physical construction of a project 
is considered to consist of the actual construction of the highway 
itself with its appurtenant facilities. It includes any removal, 
adjustment or demolition of buildings or major obstructions, and utility 
or railroad work that is a part of the contract for the physical 
construction.


<R05>
Sec. 635.307  Coordination.

    (a) The right-of-way clearance, utility, and railroad work are to be 
so coordinated with the physical construction that no unnecessary delay 
or cost for the physical construction will occur.
    (b) All right-of-way clearance, utility, and railroad work performed 
separately from the contract for the physical construction of the 
project are to be accomplished in accordance with provisions of the 
following:
    (1) 23 CFR part 140, subpart I;
    (2) 23 CFR part 646, subpart B;
    (3) 23 CFR 710.403; and
    (4) 23 CFR part 645, subpart A.

[40 FR 17251, Apr. 18, 1975, as amended at 40 FR 25585, June 17, 1975; 
64 FR 71289, Dec. 21, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 635.309  Authorization.

    Authorization to advertise the physical construction for bids or to 
proceed with force account construction thereof shall normally be issued 
as soon as, but not until, all of the following conditions have been 
met:
    (a) The plans, specifications, and estimates (PS&E) therefor have 
been approved.
    (b) A statement is received from the State, either separately or 
combined with the information required by Sec. 635.309(c), that either 
all right-of-way clearance, utility, and railroad work has been 
completed or that all necessary arrangements have been made for it to be 
undertaken and completed as required for proper coordination with the 
physical construction schedules. Where it is determined that the 
completion of such work in advance of the highway construction is not 
feasible or practical due to economy, special operational problems and 
the like, there shall be appropriate notification provided in the bid 
proposals identifying the right-of-way clearance, utility, and railroad 
work which is to be underway concurrently with the highway construction.

[[Page 177]]

    (c) A statement is received from the State certifying that all 
individuals and families have been relocated to decent, safe and 
sanitary housing or the State has made available to relocatees adequate 
replacement housing in accordance with the provisions of the current 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) directive(s) covering the 
administration of the Highway Relocation Assistance Program and that one 
of the following has application:
    (1) All necessary rights-of-way, including control of access rights 
when pertinent, have been acquired including legal and physical 
possession. Trial or appeal of cases may be pending in court but legal 
possession has been obtained. There may be some improvements remaining 
on the right-of-way but all occupants have vacated the lands and 
improvements and the State has physical possession and the right to 
remove, salvage, or demolish these improvements and enter on all land.
    (2) Although all necessary rights-of-way have not been fully 
acquired, the right to occupy and to use all rights-of-way required for 
the proper execution of the project has been acquired. Trial or appeal 
of some parcels may be pending in court and on other parcels full legal 
possession has not been obtained but right of entry has been obtained, 
the occupants of all lands and improvements have vacated and the State 
has physical possession and right to remove, salvage, or demolish these 
improvements.
    (3) The acquisition or right of occupancy and use of a few remaining 
parcels is not complete, but all occupants of the residences on such 
parcels have had replacement housing made available to them in 
accordance with 49 CFR 24.204. The State may request authorization on 
this basis only in very unusual circumstances. This exception must never 
become the rule. Under these circumstances, advertisement for bids or 
force-account work may be authorized if FHWA finds that it will be in 
the public interest. The physical construction may then also proceed, 
but the State shall ensure that occupants of residences, businesses, 
farms, or non-profit organizations who have not yet moved from the 
right-of-way are protected against unnecessary inconvenience and 
disproportionate injury or any action coercive in nature. When the State 
requests authorization to advertise for bids and to proceed with 
physical construction where acquisition or right of occupancy and use of 
a few parcels has not been obtained, full explanation and reasons 
therefor including identification of each such parcel will be set forth 
in the State's request along with a realistic date when physical 
occupancy and use is anticipated as well as substantiation that such 
date is realistic. Appropriate notification shall be provided in the bid 
proposals identifying all locations where right of occupancy and use has 
not been obtained.
    (d) The State transportation department in accord with 23 CFR 
771.111(h), has submitted public hearing transcripts, certifications and 
reports pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 128.
    (e) An affirmative finding of cost effectiveness or that an 
emergency exists has been made as required by 23 U.S.C. 112, when 
construction by some method other than contract based on competitive 
bidding is contemplated.
    (f) Minimum wage rates determined by the Department of Labor in 
accordance with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 113, are in effect and will 
not expire before the end of the period within which it can reasonably 
be expected that the contract will be awarded.
    (g) A statement has been received that right-of-way has been 
acquired or will be acquired in accordance with the current FHWA 
directive(s) covering the acquisition of real property or that 
acquisition of right-of-way is not required.
    (h) A statement has been received that the steps relative to 
relocation advisory assistance and payments as required by the current 
FHWA directive(s) covering the administration of the Highway Relocation 
Assistance Program have been taken, or that they are not required.
    (i) The FHWA Division Administrator has determined that appropriate 
measures have been included in the PS&E in keeping with approved 
guidelines, for minimizing possible soil erosion and water pollution as 
a result of highway construction operations.

[[Page 178]]

    (j) The FHWA Division Administrator has determined that requirements 
of 23 CFR part 771 have been fulfilled and appropriate measures have 
been included in the PS&E to ensure that conditions and commitments made 
in the development of the proj ect to mitigate environmental harm will 
be met.
    (k) Where utility facilities are to use and occupy the right-of-way, 
the State has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the FHWA Division 
Administrator that the provisions of 23 CFR 645.119(b) have been 
fulfilled.
    (l) The FHWA Division Administrator has verified the fact that 
adequate replacement housing is in place and has been made available to 
all affected persons.
    (m) Where applicable, areawide agency review has been accomplished 
as required by 42 U.S.C. 3334 and 4231 through 4233.
    (n) The FHWA Division Administrator has determined that the PS&E 
provide for the erection of only those information signs and traffic 
control devices that conform to the standards developed by the Secretary 
of Transportation or mandates of Federal law and do not include 
promotional or other informational signs regarding such matters as 
identification of public officials, contractors, organizational 
affiliations, and related logos and symbols.
    (o) The FHWA Division Administrator has determined that, where 
applicable, provisions are included in the PS&E that require the 
erection of funding source signs, for the life of the construction 
project, in accordance with section 154 of the Surface Transportation 
and Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of 1987.
    (p) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
certification requirements apply:
    (1) The FHWA's project authorization (authorization to advertise or 
release the Request for Proposals document) will not be issued until the 
following conditions have been met:
    (i) All projects must conform with the statewide and metropolitan 
transportation planning requirements (23 CFR part 450).
    (ii) All projects in air quality nonattainment and maintenance areas 
must meet all transportation conformity requirements (40 CFR parts 51 
and 93).
    (iii) The NEPA review process has been concluded. (See 23 CFR 
636.109).
    (iv) The Request for Proposals document has been approved.
    (v) A statement is received from the STD that either all right-of-
way, utility, and railroad work has been completed or that all necessary 
arrangements will be made for the completion of right of way, utility, 
and railroad work.
    (vi) If the STD elects to include right-of-way, utility, and/or 
railroad services as part of the design-builder's scope of work, then 
the Request for Proposals document must include:
    (A) A statement concerning scope and current status of the required 
services, and
    (B) A statement which requires compliance with the Uniform 
Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as 
amended, and 23 CFR part 710.
    (2) During a conformity lapse, a design-build project (including 
right-of-way acquisition activities) may continue if, prior to the 
conformity lapse, the NEPA process was completed and the project has not 
changed significantly in design scope, the FHWA authorized the design-
build project and the project met transportation conformity requirements 
(40 CFR parts 51 and 93).
    (3) Changes to the design-build project concept and scope may 
require a modification of the transportation plan and transportation 
improvement program. The project sponsor must comply with the 
metropolitan and statewide transportation planning requirements in 23 
CFR part 450 and the transportation conformity requirements (40 CFR 
parts 51 and 93) in air quality nonattainment and maintenance areas, and 
provide appropriate

[[Page 179]]

approval notification to the design-builder for such changes.

[40 FR 17251, Apr. 18, 1975; 40 FR 36319, Aug. 20, 1975, as amended at 
47 FR 47239, Oct. 25, 1982; 49 FR 28550, July 13, 1984; 50 FR 34093, 
Aug. 23, 1985; 52 FR 32669, Aug. 28, 1987; 52 FR 45173, Nov. 25, 1987; 
53 FR 1921, Jan. 25, 1988; 54 FR 47075, Nov. 9, 1989; 67 FR 75926, Dec. 
10, 2002]


<R04>
                 Subpart D_General Material Requirements

    Source: 41 FR 36204, Aug. 27, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 635.401  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe requirements and 
procedures relating to product and material selection and use on 
Federal-aid highway projects.


<R05>
Sec. 635.403  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, the following terms have the meanings 
indicated:
    (a) FHWA Division Administrator means the chief Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) official assigned to conduct business in a 
particular State;
    (b) Material means any tangible substance incorporated into a 
Federal-aid highway project;
    (c) PS&E means plans, specifications, and estimates;
    (d) Special provisions means additions and revisions to the standard 
and supplemental specifications applicable to an individual project;
    (e) Standard specifications means a compilation in book form of 
specifications approved for general application and repetitive use;
    (f) State has the meaning set forth in 23 U.S.C. 101;
    (g) State transportation department means that department, 
commission, board, or official of any State charged by its laws with the 
responsibility for highway construction;
    (h) Supplemental specifications means approved additions and 
revisions to the standard specifications.


<R05>
Sec. 635.405  Applicability.

    The requirements and procedures prescribed in this subpart apply to 
all contracts relating to Federal-aid highway projects.

[69 FR 7119, Feb. 13, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 635.407  Use of materials made available by a public agency.

    (a) Contracts for highway projects shall require the contractor to 
furnish all materials to be incorporated in the work and shall permit 
the contractor to select the sources from which the materials are to be 
obtained. Exception to this requirement may be made when there is a 
definite finding by the State transportation department and concurred in 
by the FHWA Division Administrator, that it is in the public interest to 
require the contractor to use material furnished by the State 
transportation department or from sources designated by the State 
transportation department. In cases such as this, the FHWA does not 
expect mutual sharing of costs unless the State transportation 
department receives a related credit from another agency or political 
subdivision of the State. Where such a credit does accrue to the State 
transportation department, it shall be applied to the Federal-aid 
project involved. The designation of a mandatory material source may be 
permitted based on environmental considerations, provided the 
environment would be substantially enhanced without excessive cost. 
Otherwise, if a State transportation department proposal to designate a 
material source for mandatory use would result in higher project costs, 
Federal-aid funds shall not participate in the increase even if the 
designation would conserve other public funds.
    (b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section will not 
preclude the designation in the plans and specifications of sources of 
local natural materials, such as borrow aggregates, that have been 
investigated by the State transportation department and found to contain 
materials meeting specification requirements. The use of materials from 
such designated sources shall not be mandatory unless there is a finding 
of public interest as stated in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Federal funds may participate in the cost of specifications 
materials made available by a public agency

[[Page 180]]

when they have been actually incorporated in accepted items of work, or 
in the cost of such materials meeting the criteria and stockpiled at the 
locations specified in Sec. 635.114 of this chapter.
    (d) To be eligible for Federal participation in its cost, any 
material, other than local natural materials, to be purchased by the 
State transportation department and furnished to the contractor for 
mandatory use in the project, must have been acquired on the basis of 
competitive bidding, except when there is a finding of public interest 
justifying the use of another method of acquisition. The location and 
unit price at which such material will be available to the contractor 
must be stated in the special provisions for the benefit of all 
prospective bidders. The unit cost eligible for Federation participation 
will be limited to the unit cost of such material to the State 
transportation department.
    (e) When the State transportation department or another public 
agency owns or has control over the source of a local natural material 
the unit price at which such material will be made available to the 
contractor must be stated in the plans or special provisions. Federal 
participation will be limited to (1) the cost of the material to the 
State transportation department or other public agency; or (2) the fair 
and reasonable value of the material, whichever is less. Special cases 
may arise that will justify Federal participation on a basis other than 
that set forth above. Such cases should be fully documented and receive 
advance approval by the FHWA Division Administrator.
    (f) Costs incurred by the State transportation department or other 
public agency for acquiring a designated source or the right to take 
materials from it will not be eligible for Federal participation if the 
source is not used by the contractor.
    (g) The contract provisions for one or a combination of Federal-aid 
projects shall not specify a mandatory site for the disposal of surplus 
excavated materials unless there is a finding by the State 
transportation department with the concurrence of the FHWA Division 
Administrator that such placement is the most economical except that the 
designation of a mandatory site may be permitted based on environmental 
considerations, provided the environment would be substantially enhanced 
without excessive cost.


<R05>
Sec. 635.409  Restrictions upon materials.

    No requirement shall be imposed and no procedure shall be enforced 
by any State transportation department in connection with a project 
which may operate:
    (a) To require the use of or provide a price differential in favor 
of articles or materials produced within the State, or otherwise to 
prohibit, restrict or discriminate against the use of articles or 
materials shipped from or prepared, made or produced in any State, 
territory or possession of the United States; or
    (b) To prohibit, restrict or otherwise discriminate against the use 
of articles or materials of foreign origin to any greater extent than is 
permissible under policies of the Department of Transportation as 
evidenced by requirements and procedures prescribed by the FHWA 
Administrator to carry out such policies.


<R05>
Sec. 635.410  Buy America requirements.

    (a) The provisions of this section shall prevail and be given 
precedence over any requirements of this subpart which are contrary to 
this section. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to be 
contrary to the requirements of Sec. 635.409(a) of this subpart.
    (b) No Federal-aid highway construction project is to be authorized 
for advertisement or otherwise authorized to proceed unless at least one 
of the following requirements is met:
    (1) The project either: (i) Includes no permanently incorporated 
steel or iron materials, or (ii) if steel or iron materials are to be 
used, all manufacturing processes, including application of a coating, 
for these materials must occur in the United States. Coating includes 
all processes which protect or enhance the value of the material to 
which the coating is applied.

[[Page 181]]

    (2) The State has standard contract provisions that require the use 
of domestic materials and products, including steel and iron materials, 
to the same or greater extent as the provisions set forth in this 
section.
    (3) The State elects to include alternate bid provisions for foreign 
and domestic steel and iron materials which comply with the following 
requirements. Any procedure for obtaining alternate bids based on 
furnishing foreign steel and iron materials which is acceptable to the 
Division Administrator may be used. The contract provisions must (i) 
require all bidders to submit a bid based on furnishing domestic steel 
and iron materials, and (ii) clearly state that the contract will be 
awarded to the bidder who submits the lowest total bid based on 
furnishing domestic steel and iron materials unless such total bid 
exceeds the lowest total bid based on furnishing foreign steel and iron 
materials by more than 25 percent.
    (4) When steel and iron materials are used in a project, the 
requirements of this section do not prevent a minimal use of foreign 
steel and iron materials, if the cost of such materials used does not 
exceed one-tenth of one percent (0.1 percent) of the total contract cost 
or $2,500, whichever is greater. For purposes of this paragraph, the 
cost is that shown to be the value of the steel and iron products as 
they are delivered to the project.
    (c)(1) A State may request a waiver of the provisions of this 
section if;
    (i) The application of those provisions would be inconsistent with 
the public interest; or
    (ii) Steel and iron materials/products are not produced in the 
United States in sufficient and reasonably available quantities which 
are of a satisfactory quality.
    (2) A request for waiver, accompanied by supporting information, 
must be submitted in writing to the Regional Federal Highway 
Administrator (RFHWA) through the FHWA Division Administrator. A request 
must be submitted sufficiently in advance of the need for the waiver in 
order to allow time for proper review and action on the request. The 
RFHWA will have approval authority on the request.
    (3) Requests for waivers may be made for specific projects, or for 
certain materials or products in specific geographic areas, or for 
combinations of both, depending on the circumstances.
    (4) The denial of the request by the RFHWA may be appealed by the 
State to the Federal Highway Administrator (Administrator), whose action 
on the request shall be considered administratively final.
    (5) A request for a waiver which involves nationwide public interest 
or availability issues or more than one FHWA region may be submitted by 
the RFHWA to the Administrator for action.
    (6) A request for waiver and an appeal from a denial of a request 
must include facts and justification to support the granting of the 
waiver. The FHWA response to a request or appeal will be in writing and 
made available to the public upon request. Any request for a nationwide 
waiver and FHWA's action on such a request may be published in the 
Federal Register for public comment.
    (7) In determining whether the waivers described in paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section will be granted, the FHWA will consider all appropriate 
factors including, but not limited to, cost, administrative burden, and 
delay that would be imposed if the provision were not waived.
    (d) Standard State and Federal-aid contract procedures may be used 
to assure compliance with the requirements of this section.

[48 FR 53104, Nov. 25, 1983, as amended at 49 FR 18821, May 3, 1984; 58 
FR 38975, July 21, 1993]

    Editorial Note: For a waiver document affecting Sec. 635.410, see 
60 FR 15478, Mar. 24, 1995.


<R05>
Sec. 635.411  Material or product selection.

    (a) Federal funds shall not participate, directly or indirectly, in 
payment for any premium or royalty on any patented or proprietary 
material, specification, or process specifically set forth in the plans 
and specifications for a project, unless:
    (1) Such patented or proprietary item is purchased or obtained 
through competitive bidding with equally suitable unpatented items; or

[[Page 182]]

    (2) The State transportation department certifies either that such 
patented or proprietary item is essential for synchronization with 
existing highway facilities, or that no equally suitable alternate 
exists; or
    (3) Such patented or proprietary item is used for research or for a 
distinctive type of construction on relatively short sections of road 
for experimental purposes.
    (b) When there is available for purchase more than one nonpatented, 
nonproprietary material, semifinished or finished article or product 
that will fulfill the requirements for an item of work of a project and 
these available materials or products are judged to be of satisfactory 
quality and equally acceptable on the basis of engineering analysis and 
the anticipated prices for the related item(s) of work are estimated to 
be approximately the same, the PS&E for the project shall either contain 
or include by reference the specifications for each such material or 
product that is considered acceptable for incorporation in the work. If 
the State transportation department wishes to substitute some other 
acceptable material or product for the material or product designated by 
the successful bidder or bid as the lowest alternate, and such 
substitution results in an increase in costs, there will not be Federal-
aid participation in any increase in costs.
    (c) A State transportation department may require a specific 
material or product when there are other acceptable materials and 
products, when such specific choice is approved by the Division 
Administrator as being in the public interest. When the Division 
Administrator's approval is not obtained, the item will be 
nonparticipating unless bidding procedures are used that establish the 
unit price of each acceptable alternative. In this case Federal-aid 
participation will be based on the lowest price so established.
    (d) Appendix A sets forth the FHWA requirements regarding (1) the 
specification of alternative types of culvert pipes, and (2) the number 
and types of such alternatives which must be set forth in the 
specifications for various types of drainage installations.
    (e) Reference in specifications and on plans to single trade name 
materials will not be approved on Federal-aid contracts.
    (f) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
requirements apply: Federal funds shall not participate, directly or 
indirectly, in payment for any premium or royalty on any patented or 
proprietary material, specification, or process specifically set forth 
in the Request for Proposals document unless the conditions of paragraph 
(a) of this section are applicable.

[41 FR 36204, Aug. 27, 1976, as amended at 67 FR 75926, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.413  Guaranty and warranty clauses.

    The STD may include warranty provisions in National Highway System 
(NHS) construction contracts in accordance with the following:
    (a) Warranty provisions shall be for a specific construction product 
or feature. Items of maintenance not eligible for Federal participation 
shall not be covered.
    (b) All warranty requirements and subsequent revisions shall be 
submitted to the Division Administrator for advance approval.
    (c) No warranty requirement shall be approved which, in the judgment 
of the Division Administrator, may place an undue obligation on the 
contractor for items over which the contractor has no control.
    (d) A STD may follow its own procedures regarding the inclusion of 
warranty provisions in non-NHS Federal-aid contracts.
    (e) In the case of a design-build project, the following 
requirements will apply instead of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this 
section.
    (1) General project warranties may be used on NHS projects, 
provided:
    (i) The term of the warranty is short (generally one to two years);
    (ii) The warranty is not the sole means of acceptance;
    (iii) The warranty must not include items of routine maintenance 
which are not eligible for Federal participation; and,
    (iv) The warranty may include the quality of workmanship, materials 
and

[[Page 183]]

other specific tasks identified in the contract.
    (2) Performance warranties for specific products on NHS projects may 
be used at the STD's discretion. If performance warranties are used, 
detailed performance criteria must be provided in the Request for 
Proposal document.
    (3) The STD may follow its own procedures regarding the inclusion of 
warranty provisions on non-NHS Federal-aid design-build contracts.
    (4) For best value selections, the STD may allow proposers to submit 
alternate warranty proposals that improve upon the warranty terms in the 
RFP document. Such alternate warranty proposals must be in addition to 
the base proposal that responds to the RFP requirements.

[60 FR 44274, Aug. 25, 1995, as amended at 67 FR 75926, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 635.417  Convict produced materials.

    (a) Materials produced after July 1, 1991, by convict labor may only 
be incorporated in a Federal-aid highway construction project if such 
materials have been:
    (1) Produced by convicts who are on parole, supervised release, or 
probation from a prison or
    (2) Produced in a qualified prison facility and the cumulative 
annual production amount of such materials for use in Federal-aid 
highway construction does not exceed the amount of such materials 
produced in such facility for use in Federal-aid highway construction 
during the 12-month period ending July 1, 1987.
    (b) Qualified prison facility means any prison facility in which 
convicts, during the 12-month period ending July 1, 1987, produced 
materials for use in Federal-aid highway construction projects.

[53 FR 1923, Jan. 25, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 38975, July 21, 1993]

Appendix A to Subpart D of Part 635--Summary of Acceptable Criteria for 
                    Specifying Types of Culvert Pipes

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Alternatives required                 AASHTO designations
   Type of drainage installation   ----------------------------------------------------  to be included with       Application             Remarks
                                         Yes             No              Number             alternatives
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cross drains under high-type        .............  X............  ....................  ....................  Statewide...........  Any AASHTO-approved
 pavement.\1\                                                                                                                        material.\2\
Other cross-drain installations...  X............  .............  3 minimum...........  M-170 and M-190.....  ......do............   Do.\2\
Side-drain installations..........  X............  .............  ......do............  M-36................  ......do............   Do.\2\
Special installation conditions...  .............  X............  ....................  ....................  Individual            Specified to meet
                                                                                                               installation.         special condi-
                                                                                                                                     tions.
Special drainage systems (storm     .............  X............  ....................  ....................  ......do............  Specified to meet
 sewers, inverted siphons, etc.).                                                                                                    site require-ments.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ High-type pavement is generally described as FHWA construction type codes I, J, K, L, and plant mix and penetration macadam segments, respectively
  shown in the right-hand columns of type codes G and H having a combined thickness of surface and base of 7 in or more (or equivalent) or that are
  constructed on rigid bases.
\2\ Types not included in currently approved AASHTO specifications may be specified if recommended by the State with adequate justification and approved
  by FHWA.


<R03>
PART 636_DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACTING--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
636.101 What does this part do?
636.102 Does this part apply to me?
636.103 What are the definitions of terms used in this part?
636.104 Does this part apply to all Federal-aid design-build projects?
636.105 Is the FHWA requiring the use of design-build?
636.106 What type of projects may be used with design-build contracting?
636.107 Does the definition of a qualified project limit the use of 
          design-build contracting?
636.108 How does the definition of a qualified project apply to ITS 
          projects?

[[Page 184]]

636.109 How does the NEPA review process relate to the design-build 
          procurement process?
636.110 What procedures may be used for solicitations and receipt of 
          proposals?
636.111 Can oral presentations be used during the procurement process?
636.112 May stipends be used?
636.113 Is the stipend amount eligible for Federal participation?
636.114 What factors should be considered in risk allocation?
636.115 May I meet with industry to gather information concerning the 
          appropriate risk allocation strategies?
636.116 What organizational conflict of interest requirements apply to 
          design-build projects?
636.117 What conflict of interest standards apply to individuals who 
          serve as selection team members for the owner?
636.118 Is team switching allowed after contract award?
636.119 How does this part apply to a project developed under a public-
          private partnership?

             Subpart B_Selection Procedures, Award Criteria

636.201 What selection procedures and award criteria may be used?
636.202 When are two-phase design-build selection procedures 
          appropriate?
636.203 What are the elements of two-phase selection procedures for 
          competitive proposals?
636.204 What items may be included in a phase-one solicitation?
636.205 Can past performance be used as an evaluation criteria?
636.206 How do I evaluate offerors who do not have a record of relevant 
          past performance?
636.207 Is there a limit on short listed firms?
636.208 May I use my existing prequalification procedures with design-
          build contracts?
636.209 What items must be included in a phase-two solicitation?
636.210 What requirements apply to projects which use the modified 
          design-build procedure?
636.211 When and how should tradeoffs be used?
636.212 To what extent must tradeoff decisions be documented?

                  Subpart C_Proposal Evaluation Factors

636.301 How should proposal evaluation factors be selected?
636.302 Are there any limitations on the selection and use of proposal 
          evaluation factors?
636.303 May pre-qualification standards be used as proposal evaluation 
          criteria in the RFP?
636.304 What process may be used to rate and score proposals?
636.305 Can price information be provided to analysts who are reviewing 
          technical proposals?

                           Subpart D_Exchanges

636.401 What types of information exchange may take place prior to the 
          release of the RFP document?
636.402 What types of information exchange may take place after the 
          release of the RFP document?
636.403 What information may be exchanged with a clarification?
636.404 Can a competitive range be used to limit competition?
636.405 After developing a short list, can I still establish a 
          competitive range?
636.406 Are communications allowed prior to establishing the competitive 
          range?
636.407 Am I limited in holding communications with certain firms?
636.408 Can communications be used to cure proposal deficiencies?
636.409 Can offerors revise their proposals during communications?

     Subpart E_Discussions, Proposal Revisions and Source Selection

636.501 What issues may be addressed in discussions?
636.502 Why should I use discussions?
636.503 Must I notify offerors of my intent to use/not use discussions?
636.504 If the solicitation indicated my intent was to award contract 
          without discussions, but circumstances change, may I still 
          hold discussions?
636.505 Must a contracting agency establish a competitive range if it 
          intends to have discussions with offerors?
636.506 What issues must be covered in discussions?
636.507 What subjects are prohibited in discussions, communications and 
          clarifications with offerors?
636.508 Can price or cost be an issue in discussions?
636.509 Can offerors revise their proposals as a result of discussions?
636.510 Can the competitive range be further defined once discussions 
          have begun?
636.511 Can there be more than one round of discussions?
636.512 What is the basis for the source selection decision?
636.513 Are limited negotiations allowed prior to contract execution?
636.514 How may I provide notifications and debriefings?

[[Page 185]]


    Authority: Sec. 1307 of Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107; 23 U.S.C. 
101, 109, 112, 113, 114, 115, 119, 128, and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source:  67 FR 75926, Dec. 10, 2002, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 636.101  What does this part do?

    This part describes the FHWA's policies and procedures for approving 
design-build projects financed under title 23, United States Code 
(U.S.C.). This part satisfies the requirement of section 1307(c) of the 
Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21), enacted on June 
9, 1998. The contracting procedures of this part apply to all design-
build project funded under title 23, U.S.C.


<R05>
Sec. 636.102  Does this part apply to me?

    (a) This part uses a plain language format to make the rule easier 
for the general public and business community to use. The section 
headings and text, often in the form of questions and answers, must be 
read together.
    (b) Unless otherwise noted, the pronoun ``you'' means the primary 
recipient of Federal-aid highway funds, the State Transportation 
Department (STD). Where the STD has an agreement with a local public 
agency (or other governmental agency) to administer a Federal-aid 
design-build project, the term ``you'' will also apply to that 
contracting agency.


<R05>
Sec. 636.103  What are the definitions of terms used in this part?

    Unless otherwise specified in this part, the definitions in 23 
U.S.C. 101(a) are applicable to this part. Also, the following 
definitions are used:
    Adjusted low bid means a form of best value selection in which 
qualitative aspects are scored on a 0 to 100 scale expressed as a 
decimal; price is then divided by qualitative score to yield an 
``adjusted bid'' or ``price per quality point.'' Award is made to 
offeror with the lowest adjusted bid.
    Best value selection means any selection process in which proposals 
contain both price and qualitative components and award is based upon a 
combination of price and qualitative considerations.
    Clarifications means a written or oral exchange of information which 
takes place after the receipt of proposals when award without 
discussions is contemplated. The purpose of clarifications is to address 
minor or clerical revisions in a proposal.
    Communications are exchanges, between the contracting agency and 
offerors, after receipt of proposals, which lead to the establishment of 
the competitive range.
    Competitive acquisition means an acquisition process which is 
designed to foster an impartial and comprehensive evaluation of 
offerors' proposals, leading to the selection of the proposal 
representing the best value to the contracting agency.
    Competitive range means a list of the most highly rated proposals 
based on the initial proposal rankings. It is based on the rating of 
each proposal against all evaluation criteria.
    Contracting agency means the public agency awarding and 
administering a design-build contract. The contracting agency may be the 
STD or another State or local public agency.
    Deficiency means a material failure of a proposal to meet a 
contracting agency requirement or a combination of significant 
weaknesses in a proposal that increases the risk of unsuccessful 
contract performance to an unacceptable level.
    Design-bid-build means the traditional project delivery method where 
design and construction are sequential steps in the project development 
process.
    Design-build contract means an agreement that provides for design 
and construction of improvements by a contractor or private developer. 
The term encompasses design-build-maintain, design-build-operate, 
design-build-finance and other contracts that include services in 
addition to design and construction. Franchise and concession agreements 
are included in the term if they provide for the franchisee or 
concessionaire to develop the project which is the subject of the 
agreement.
    Design-builder means the entity contractually responsible for 
delivering the project design and construction.

[[Page 186]]

    Discussions mean written or oral exchanges that take place after the 
establishment of the competitive range with the intent of allowing the 
offerors to revise their proposals.
    Fixed price/best design means a form of best value selection in 
which contract price is established by the owner and stated in the 
Request for Proposals document. Design solutions and other qualitative 
factors are evaluated and rated, with award going to the firm offering 
the best qualitative proposal for the established price.
    Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) services means services 
which provide for the acquisition of technologies or systems of 
technologies (e.g., computer hardware or software, traffic control 
devices, communications link, fare payment system, automatic vehicle 
location system, etc.) that provide or contribute to the provision of 
one or more ITS user services as defined in the National ITS 
Architecture.
    Modified design-build means a variation of design-build in which the 
contracting agency furnishes offerors with partially complete plans. The 
design-builders role is generally limited to the completion of the 
design and construction of the project.
    Organizational conflict of interest means that because of other 
activities or relationships with other persons, a person is unable or 
potentially unable to render impartial assistance or advice to the 
owner, or the person's objectivity in performing the contract work is or 
might be otherwise impaired, or a person has an unfair competitive 
advantage.
    Prequalification means the contracting agency's process for 
determining whether a firm is fundamentally qualified to compete for a 
certain project or class of projects. The prequalification process may 
be based on financial, management and other types of qualitative data. 
Prequalification should be distinguished from short listing.
    Price proposal means the price submitted by the offeror to provide 
the required design and construction services.
    Proposal modification means a change made to a proposal before the 
solicitation closing date and time, or made in response to an amendment, 
or made to correct a mistake at any time before award.
    Proposal revision means a change to a proposal made after the 
solicitation closing date, at the request of or as allowed by a 
contracting officer, as the result of negotiations.
    Qualified project means any design-build project with a total 
estimated cost greater than $50 million or an intelligent transportation 
system project greater than $5 million (23 U.S.C. 112 (b)(3)(C)).
    Request for Proposals (RFP) means the document that describes the 
procurement process, forms the basis for the final proposals and may 
potentially become an element in the contract.
    Request for Qualification (RFQ) means the document issued by the 
owner in Phase I of the two-phased selection process. It typically 
describes the project in enough detail to let potential offerors 
determine if they wish to compete and forms the basis for requesting 
qualifications submissions from which the most highly qualified offerors 
can be identified.
    Short listing means the narrowing of the field of offerors through 
the selection of the most qualified offerors who have responded to an 
RFQ.
    Single-phase selection process means a procurement process where 
price and/or technical proposals are submitted in response to an RFP. 
Short listing is not used.
    Solicitation means a public notification of an owner's need for 
information, qualifications, or proposals related to identified 
services.
    Stipend means a monetary amount sometimes paid to unsuccessful 
offerors.
    Technical proposal means that portion of a design-build proposal 
which contains design solutions and other qualitative factors that are 
provided in response to the RFP document.
    Tradeoff means an analysis technique involving a comparison of price 
and non-price factors to determine the best value when considering the 
selection of other than the lowest priced proposal.
    Two-phase selection process means a procurement process in which the 
first phase consists of short listing (based on qualifications submitted 
in response

[[Page 187]]

to an RFQ) and the second phase consists of the submission of price and 
technical proposals in response to an RFP.
    Weakness means a flaw in the proposal that increases the risk of 
unsuccessful contract performance. A significant weakness in the 
proposal is a flaw that appreciably increases the risk of unsuccessful 
contract performance.
    Weighted criteria process means a form of best value selection in 
which maximum point values are pre-established for qualitative and price 
components, and award is based upon high total points earned by the 
offerors.


<R05>
Sec. 636.104  Does this part apply to all Federal-aid design-build 
projects?

    The provisions of this part apply to all Federal-aid design-build 
projects within the highway right-of-way or linked to a Federal-aid 
highway project (i.e., the project would not exist without another 
Federal-aid highway project). Projects that are not located within the 
highway right-of-way, and not linked to a Federal-aid highway project 
may utilize State-approved procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 636.105  Is the FHWA requiring the use of design-build?

    No, the FHWA is neither requiring nor promoting the use of the 
design-build contracting method. The design-build contracting technique 
is optional.


<R05>
Sec. 636.106  What type of projects may be used with design-build 
contracting?

    You may use the design-build contracting technique for any qualified 
or non-qualified project which you deem to be appropriate on the basis 
of project delivery time, cost, construction schedule and/or quality.


<R05>
Sec. 636.107  Does the definition of a qualified project limit the use 
of design-build contracting?

    (a) No, the use of the term ``qualified project'' does not limit the 
use of design-build contracting. It merely determines the FHWA's 
procedures for approval. The FHWA Division Administrator may approve the 
design-build method for ``qualified projects'' which meet the 
requirements of this part.
    (b) The FHWA Division Administrator may also approve other design-
build projects (which do not meet the ``qualified projects'' definition) 
by using Special Experimental Projects No. 14 (SEP-14), ``Innovative 
Contracting Practices,'' \1\ provided the project meets the requirements 
of this part. Projects which do not meet the requirements of this part 
(either ``qualified or non-qualified'' projects) must be submitted to 
the FHWA Headquarters for concept approval.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Information concerning Special Experimental Project No. 14 (SEP-
14), ``Innovative Contracting Practices,'' is available on FHWA's home 
page: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov. Additional information may be obtained 
from the FHWA Division Administrator in each State.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 636.108  How does the definition of a qualified project apply to 
ITS projects?

    For the purpose of this part, a Federal-aid ITS design-build project 
meets the criteria of a ``qualified project'' if:
    (a) A majority of the scope of services provides ITS services (at 
least 50 percent of the scope of work is related to ITS services); and
    (b) The estimated contract value exceeds $5 million.


<R05>
Sec. 636.109  How does the NEPA review process relate to the design-build 
procurement process?

    In terms of the design-build procurement process:
    (a) The RFQ solicitation may be released prior to the conclusion of 
the NEPA review process as long as the RFQ solicitation informs 
proposers of the general status of the NEPA process.
    (b) The RFP must not be released prior to the conclusion of the NEPA 
process. The NEPA review process is concluded with either a Categorical 
Exclusion classification, an approved Finding of No Significant Impact, 
or an approved Record of Decision as defined in 23 CFR 771.113(a).
    (c) The RFP must address how environmental commitments and 
mitigation measures identified during the NEPA process will be 
implemented.

[[Page 188]]


<R05>
Sec. 636.110  What procedures may be used for solicitations and receipt 
of proposals?

    You may use your own procedures for the solicitation and receipt of 
proposals and information including the following:
    (a) Exchanges with industry before receipt of proposals;
    (b) RFQ, RFP and contract format;
    (c) Solicitation schedules;
    (d) Lists of forms, documents, exhibits, and other attachments;
    (e) Representations and instructions;
    (f) Advertisement and amendments;
    (g) Handling proposals and information; and
    (h) Submission, modification, revisions and withdrawal of proposals.


<R05>
Sec. 636.111  Can oral presentations be used during the procurement process?

    (a) Yes, the use of oral presentations as a substitute for portions 
of a written proposal can be effective in streamlining the source 
selection process. Oral presentations may occur at any time in the 
acquisition process, however, you must comply with the appropriate State 
procurement integrity standards.
    (b) Oral presentations may substitute for, or augment, written 
information. You must maintain a record of oral presentations to 
document what information you relied upon in making the source selection 
decision. You may decide the appropriate method and level of detail for 
the record (e.g., videotaping, audio tape recording, written record, 
contracting agency notes, copies of offeror briefing slides or 
presentation notes). A copy of the record should be placed in the 
contract file and may be provided to offerors upon request.


<R05>
Sec. 636.112  May stipends be used?

    At your discretion, you may elect to pay a stipend to unsuccessful 
offerors who have submitted responsive proposals. The decision to do so 
should be based on your analysis of the estimated proposal development 
costs and the anticipated degree of competition during the procurement 
process.


<R05>
Sec. 636.113  Is the stipend amount eligible for Federal participation?

    (a) Yes, stipends are eligible for Federal-aid participation. 
Stipends are recommended on large projects where there is substantial 
opportunity for innovation and the cost of submitting a proposal is 
significant. On such projects, stipends are used to:
    (1) Encourage competition;
    (2) Compensate unsuccessful offerors for a portion of their costs 
(usually one-third to one-half of the estimated proposal development 
cost); and
    (3) Ensure that smaller companies are not put at a competitive 
disadvantage.
    (b) Unless prohibited by State law, you may retain the right to use 
ideas from unsuccessful offerors if they accept stipends. If stipends 
are used, the RFP should describe the process for distributing the 
stipend to qualifying offerors.


<R05>
Sec. 636.114  What factors should be considered in risk allocation?

    (a) You may consider, identify, and allocate the risks in the RFP 
document and define these risks in the contract. Risk should be 
allocated with consideration given to the party who is in the best 
position to manage and control a given risk or the impact of a given 
risk.
    (b) Risk allocation will vary according to the type of project and 
location, however, the following factors should be considered:
    (1) Governmental risks, including the potential for delays, 
modifications, withdrawal, scope changes, or additions that result from 
multi-level Federal, State, and local participation and sponsorship;
    (2) Regulatory compliance risks, including environmental and third-
party issues, such as permitting, railroad, and utility company risks;
    (3) Construction phase risks, including differing site conditions, 
traffic control, interim drainage, public access, weather issues, and 
schedule;
    (4) Post-construction risks, including public liability and meeting 
stipulated performance standards; and
    (5) Right-of-way risks including acquisition costs, appraisals, 
relocation

[[Page 189]]

delays, condemnation proceedings, including court costs and others.


<R05>
Sec. 636.115  May I meet with industry to gather information concerning 
the appropriate risk allocation strategies?

    (a) Yes, information exchange at an early project stage is 
encouraged if it facilitates your understanding of the capabilities of 
potential offerors. However, any exchange of information must be 
consistent with State procurement integrity requirements. Interested 
parties include potential offerors, end users, acquisition and 
supporting personnel, and others involved in the conduct or outcome of 
the acquisition.
    (b) The purpose of exchanging information is to improve the 
understanding of your requirements and industry capabilities, thereby 
allowing potential offerors to judge whether or how they can satisfy 
your requirements, and enhancing your ability to obtain quality supplies 
and services, including construction, at reasonable prices, and increase 
efficiency in proposal preparation, proposal evaluation, negotiation, 
and contract award.
    (c) An early exchange of information can identify and resolve 
concerns regarding the acquisition strategy, including proposed contract 
type, terms and conditions, and acquisition planning schedules. This 
also includes the feasibility of the requirement, including performance 
requirements, statements of work, and data requirements; the suitability 
of the proposal instructions and evaluation criteria, including the 
approach for assessing past performance information; the availability of 
reference documents; and any other industry concerns or questions. Some 
techniques to promote early exchanges of information are as follows:
    (1) Industry or small business conferences;
    (2) Public hearings;
    (3) Market research;
    (4) One-on-one meetings with potential offerors (any meetings that 
are substantially involved with potential contract terms and conditions 
should include the contracting officer; also see paragraph (e) of this 
section regarding restrictions on disclosure of information);
    (5) Presolicitation notices;
    (6) Draft RFPs;
    (7) Request for Information (RFI) ;
    (8) Presolicitation or preproposal conferences; and
    (9) Site visits.
    (d) RFIs may be used when you do not intend to award a contract, but 
want to obtain price, delivery, other market information, or 
capabilities for planning purposes. Responses to these notices are not 
offers and cannot be accepted to form a binding contract. There is no 
required format for an RFI.
    (e) When specific information about a proposed acquisition that 
would be necessary for the preparation of proposals is disclosed to one 
or more potential offerors, that information shall be made available to 
all potential offerors as soon as practicable, but no later than the 
next general release of information, in order to avoid creating an 
unfair competitive advantage. Information provided to a particular 
offeror in response to that offeror's request must not be disclosed if 
doing so would reveal the potential offeror's confidential business 
strategy. When a presolicitation or preproposal conference is conducted, 
materials distributed at the conference should be made available to all 
potential offerors, upon request.


<R05>
Sec. 636.116  What organizational conflict of interest requirements 
apply to design-build projects?

    (a) State statutes or policies concerning organizational conflict of 
interest should be specified or referenced in the design-build RFQ or 
RFP document as well as any contract for engineering services, 
inspection or technical support in the administration of the design-
build contract. All design-build solicitations should address the 
following situations as appropriate:
    (1) Consultants and/or sub-consultants who assist the owner in the 
preparation of a RFP document will not be allowed to participate as an 
offeror or join a team submitting a proposal in response to the RFP. 
However, a contracting agency may determine there is not an 
organizational conflict of interest for a consultant or sub-consultant 
where:

[[Page 190]]

    (i) The role of the consultant or sub-consultant was limited to 
provision of preliminary design, reports, or similar ``low-level'' 
documents that will be incorporated into the RFP, and did not include 
assistance in development of instructions to offerors or evaluation 
criteria, or
    (ii) Where all documents and reports delivered to the agency by the 
consultant or sub-consultant are made available to all offerors.
    (2) All solicitations for design-build contracts, including related 
contracts for inspection, administration or auditing services, must 
include a provision which:
    (i) Directs offerors attention to this subpart;
    (ii) States the nature of the potential conflict as seen by the 
owner;
    (iii) States the nature of the proposed restraint or restrictions 
(and duration) upon future contracting activities, if appropriate;
    (iv) Depending on the nature of the acquisition, states whether or 
not the terms of any proposed clause and the application of this subpart 
to the contract are subject to negotiation; and
    (v) Requires offerors to provide information concerning potential 
organizational conflicts of interest in their proposals. The apparent 
successful offerors must disclose all relevant facts concerning any 
past, present or currently planned interests which may present an 
organizational conflict of interest. Such firms must state how their 
interests, or those of their chief executives, directors, key project 
personnel, or any proposed consultant, contractor or subcontractor may 
result, or could be viewed as, an organizational conflict of interest. 
The information may be in the form of a disclosure statement or a 
certification.
    (3) Based upon a review of the information submitted, the owner 
should make a written determination of whether the offeror's interests 
create an actual or potential organizational conflict of interest and 
identify any actions that must be taken to avoid, neutralize, or 
mitigate such conflict. The owner should award the contract to the 
apparent successful offeror unless an organizational conflict of 
interest is determined to exist that cannot be avoided, neutralized, or 
mitigated.
    (b) The organizational conflict of interest provisions in this 
subpart provide minimum standards for STDs to identify, mitigate or 
eliminate apparent or actual organizational conflicts of interest. To 
the extent that State-developed organizational conflict of interest 
standards are more stringent than that contained in this subpart, the 
State standards prevail.


<R05>
Sec. 636.117  What conflict of interest standards apply to individuals 
who serve as selection team members for the owner?

    State laws and procedures governing improper business practices and 
personal conflicts of interest will apply to the owner's selection team 
members. In the absence of such State provisions, the requirements of 48 
CFR Part 3, Improper Business Practices and Personal Conflicts of 
Interest, will apply to selection team members.


<R05>
Sec. 636.118  Is team switching allowed after contract award?

    Where the offeror's qualifications are a major factor in the 
selection of the successful design-builder, team member switching 
(adding or switching team members) is discouraged after contract award. 
However, the owner may use its discretion in reviewing team changes or 
team enhancement requests on a case-by-case basis. Specific project 
rules related to changes in team members or changes in personnel within 
teams should be explicitly stated by the STD in all project 
solicitations.


<R05>
Sec. 636.119  How does this part apply to a project developed under a 
public-private partnership?

    (a) In order for a project being developed under a public-private 
agreement to be eligible for Federal-aid funding (including traditional 
Federal-aid funds, direct loans, loan guarantees, lines of credit, or 
some other form of credit assistance), the contracting agency must have 
awarded the contract to the public-private entity through a competitive 
process that complies with applicable State and local laws.

[[Page 191]]

    (b) If a contracting agency wishes to utilize traditional Federal-
aid funds in a project under a public-private agreement, the 
applicability of Federal-aid procurement procedures will depend on the 
nature of the public-private agreement.
    (1) If the public-private agreement establishes price and an 
assignment of risk, then all subsequent contracts executed by the 
developer are considered to be subcontracts and are not subject to 
Federal-aid procurement requirements.
    (2) If the public-private agreement does not establish price and an 
assignment of risk, the developer is considered to be an agent of the 
owner, and the developer must follow the appropriate Federal-aid 
procurement requirements (23 CFR part 172 for engineering service 
contracts, 23 CFR part 635 for construction contracts and the 
requirements of this part for design-build contracts) for all prime 
contracts (not subcontracts).
    (c) The STD must ensure such public-private projects comply with all 
non-procurement requirements of 23 U. S. Code, regardless of the form of 
the FHWA funding (traditional Federal-aid funding or credit assistance). 
This includes compliance with all FHWA policies such as environmental 
and right-of-way requirements and compliance with such construction 
contracting requirements as Buy America, Davis-Bacon minimum wage rate 
requirements, for federally funded construction or design-build 
contracts under the public-private agreement.


<R04>
             Subpart B_Selection Procedures, Award Criteria


<R05>
Sec. 636.201  What selection procedures and award criteria may be used?

    You should consider using two-phase selection procedures for all 
design-build projects. However, if you do not believe two-phase 
selection procedures are appropriate for your project (based on the 
criteria in Sec. 636.202), you may use a single phase selection 
procedure or the modified-design-build contracting method. The following 
procedures are available:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Criteria for using
       Selection procedure            a selection       Award criteria
                                       procedure            options
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) Two-Phase Selection           Sec.  636.202....  Lowest price,
 Procedures (RFQ followed by                           Adjusted low-bid
 RFP).                                                 (price per
                                                       quality point),
                                                       meets criteria/
                                                       low bid, weighted
                                                       criteria process,
                                                       fixed price/best
                                                       design, best
                                                       value.
(b) Single Phase (RFP)..........  Project not         All of the award
                                   meeting the         criteria in item
                                   criteria in Sec.   (a) of this
                                    636.202.           table.
(c) Modified Design-Build (may    Any project.......  Lowest price
 be one or two phases).                                technically
                                                       acceptable.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 636.202  When are two-phase design-build selection procedures 
appropriate?

    You may consider the following criteria in deciding whether two-
phase selection procedures are appropriate. A negative response may 
indicate that two-phase selection procedures are not appropriate.
    (a) Are three or more offers anticipated?
    (b) Will offerors be expected to perform substantial design work 
before developing price proposals?
    (c) Will offerors incur a substantial expense in preparing 
proposals?
    (d) Have you identified and analyzed other contributing factors, 
including:
    (1) The extent to which you have defined the project requirements?
    (2) The time constraints for delivery of the project?
    (3) The capability and experience of potential contractors?
    (4) Your capability to manage the two-phase selection process?
    (5) Other criteria that you may consider appropriate?


<R05>
Sec. 636.203  What are the elements of two-phase selection procedures for 
competitive proposals?

    The first phase consists of short listing based on a RFQ. The second 
phase consists of the receipt and evaluation of price and technical 
proposals in response to a RFP.

[[Page 192]]


<R05>
Sec. 636.204  What items may be included in a phase-one solicitation?

    You may consider including the following items in any phase-one 
solicitation:
    (a) The scope of work;
    (b) The phase-one evaluation factors and their relative weights, 
including:
    (1) Technical approach (but not detailed design or technical 
information);
    (2) Technical qualifications, such as--
    (i) Specialized experience and technical competence;
    (ii) Capability to perform (including key personnel); and
    (iii) Past performance of the members of the offeror's team 
(including the architect-engineer and construction members);
    (3) Other appropriate factors (excluding cost or price related 
factors, which are not permitted in phase-one);
    (c) Phase-two evaluation factors; and
    (d) A statement of the maximum number of offerors that will be short 
listed to submit phase-two proposals.


<R05>
Sec. 636.205  Can past performance be used as an evaluation criteria?

    (a) Yes, past performance information is one indicator of an 
offeror's ability to perform the contract successfully. Past performance 
information may be used as an evaluation criteria in either phase-one or 
phase-two solicitations. If you elect to use past performance criteria, 
the currency and relevance of the information, source of the 
information, context of the data, and general trends in contractor's 
performance may be considered.
    (b) Describe your approach for evaluating past performance in the 
solicitation, including your policy for evaluating offerors with no 
relevant performance history. You should provide offerors an opportunity 
to identify past or current contracts (including Federal, State, and 
local government and private) for efforts similar to the current 
solicitation.
    (c) If you elect to request past performance information, the 
solicitation should also authorize offerors to provide information on 
problems encountered on the identified contracts and the offeror's 
corrective actions. You may consider this information, as well as 
information obtained from any other sources, when evaluating the 
offeror's past performance. You may use your discretion in determining 
the relevance of similar past performance information.
    (d) The evaluation should take into account past performance 
information regarding predecessor companies, key personnel who have 
relevant experience, or subcontractors that will perform major or 
critical aspects of the requirement when such information is relevant to 
the current acquisition.


<R05>
Sec. 636.206  How do I evaluate offerors who do not have a record of 
relevant past performance?

    In the case of an offeror without a record of relevant past 
performance or for whom information on past performance is not 
available, the offeror may not be evaluated favorably or unfavorably on 
past performance.


<R05>
Sec. 636.207  Is there a limit on short listed firms?

    Normally, three to five firms are short listed, however, the maximum 
number specified shall not exceed five unless you determine, for that 
particular solicitation, that a number greater than five is in your 
interest and is consistent with the purposes and objectives of two-phase 
design-build contracting.


<R05>
Sec. 636.208  May I use my existing prequalification procedures with 
design-build contracts?

    Yes, you may use your existing prequalification procedures for 
either construction or engineering design firms as a supplement to the 
procedures in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 636.209  What items must be included in a phase-two solicitation?

    (a) You must include the requirements for technical proposals and 
price proposals in the phase-two solicitation. All factors and 
significant subfactors that will affect contract award and their 
relative importance must be stated clearly in the solicitation. Use your 
own procedures for the solicitation as long as it complies the 
requirements of this part.
    (b) At your discretion, you may allow proposers to submit alternate 
technical

[[Page 193]]

concepts in their proposals as long as these alternate concepts do not 
conflict with criteria agreed upon in the environmental decision making 
process. Alternate technical concept proposals may supplement, but not 
substitute for base proposals that respond to the RFP requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 636.210  What requirements apply to projects which use the 
modified design-build procedure?

    (a) Modified design-build selection procedures (lowest price 
technically acceptable source selection process) may be used for any 
project.
    (b) The solicitation must clearly state the following:
    (1) The identification of evaluation factors and significant 
subfactors that establish the requirements of acceptability.
    (2) That award will be made on the basis of the lowest evaluated 
price of proposals meeting or exceeding the acceptability standards for 
non-cost factors.
    (c) The contracting agency may forgo a short listing process and 
advertise for the receipt of proposals from all responsible offerors. 
The contract is then awarded to the lowest responsive bidder.
    (d) Tradeoffs are not permitted, however, you may incorporate cost-
plus-time bidding procedures (A+B bidding), lane rental, or other cost-
based provisions in such contracts.
    (e) Proposals are evaluated for acceptability but not ranked using 
the non-cost/price factors.
    (f) Exchanges may occur (see subpart D of this part).


<R05>
Sec. 636.211  When and how should tradeoffs be used?

    (a) At your discretion, you may consider the tradeoff technique when 
it is desirable to award to other than the lowest priced offeror or 
other than the highest technically rated offeror.
    (b) If you use a tradeoff technique, the following apply:
    (1) All evaluation factors and significant subfactors that will 
affect contract award and their relative importance must be clearly 
stated in the solicitation; and
    (2) The solicitation must also state, at a minimum, whether all 
evaluation factors other than cost or price, when combined, are--
    (i) Significantly more important than cost or price; or
    (ii) Approximately equal to cost or price; or
    (iii) Significantly less important than cost or price.

[67 FR 75926, Dec. 10, 2002; 68 FR 7922, Feb. 19, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 636.212  To what extent must tradeoff decisions be documented?

    When tradeoffs are performed, the source selection records must 
include the following:
    (a) An assessment of each offeror's ability to accomplish the 
technical requirements; and
    (b) A summary, matrix, or quantitative ranking, along with 
appropriate supporting narrative, of each technical proposal using the 
evaluation factors.


<R04>
                  Subpart C_Proposal Evaluation Factors


<R05>
Sec. 636.301  How should proposal evaluation factors be selected?

    (a) The proposal evaluation factors and significant subfactors 
should be tailored to the acquisition.
    (b) Evaluation factors and significant subfactors should:
    (1) Represent the key areas of importance and emphasis to be 
considered in the source selection decision; and
    (2) Support meaningful comparison and discrimination between and 
among competing proposals.


<R05>
Sec. 636.302  Are there any limitations on the selection and use of 
proposal evaluation factors?

    (a) The selection of the evaluation factors, significant subfactors 
and their relative importance are within your broad discretion subject 
to the following requirements:
    (1) You must evaluate price in every source selection where 
construction is a significant component of the scope of work.

[[Page 194]]

    (2) You must evaluate the quality of the product or service through 
consideration of one or more non-price evaluation factors. These factors 
may include (but are not limited to) such criteria as:
    (i) Compliance with solicitation requirements;
    (ii) Completion schedule (contractual incentives and disincentives 
for early completion may be used where appropriate); or
    (iii) Technical solutions.
    (3) At your discretion, you may evaluate past performance, technical 
experience and management experience (subject to Sec. 636.303(b)).
    (b) All factors and significant subfactors that will affect contract 
award and their relative importance must be stated clearly in the 
solicitation.


<R05>
Sec. 636.303  May pre-qualification standards be used as proposal 
evaluation criteria in the RFP?

    (a) If you use a prequalification procedure or a two-phase selection 
procedure to develop a short list of qualified offerors, then pre-
qualification criteria should not be included as proposal evaluation 
criteria.
    (b) The proposal evaluation criteria should be limited to the 
quality, quantity, value and timeliness of the product or service being 
proposed. However, there may be circumstances where it is appropriate to 
include prequalification standards as proposal evaluation criteria. Such 
instances include situations where:
    (1) The scope of work involves very specialized technical expertise 
or specialized financial qualifications; or
    (2) Where prequalification procedures or two-phase selection 
procedures are not used (short listing is not performed).


<R05>
Sec. 636.304  What process may be used to rate and score proposals?

    (a) Proposal evaluation is an assessment of the offeror's proposal 
and ability to perform the prospective contract successfully. You must 
evaluate proposals solely on the factors and subfactors specified in the 
solicitation.
    (b) You may conduct evaluations using any rating method or 
combination of methods including color or adjectival ratings, numerical 
weights, and ordinal rankings. The relative strengths, deficiencies, 
significant weaknesses, and risks supporting proposal evaluation must be 
documented in the contract file.


<R05>
Sec. 636.305  Can price information be provided to analysts who are 
reviewing technical proposals?

    Normally, technical and price proposals are reviewed independently 
by separate evaluation teams. However, there may be occasions where the 
same experts needed to review the technical proposals are also needed in 
the review of the price proposals. This may occur where a limited amount 
of technical expertise is available to review proposals. Price 
information may be provided to such technical experts in accordance with 
your procedures.


<R04>
                           Subpart D_Exchanges


<R05>
Sec. 636.401  What types of information exchange may take place prior 
to the release of the RFP document?

    Verbal or written information exchanges (such as in the first-phase 
of a two-phase selection procedure) must be consistent with State and/or 
local procurement integrity requirements. See Sec. 636.115(a) for 
additional details.


<R05>
Sec. 636.402  What types of information exchange may take place after 
the release of the RFP document?

    Certain types of information exchange may be desirable at different 
points after the release of the RFP document. The following table 
summarizes the types of communications that will be discussed in this 
subpart. These communication methods are optional.

[[Page 195]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Type of information exchange                When                   Purpose              Parties involved
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) Clarifications...................  After receipt of         Used when award without  Any offeror whose
                                        proposals.               discussions is           proposal is not clear
                                                                 contemplated. Used to    to the contracting
                                                                 clarify certain          agency.
                                                                 aspects of a proposal
                                                                 (resolve minor errors,
                                                                 clerical errors,
                                                                 obtain additional past
                                                                 performance
                                                                 information, etc.).
(b) Communications...................  After receipt of         Used to address issues   Only those offerors
                                        proposals, prior to      which might prevent a    whose exclusion from,
                                        the establishment of     proposal from being      or inclusion in, the
                                        the competitive range.   placed in the            competitive range is
                                                                 competitive range.       uncertain. All
                                                                                          offerors whose past
                                                                                          performance
                                                                                          information is the
                                                                                          determining factor
                                                                                          preventing them from
                                                                                          being placed in the
                                                                                          competitive range.
(c) Discussions (see Subpart E of      After receipt of         Enhance contracting      Must be held with all
 this part).                            proposals and after      agency understanding     offerors in the
                                        the determination of     of proposals and         competitive range.
                                        the competitive range.   offerors understanding
                                                                 of scope of work.
                                                                 Facilitate the
                                                                 evaluation process.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 636.403  What information may be exchanged with a clarification?

    (a) You may wish to clarify any aspect of proposals which would 
enhance your understanding of an offeror's proposal. This includes such 
information as an offeror's past performance or information regarding 
adverse past performance to which the offeror has not previously had an 
opportunity to respond. Clarification exchanges are discretionary. They 
do not have to be held with any specific number of offerors and do not 
have to address specific issues.
    (b) You may wish to clarify and revise the RFP document through an 
addenda process in response to questions from potential offerors.


<R05>
Sec. 636.404  Can a competitive range be used to limit competition?

    If the solicitation notifies offerors that the competitive range can 
be limited for purposes of efficiency, you may limit the number of 
proposals to the greatest number that will permit an efficient 
competition. However, you must provide written notice to any offeror 
whose proposal is no longer considered to be included in the competitive 
range. Offerors excluded or otherwise eliminated from the competitive 
range may request a debriefing. Debriefings may be conducted in 
accordance with your procedures as long as you comply with Sec. 
636.514.


<R05>
Sec. 636.405  After developing a short list, can I still establish a 
competitive range?

    Yes, if you have developed a short list of firms, you may still 
establish a competitive range. The short list is based on qualifications 
criteria. The competitive range is based on the rating of technical and 
price proposals.


<R05>
Sec. 636.406  Are communications allowed prior to establishing the 
competitive range?

    Yes, prior to establishing the competitive range, you may conduct 
communications to:
    (a) Enhance your understanding of proposals;
    (b) Allow reasonable interpretation of the proposal; or
    (c) Facilitate your evaluation process.


<R05>
Sec. 636.407  Am I limited in holding communications with certain 
firms?

    Yes, if you establish a competitive range, you must do the 
following:
    (a) Hold communications with offerors whose past performance 
information is the determining factor preventing them from being placed 
within the competitive range;
    (b) Address adverse past performance information to which an offeror 
has not had a prior opportunity to respond; and
    (c) Hold communications only with those offerors whose exclusion 
from, or

[[Page 196]]

inclusion in, the competitive range is uncertain.


<R05>
Sec. 636.408  Can communications be used to cure proposal deficiencies?

    (a) No, communications must not be used to:
    (1) Cure proposal deficiencies or material omissions;
    (2) Materially alter the technical or cost elements of the proposal; 
and/or
    (3) Otherwise revise the proposal.
    (b) Communications may be considered in rating proposals for the 
purpose of establishing the competitive range.


<R05>
Sec. 636.409  Can offerors revise their proposals during communications?

    (a) No, communications shall not provide an opportunity for an 
offeror to revise its proposal, but may address the following:
    (1) Ambiguities in the proposal or other concerns (e.g., perceived 
deficiencies, weaknesses, errors, omissions, or mistakes); and
    (2) Information relating to relevant past performance.
    (b) Communications must address adverse past performance information 
to which the offeror has not previously had an opportunity to comment.


<R04>
     Subpart E_Discussions, Proposal Revisions and Source Selection


<R05>
Sec. 636.501  What issues may be addressed in discussions?

    In a competitive acquisition, discussions may include bargaining. 
The term bargaining may include: persuasion, alteration of assumptions 
and positions, give-and-take, and may apply to price, schedule, 
technical requirements, type of contract, or other terms of a proposed 
contract.


<R05>
Sec. 636.502  Why should I use discussions?

    You should use discussions to maximize your ability to obtain the 
best value, based on the requirements and the evaluation factors set 
forth in the solicitation.


<R05>
Sec. 636.503  Must I notify offerors of my intent to use/not use 
discussions?

    Yes, in competitive acquisitions, the solicitation must notify 
offerors of your intent. You should either:
    (a) Notify offerors that discussions may or may not be held 
depending on the quality of the proposals received (except 
clarifications may be used as described in Sec. 636.401). Therefore, 
the offeror's initial proposal should contain the offeror's best terms 
from a cost or price and technical standpoint; or
    (b) Notify offerors of your intent to establish a competitive range 
and hold discussions.


<R05>
Sec. 636.504  If the solicitation indicated my intent was to award 

contract without discussions, but circumstances change, may I still 
hold discussions?

    Yes, you may still elect to hold discussions when circumstances 
dictate, as long as the rationale for doing so is documented in the 
contract file. Such circumstances might include situations where all 
proposals received have deficiencies, when fair and reasonable prices 
are not offered, or when the cost or price offered is not affordable.


<R05>
Sec. 636.505  Must a contracting agency establish a competitive 
range if it intends to have discussions with offerors?

    Yes, if discussions are held, they must be conducted with all 
offerors in the competitive range. If you wish to hold discussions and 
do not formally establish a competitive range, then you must hold 
discussions with all responsive offerors.


<R05>
Sec. 636.506  What issues must be covered in discussions?

    (a) Discussions should be tailored to each offeror's proposal. 
Discussions must cover significant weaknesses, deficiencies, and other 
aspects of a proposal (such as cost or price, technical approach, past 
performance, and terms and conditions) that could be altered or 
explained to enhance materially the proposal's potential for award. You 
may use your judgment in setting limits for the scope and extent of 
discussions.

[[Page 197]]

    (b) In situations where the solicitation stated that evaluation 
credit would be given for technical solutions exceeding any mandatory 
minimums, you may hold discussions regarding increased performance 
beyond any mandatory minimums, and you may suggest to offerors that have 
exceeded any mandatory minimums (in ways that are not integral to the 
design), that their proposals would be more competitive if the excesses 
were removed and the offered price decreased.


<R05>
Sec. 636.507  What subjects are prohibited in discussions, communications 
and clarifications with offerors?

    You may not engage in conduct that:
    (a) Favors one offeror over another;
    (b) Reveals an offeror's technical solution, including unique 
technology, innovative and unique uses of commercial items, or any 
information that would compromise an offeror's intellectual property to 
another offeror;
    (c) Reveals an offerors price without that offeror's permission;
    (d) Reveals the names of individuals providing reference information 
about an offeror's past performance; or
    (e) Knowingly furnish source selection information which could be in 
violation of State procurement integrity standards.


<R05>
Sec. 636.508  Can price or cost be an issue in discussions?

    You may inform an offeror that its price is considered to be too 
high, or too low, and reveal the results of the analysis supporting that 
conclusion. At your discretion, you may indicate to all offerors your 
estimated cost for the project.


<R05>
Sec. 636.509  Can offerors revise their proposals as a result of 
discussions?

    (a) Yes, you may request or allow proposal revisions to clarify and 
document understandings reached during discussions. At the conclusion of 
discussions, each offeror shall be given an opportunity to submit a 
final proposal revision.
    (b) You must establish a common cut-off date only for receipt of 
final proposal revisions. Requests for final proposal revisions shall 
advise offerors that the final proposal revisions shall be in writing 
and that the contracting agency intends to make award without obtaining 
further revisions.


<R05>
Sec. 636.510  Can the competitive range be further defined once 
discussions have begun?

    Yes, you may further narrow the competitive range if an offeror 
originally in the competitive range is no longer considered to be among 
the most highly rated offerors being considered for award. That offeror 
may be eliminated from the competitive range whether or not all material 
aspects of the proposal have been discussed, or whether or not the 
offeror has been afforded an opportunity to submit a proposal revision. 
You must provide an offeror excluded from the competitive range with a 
written determination and notice that proposal revisions will not be 
considered.


<R05>
Sec. 636.511  Can there be more than one round of discussions?

    Yes, but only at the conclusion of discussions will the offerors be 
requested to submit a final proposal revision, also called best and 
final offer (BAFO). Thus, regardless of the length or number of 
discussions, there will be only one request for a revised proposal 
(i.e., only one BAFO).


<R05>
Sec. 636.512  What is the basis for the source selection decision?

    (a) You must base the source selection decision on a comparative 
assessment of proposals against all selection criteria in the 
solicitation. While you may use reports and analyses prepared by others, 
the source selection decision shall represent your independent judgment.
    (b) The source selection decision shall be documented, and the 
documentation shall include the rationale for any business judgments and 
tradeoffs made or relied on, including benefits associated with 
additional costs. Although the rationale for the selection decision must 
be documented, that documentation need not quantify the tradeoffs that 
led to the decision.

[[Page 198]]


<R05>
Sec. 636.513  Are limited negotiations allowed prior to contract execution?

    Yes, after the source selection but prior to contract execution, you 
may conduct limited negotiations with the selected design-builder to 
clarify any remaining issues regarding scope, schedule, financing or any 
other information provided by that offeror. You must comply with the 
provisions of Sec. 636.507 in the exchange of this information.


<R05>
Sec. 636.514  How may I provide notifications and debriefings?

    You may provide pre-award or post-award notifications in accordance 
with State approved procedures. If an offeror requests a debriefing, you 
may provide pre-award or post-award debriefings in accordance with State 
approved procedures.


<R03>
PART 637_CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION AND APPROVAL--Table of Contents




Subpart A [Reserved]

         Subpart B_Quality Assurance Procedures for Construction

Sec.
637.201 Purpose.
637.203 Definitions.
637.205 Policy.
637.207 Quality assurance program.
637.209 Laboratory and sampling and testing personnel qualifications.

Appendix A to Subpart B--Guide Letter of Certification by State Engineer

    Authority: Sec. 1307, Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107; 23 U.S.C. 109, 
114, and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 60 FR 33717, June 29, 1995, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 637 appear at 67 FR 
75934, Dec. 10, 2002.

Subpart A [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart B_Quality Assurance Procedures for Construction


<R05>
Sec. 637.201  Purpose.

    To prescribe policies, procedures, and guidelines to assure the 
quality of materials and construction in all Federal-aid highway 
projects on the National Highway System.


<R05>
Sec. 637.203  Definitions.

    Acceptance program. All factors that comprise the State 
transportation department's (STD) determination of the quality of the 
product as specified in the contract requirements. These factors include 
verification sampling, testing, and inspection and may include results 
of quality control sampling and testing.
    Independent assurance program. Activities that are an unbiased and 
independent evaluation of all the sampling and testing procedures used 
in the acceptance program. Test procedures used in the acceptance 
program which are performed in the STD's central laboratory would not be 
covered by an independent assurance program.
    Proficiency samples. Homogeneous samples that are distributed and 
tested by two or more laboratories. The test results are compared to 
assure that the laboratories are obtaining the same results.
    Qualified laboratories. Laboratories that are capable as defined by 
appropriate programs established by each STD. As a minimum, the 
qualification program shall include provisions for checking test 
equipment and the laboratory shall keep records of calibration checks.
    Qualified sampling and testing personnel. Personnel who are capable 
as defined by appropriate programs established by each STD.
    Quality assurance. All those planned and systematic actions 
necessary to provide confidence that a product or service will satisfy 
given requirements for quality.
    Quality control. All contractor/vendor operational techniques and 
activities that are performed or conducted to fulfill the contract 
requirements.
    Random sample. A sample drawn from a lot in which each increment in 
the lot has an equal probability of being chosen.
    Vendor. A supplier of project-produced material that is not the 
contractor.
    Verification sampling and testing. Sampling and testing performed to 
validate the quality of the product.

[[Page 199]]


<R05>
Sec. 637.205  Policy.

    (a) Quality assurance program. Each STD shall develop a quality 
assurance program which will assure that the materials and workmanship 
incorporated into each Federal-aid highway construction project on the 
NHS are in conformity with the requirements of the approved plans and 
specifications, including approved changes. The program must meet the 
criteria in Sec. 637.207 and be approved by the FHWA.
    (b) STD capabilities. The STD shall maintain an adequate, qualified 
staff to administer its quality assurance program. The State shall also 
maintain a central laboratory. The State's central laboratory shall meet 
the requirements in Sec. 637.209(a)(2).
    (c) Independent assurance program. Independent assurance samples and 
tests or other procedures shall be performed by qualified sampling and 
testing personnel employed by the STD or its designated agent.
    (d) Verification sampling and testing. The verification sampling and 
testing are to be performed by qualified testing personnel employed by 
the STD or its designated agent, excluding the contractor and vendor.
    (e) Random samples. All samples used for quality control and 
verification sampling and testing shall be random samples.


<R05>
Sec. 637.207  Quality assurance program.

    (a) Each STD's quality assurance program shall provide for an 
acceptance program and an independent assurance (IA) program consisting 
of the following:
    (1) Acceptance program.
    (i) Each STD's acceptance program shall consist of the following:
    (A) Frequency guide schedules for verification sampling and testing 
which will give general guidance to personnel responsible for the 
program and allow adaptation to specific project conditions and needs.
    (B) Identification of the specific location in the construction or 
production operation at which verification sampling and testing is to be 
accomplished.
    (C) Identification of the specific attributes to be inspected which 
reflect the quality of the finished product.
    (ii) Quality control sampling and testing results may be used as 
part of the acceptance decision provided that:
    (A) The sampling and testing has been performed by qualified 
laboratories and qualified sampling and testing personnel.
    (B) The quality of the material has been validated by the 
verification sampling and testing. The verification testing shall be 
performed on samples that are taken independently of the quality control 
samples.
    (C) The quality control sampling and testing is evaluated by an IA 
program.
    (iii) If the results from the quality control sampling and testing 
are used in the acceptance program, the STD shall establish a dispute 
resolution system. The dispute resolution system shall address the 
resolution of discrepancies occurring between the verification sampling 
and testing and the quality control sampling and testing. The dispute 
resolution system may be administered entirely within the STD.
    (iv) In the case of a design-build project on the National Highway 
System, warranties may be used where appropriate. See 23 CFR 635.413(e) 
for specific requirements.
    (2) The IA program shall evaluate the qualified sampling and testing 
personnel and the testing equipment. The program shall cover sampling 
procedures, testing procedures, and testing equipment. Each IA program 
shall include a schedule of frequency for IA evaluation. The schedule 
may be established based on either a project basis or a system basis. 
The frequency can be based on either a unit of production or on a unit 
of time.
    (i) The testing equipment shall be evaluated by using one or more of 
the following: Calibration checks, split samples, or proficiency 
samples.
    (ii) Testing personnel shall be evaluated by observations and split 
samples or proficiency samples.
    (iii) A prompt comparison and documentation shall be made of test 
results obtained by the tester being evaluated and the IA tester. The 
STD shall develop guidelines including tolerance limits for the 
comparison of test results.

[[Page 200]]

    (iv) If the STD uses the system approach to the IA program, the STD 
shall provide an annual report to the FHWA summarizing the results of 
the IA program.
    (3) The preparation of a materials certification, conforming in 
substance to Appendix A of this subpart, shall be submitted to the FHWA 
Division Administrator for each construction project which is subject to 
FHWA construction oversight activities.
    (b) In the case of a design-build project funded under title 23, 
U.S. Code, the STD's quality assurance program should consider the 
specific contractual needs of the design-build project. All provisions 
of paragraph (a) of this section are applicable to design-build 
projects. In addition, the quality assurance program may include the 
following:
    (1) Reliance on a combination of contractual provisions and 
acceptance methods;
    (2) Reliance on quality control sampling and testing as part of the 
acceptance decision, provided that adequate verification of the design-
builder's quality control sampling and testing is performed to ensure 
that the design-builder is providing the quality of materials and 
construction required by the contract documents.
    (3) Contractual provisions which require the operation of the 
completed facility for a specific time period.

[60 FR 33717, June 29, 1995, as amended at 67 FR 75934, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 637.209  Laboratory and sampling and testing personnel qualifications.

    (a) Laboratories.
    (1) After June 29, 2000, all contractor, vendor, and STD testing 
used in the acceptance decision shall be performed by qualified 
laboratories.
    (2) After June 30, 1997, each STD shall have its central laboratory 
accredited by the AASHTO Accreditation Program or a comparable 
laboratory accreditation program approved by the FHWA.
    (3) After June 29, 2000, any non-STD designated laboratory which 
performs IA sampling and testing shall be accredited in the testing to 
be performed by the AASHTO Accreditation Program or a comparable 
laboratory accreditation program approved by the FHWA.
    (4) After June 29, 2000, any non-STD laboratory that is used in 
dispute resolution sampling and testing shall be accredited in the 
testing to be performed by the AASHTO Accreditation Program or a 
comparable laboratory accreditation program approved by the FHWA.
    (b) Sampling and testing personnel. After June 29, 2000, all 
sampling and testing data to be used in the acceptance decision or the 
IA program shall be executed by qualified sampling and testing 
personnel.
    (c) Conflict of interest. In order to avoid an appearance of a 
conflict of interest, any qualified non-STD laboratory shall perform 
only one of the following types of testing on the same project: 
Verification testing, quality control testing, IA testing, or dispute 
resolution testing.

 Appendix A to Subpart B of Part 637--Guide Letter of Certification by 
                             State Engineer

Date____________________________________________________________________
Project No._____________________________________________________________
    This is to certify that:
    The results of the tests used in the acceptance program indicate 
that the materials incorporated in the construction work, and the 
construction operations controlled by sampling and testing, were in 
conformity with the approved plans and specifications. (The following 
sentence should be added if the IA testing frequencies are based on 
project quantities. All independent assurance samples and tests are 
within tolerance limits of the samples and tests that are used in the 
acceptance program.)
    Exceptions to the plans and specifications are explained on the back 
hereof (or on attached sheet).
________________________________________________________________________
Director of STD Laboratory or other appropriate STD Official.


<R03>
PART 645_UTILITIES--Table of Contents




      Subpart A_Utility Relocations, Adjustments, and Reimbursement

Sec.
645.101 Purpose.
645.103 Applicability.
645.105 Definitions.
645.107 Eligibility.
645.109 Preliminary engineering.
645.111 Right-of-way.

[[Page 201]]

645.113 Agreements and authorizations.
645.115 Construction.
645.117 Cost development and reimbursement.
645.119 Alternate procedure.

                  Subpart B_Accommodation of Utilities

645.201 Purpose.
645.203 Applicability.
645.205 Policy.
645.207 Definitions.
645.209 General requirements.
645.211 State transportation department accommodation policies.
645.213 Use and occupancy agreements (permits).
645.215 Approvals.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101, 109, 111, 116, 123, and 315; 23 CFR 1.23 
and 1.27; 49 CFR 1.48(b); and E.O. 11990, 42 26961 (May 24, 1977).

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 645 appear at 65 FR 
70311, Nov. 22, 2000.


<R04>
      Subpart A_Utility Relocations, Adjustments, and Reimbursement

    Source: 50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 645.101  Purpose.

    To prescribe the policies, procedures, and reimbursement provisions 
for the adjustment and relocation of utility facilities on Federal-aid 
and direct Federal projects.


<R05>
Sec. 645.103  Applicability.

    (a) The provisions of this regulation apply to reimbursement claimed 
by a State transportation department (STD) for costs incurred under an 
approved and properly executed transportation department (TD)/utility 
agreement and for payment of costs incurred under all Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA)/utility agreements.
    (b) Procedures on the accommodation of utilities are set forth in 23 
CFR part 645, subpart B, Accommodation of Utilities.
    (c) When the lines or facilities to be relocated or adjusted due to 
highway construction are privately owned, located on the owner's land, 
devoted exclusively to private use and not directly or indirectly 
serving the public, the provisions of the FHWA's right-of-way procedures 
in 23 CFR 710.203, apply. When applicable, under the foregoing 
conditions, the provisions of this regulation may be used as a guide to 
establish a cost-to-cure.
    (d) The FHWA's reimbursement to the STD will be governed by State 
law (or State regulation) or the provisions of this regulation, 
whichever is more restrictive. When State law or regulation differs from 
this regulation, a determination shall be made by the STD subject to the 
concurrence of the FHWA as to which standards will govern, and the 
record documented accordingly, for each relocation encountered.
    (e) For direct Federal projects, all references herein to the STD or 
TD are inapplicable, and it is intended that the FHWA be considered in 
the relative position of the STD or TD.

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 64 FR 71289, Dec. 21, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 645.105  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this regulation, the following definitions shall 
apply:
    Authorization--for Federal-aid projects authorization to the STD by 
the FHWA, or for direct Federal projects authorization to the utility by 
the FHWA, to proceed with any phase of a project. The date of 
authorization establishes the date of eligibility for Federal funds to 
participate in the costs incurred on that phase of work.
    Betterment--any upgrading of the facility being relocated that is 
not attributable to the highway construction and is made solely for the 
benefit of and at the election of the utility.
    Cost of relocation--the entire amount paid by or on behalf of the 
utility properly attributable to the relocation after deducting from 
that amount any increase in value of the new facility, and any salvage 
derived from the old facility.
    Cost of Removal--the amount expended to remove utility property 
including the cost of demolishing, dismantling, removing, transporting, 
or otherwise disposing of utility property and of cleaning up to leave 
the site in a neat and presentable condition.
    Cost of salvage--the amount expended to restore salvaged utility 
property to usable condition after its removal.
    Direct Federal projects--highway projects such as projects under the 
Federal Lands Highways Program

[[Page 202]]

which are under the direct administration of the FHWA.
    Indirect or overhead costs--those costs which are not readily 
identifiable with one specific task, job, or work order. Such costs may 
include indirect labor, social security taxes, insurance, stores 
expense, and general office expenses. Costs of this nature generally are 
distributed or allocated to the applicable job or work orders, other 
accounts and other functions to which they relate. Distribution and 
allocation is made on a uniform basis which is reasonable, equitable, 
and in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting practices.
    Relocation--the adjustment of utility facilities required by the 
highway project. It includes removing and reinstalling the facility, 
including necessary temporary facilities, acquiring necessary right-of-
way on the new location, moving, rearranging or changing the type of 
existing facilities and taking any necessary safety and protective 
measures. It shall also mean constructing a replacement facility that is 
both functionally equivalent to the existing facility and necessary for 
continuous operation of the utility service, the project economy, or 
sequence of highway construction.
    Salvage value--the amount received from the sale of utility property 
that has been removed or the amount at which the recovered material is 
charged to the utility's accounts, if retained for reuse.
    State transportation department--the transportation department of 
one of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico.
    Transportation department(TD)--that department, commission, board, 
or official of any State or political subdivison thereof, charged by its 
law with the responsibility for highway administration.
    Use and occupancy agreement--the document (written agreement or 
permit) by which the TD approves the use and occupancy of highway right-
of-way by utility facilities or private lines.
    Utility--a privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned line, 
facility or system for producing, transmitting, or distributing 
communications, cable television, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, 
oil, crude products, water, steam, waste, storm water not connected with 
highway drainage, or any other similar commodity, including any fire or 
police signal system or street lighting system, which directly or 
indirectly serves the public. The term utility shall also mean the 
utility company inclusive of any wholly owned or controlled subsidiary.
    Work order system--a procedure for accumulating and recording into 
separate accounts of a utility all costs to the utility in connection 
with any change in its system or plant.

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 65 FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 645.107  Eligibility.

    (a) When requested by the STD, Federal funds may participate, 
subject to the provisions of Sec. 645.103(d) of this part and at the 
pro rata share applicable, in an amount actually paid by an TD for the 
costs of utility relocations. Federal funds may participate in safety 
corrective measures made under the provisions of Sec. 645.107(k) of 
this part. Federal funds may also participate for relocations 
necessitated by the actual construction of highway project made under 
one or more of the following conditions when:
    (1) The STD certifies that the utility has the right of occupancy in 
its existing location because it holds the fee, an easement, or other 
real property interest, the damaging or taking of which is compensable 
in eminent domain,
    (2) The utility occupies privately or publicly owned land, including 
public road or street right-of-way, and the STD certifies that the 
payment by the TD is made pursuant to a law authorizing such payment in 
conformance with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 123, and/or
    (3) The utility occupies publicy owned land, including public road 
and street right-of-way, and is owned by a public agency or political 
subdivision of the State, and is not required by law or agreement to 
move at its own expense, and the STD certifies that the TD has the legal 
authority or obligation to make such payments.
    (b) On projects which the STD has the authority to participate in 
project

[[Page 203]]

costs, Federal funds may not participate in payments made by a political 
subdivision for relocation of utility facilities, other than those 
proposed under the provisions of Sec. 645.107(k) of this part, when 
State law prohibits the STD from making payment for relocation of 
utility facilities.
    (c) On projects which the STD does not have the authority to 
participate in project costs, Federal funds may participate in payments 
made by a political subdivision for relocation of utility facilities 
necessitated by the actual construction of a highway project when the 
STD certifies that such payment is based upon the provisions of Sec. 
645.107(a) of this part and does not violate the terms of a use and 
occupancy agreement, or legal contract, between the utility and the TD 
or for utility safety corrective measures under the provisions of Sec. 
645.107(k) of this part.
    (d) Federal funds are not eligible to participate in any costs for 
which the utility contributes or repays the TD, except for utilities 
owned by the political subdivision on projects which qualify under the 
provisions of Sec. 645.107(c) of this part in which case the costs of 
the utility are considered to be costs of the TD.
    (e) The FHWA may deny Federal fund participation in any payments 
made by a TD for the relocation of utility facilities when such payments 
do not constitute a suitable basis for Federal fund participation under 
the provisions of title 23 U.S.C.
    (f) The rights of any public agency or political subdivision of a 
State under contract, franchise, or other instrument or agreement with 
the utility, pertaining to the utility's use and occupancy of publicly 
owned land, including public road and street right-of-way, shall be 
considered the rights of the STD in the absence of State law to the 
contrary.
    (g) In lieu of the individual certifications required by Sec. 
645.107(a) and (c), the STD may file a statement with the FHWA setting 
forth the conditions under which the STD will make payments for the 
relocation of utility facilities. The FHWA may approve Federal fund 
participation in utility relocations proposed by the STD under the 
conditions of the statement when the FHWA has made an affirmative 
finding that such statement and conditions form a suitable basis for 
Federal fund participation under the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 123.
    (h) Federal funds may not participate in the cost of relocations of 
utility facilities made solely for the benefit or convenience of a 
utility, its contractor, or a highway contractor.
    (i) When the advance installation of new utility facilities crossing 
or otherwise occupying the proposed right-of-way of a planned highway 
project is underway, or scheduled to be underway, prior to the time such 
right-of-way is purchased by or under control of the TD, arrangements 
should be made for such facilities to be installed in a manner that will 
meet the requirements of the planned highway project. Federal funds are 
eligible to participate in the additional cost incurred by the utility 
that are attributable to, and in accommodation of, the highway project 
provided such costs are incurred subsequent to authorization of the work 
by the FHWA. Subject to the other provisions of this regulation, Federal 
participation may be approved under the foregoing circumstances when it 
is demonstrated that the action taken is necessary to protect the public 
interest and the adjustment of the facility is necessary by reason of 
the actual construction of the highway project.
    (j) Federal funds are eligible to participate in the costs of 
preliminary engineering and allied services for utilities, the 
acquisition of replacement right-of-way for utilities, and the physical 
construction work associated with utility relocations. Such costs must 
be incurred by or on behalf of a utility after the date the work is 
included in an approved program and after the FHWA has authorized the 
STD to proceed in accordance with 23 CFR part 630, subpart A, Federal-
Aid Programs Approval and Project Authorization.
    (k) Federal funds may participate in projects solely for the purpose 
of implementing safety corrective measures

[[Page 204]]

to reduce the roadside hazards of utility facilities to the highway 
user. Safety corrective measures should be developed in accordance with 
the provisions of 23 CFR 645.209(k).

(Information collection requirements in paragraph (g) were approved by 
the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2125-0515)

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 24932, July 1, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 645.109  Preliminary engineering.

    (a) As mutually agreed to by the TD and utility, and subject to the 
provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, preliminary engineering 
activities associated with utility relocation work may be done by:
    (1) The TD's or utility's engineering forces;
    (2) An engineering consultant selected by the TD, after consultation 
with the utility, the contract to be administered by the TD; or,
    (3) An engineering consultant selected by the utility, with the 
approval of the TD, the contract to be administered by the utility.
    (b) When a utility is not adequately staffed to pursue the necessary 
preliminary engineering and related work for the utility relocation, 
Federal funds may participate in the amount paid to engineers, 
architects, and others for required engineering and allied services 
provided such amounts are not based on a percentage of the cost of 
relocation. When Federal participation is requested by the STD in the 
cost of such services, the utility and its consultant shall agree in 
writing as to the services to be provided and the fees and arrangements 
for the services. Federal funds may participate in the cost of such 
services performed under existing written continuing contracts when it 
is demonstrated that such work is performed regularly for the utility in 
its own work and that the costs are reasonable.
    (c) The procedures in 23 CFR part 172, Administration of Engineering 
and Design Related Service Contracts, may be used as a guide for 
reviewing proposed consultant contracts.

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 60 FR 34850, July 5, 1995; 65 
FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 645.111  Right-of-way.

    (a) Federal participation may be approved for the cost of 
replacement right-of-way provided:
    (1) The utility has the right of occupancy in its existing location 
beause it holds the fee, an easement, or another real property interest, 
the damaging or taking of which is compensable in eminent domain, or the 
acquisition is made in the interest of project economy or is necessary 
to meet the requirements of the highway project, and
    (2) There will be no charge to the project for that portion of the 
utility's existing right-of-way being transferred to the TD for highway 
purposes.
    (b) The utility shall determine and make a written valuation of the 
replacement right-of-way that it acquires in order to justify amounts 
paid for such right-of-way. This written valuation shall be accomplished 
prior to negotiation for acquisition.
    (c) Acquisition of replacement right-of-way by the TD on behalf of a 
utility or acquisition of nonoperating real property from a utility 
shall be in accordance with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4601 et seq.) and 
applicable right-of-way procedures in 23 CFR 710.203.
    (d) When the utility has the right-of-occupancy in its existing 
location because it holds the fee, an easement, or another real property 
interest, and it is not necessary by reason of the highway construction 
to adjust or replace the facilities located thereon, the taking of and 
damage to the utility's real property, including the disposal or removal 
of such facilities, may be considered a right-of-way transaction in 
accordance with provisions of the applicable right-of-way procedures in 
23 CFR 710.203.

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 64 FR 71289, Dec. 21, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 645.113  Agreements and authorizations.

    (a) On Federal-aid and direct Federal projects involving utility 
relocations, the utility and the TD shall agree in writing on their 
separate responsibilities for financing and accomplishing the relocation 
work. When Federal participation is requested, the agreement

[[Page 205]]

shall incorporate this regulation by reference and designate the method 
to be used for performing the work (by contract or force account) and 
for developing relocation costs. The method proposed by the utility for 
developing relocation costs must be acceptable to both the TD and the 
FHWA. The preferred method for the development of relocation costs by a 
utility is on the basis of actual direct and related indirect costs 
accumulated in accordance with a work order accounting procedure 
prescribed by the applicable Federal or State regulatory body.
    (b) When applicable, the written agreement shall specify the terms 
and amounts of any contribution or repayments made or to be made by the 
utility to the TD in connection with payments by the TD to the utility 
under the provisions of Sec. 645.107 of this regulation.
    (c) The agreement shall be supported by plans, specifications when 
required, and itemized cost estimates of the work agreed upon, including 
appropriate credits to the project, and shall be sufficiently 
informative and complete to provide the TD and the FHWA with a clear 
description of the work required.
    (d) When the relocation involves both work to be done at the TD's 
expense and work to be done at the expense of the utility, the written 
agreement shall state the share to be borne by each party.
    (e) In the event there are changes in the scope of work, extra work 
or major changes in the planned work covered by the approved agreement, 
plans, and estimates, Federal participation shall be limited to costs 
covered by a modification of the agreement, a written change, or extra 
work order approved by the TD and the FHWA.
    (f) When proposed utility relocation and adjustment work on a 
project for a specific utility company can be clearly defined and the 
cost can be accurately estimated, the FHWA may approve an agreement 
between the TD and the utility company for a lump-sum payment without 
later confirmation by audit of actual costs.
    (g) Except as otherwise provided by Sec. 645.113(h), authorization 
by the FHWA to the STD to proceed with the physical relocation of a 
utility's facilities may be given after:
    (1) The utility relocation work, or the right-of-way, or physical 
construction phase of the highway construction work is included in an 
approved Statewide transportation improvement program,
    (2) The appropriate environmental evaluation and public hearing 
procedures required by 23 CFR part 771, Environmental Impact and Related 
Procedures, have been satisfied.
    (3) The FHWA has reviewed and approved the plans, estimates, and 
proposed or executed agreements for the utility work and is furnished a 
schedule for accomplishing the work.
    (h) The FHWA may authorize the physical relocation of utility 
facilities before the requirements of Sec. 645.113(g)(2) are satisfied 
when the relocation or adjustment of utility facilities meets the 
requirements of Sec. 645.107(i) of this regulation.
    (i) Whenever the FHWA has authorized right-of-way acquisition under 
the hardship and protective buying provisions of 23 CFR 710.503, the 
FHWA may authorize the physical relocation of utility facilities located 
in whole or in part on such right-of-way.
    (j) When all efforts by the TD and utility fail to bring about 
written agreement of their separate responsibilities under the 
provisions of this regulation, the STD shall submit its proposal and a 
full report of the circumstances to the FHWA. Conditional authorizations 
for the relocation work to proceed may be given by the FHWA to the STD 
with the understanding that Federal funds will not be paid for work done 
by the utility until the STD proposal has been approved by the FHWA.
    (k) The FHWA will consider for approval any special procedure under 
State law, or appropriate administrative or judicial order, or under 
blanket master agreements with the utilities, that will fully accomplish 
all of the foregoing objectives and accelerate the advancement of the 
construction and completion of projects.

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 60 FR 34850, July 5, 1995; 64 
FR 71289, Dec. 21, 1999; 65 FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]

[[Page 206]]


<R05>
Sec. 645.115  Construction.

    (a) Part 635, subpart B, of this title, Force Account Construction 
(justification required for force account work), states that it is cost-
effective for certain utility adjustments to be performed by a utility 
with its own forces and equipment, provided the utility is qualified to 
perform the work in a satisfactory manner. This cost-effectiveness 
finding covers minor work on the utility's existing facilities routinely 
performed by the utility with its own forces. When the utility is not 
adequately staffed and equipped to perform such work with its own forces 
and equipment at a time convenient to and in coordination with the 
associated highway construction, such work may be done by:
    (1) A contract awarded by the TD or utility to the lowest qualified 
bidder based on appropriate solicitation,
    (2) Inclusion as part of the TD's highway construction contract let 
by the TD as agreed to by the utility,
    (3) An existing continuing contract, provided the costs are 
reasonable, or
    (4) A contract for low-cost incidental work, such as tree trimming 
and the like, awarded by the TD or utility without competitive bidding, 
provided the costs are reasonable.
    (b) When it has been determined under part 635, subpart B, that the 
force account method is not the most cost-effective means for 
accomplishing the utility adjustment, such work is to be done under 
competitive bid contracts as described in Sec. 645.115(a) (1) and (2) 
or under an existing continuing contract provided it can be demonstrated 
this is the most cost-effective method.
    (c) Costs for labor, materials, equipment, and other services 
furnished by the utility shall be billed by the utility directly to the 
TD. The special provisions of contracts let by the utility or the TD 
shall be explicit in this respect. The costs of force account work 
performed for the utility by the TD and of contract work performed for 
the utility under a contract let by the TD shall be reported separately 
from the costs of other force account and contract items on the highway 
project.


<R05>
Sec. 645.117  Cost development and reimbursement.

    (a) Developing and recording costs. (1) All utility relocation costs 
shall be recorded by means of work orders in accordance with an approved 
work order system except when another method of developing and recording 
costs, such as lump-sum agreement, has been approved by the TD and the 
FHWA. Except for work done under contracts, the individual and total 
costs properly reported and recorded in the utility's accounts in 
accordance with the approved method for developing such costs, or the 
lump-sum agreement, shall constitute the maximum amount on which Federal 
participation may be based.
    (2) Each utility shall keep its work order system or other approved 
accounting procedure in such a manner as to show the nature of each 
addition to or retirement from a facility, the total costs thereof, and 
the source or sources of cost. Separate work orders may be issued for 
additions and retirements. Retirements, however, may be included with 
the construction work order provided that all items relating to 
retirements shall be kept separately from those relating to 
construction.
    (3) The STD may develop, or work in concert with utility companies 
to develop, other acceptable costing methods, such as unit costs, to 
estimate and reimburse utility relocation expenditures. Such other 
methods shall be founded in generally accepted industry practices and be 
reasonably supported by recent actual expenditures. Unit costs should be 
developed periodically and supported annually by a maintained data base 
of relocation expenses. Development of any alternate costing method 
should consider the factors listed in paragraphs (b) through (g) of this 
section. Streamlining of the cost development and reimbursement 
procedures is encouraged so long as adequate accountability for Federal 
expenditures is maintained. Concurrence by the FHWA is required for any 
costing method used other than actual cost.
    (b) Direct labor costs. (1) Salaries and wages, at actual or average 
rates, and related expenses paid by the utility to individuals for the 
time worked on the

[[Page 207]]

project are reimbursable when supported by adequate records. This 
includes labor associated with preliminary engineering, construction 
engineering, right-of-way, and force account construction.
    (2) Salaries and expenses paid to individuals who are normally part 
of the overhead organization of the utility may be reimbursed for the 
time worked directly on the project when supported by adequate records 
and when the work performed by such individuals is essential to the 
project and could not have been accomplished as economically by 
employees outside the overhead organization.
    (3) Amounts paid to engineers, architects and others for services 
directly related to projects may be reimbursed.
    (c) Labor surcharges. (1) Labor surcharges include worker 
compensation insurance, public liability and property damage insurance, 
and such fringe benefits as the utility has established for the benefit 
of its employees. The cost of labor surcharges will be reimbursed at 
actual cost to the utility, or, at the option of the utility, average 
rates which are representative of actual costs may be used in lieu of 
actual costs if approved by the STD and the FHWA. These average rates 
should be adjusted at least once annually to take into account known 
anticipated changes and correction for any over or under applied costs 
for the preceding period.
    (2) When the utility is a self-insurer, there may be reimbursement 
at experience rates properly developed from actual costs. The rates 
cannot exceed the rates of a regular insurance company for the class of 
employment covered.
    (d) Overhead and indirect construction costs. (1) Overhead and 
indirect construction costs not charged directly to work order or 
construction accounts may be allocated to the relocation provided the 
allocation is made on an equitable basis. All costs included in the 
allocation shall be eligible for Federal reimbursement, reasonable, 
actually incurred by the utility, and consistent with the provisions of 
48 CFR part 31.
    (2) Costs not eligible for Federal reimbursement include, but are 
not limited to, the costs associated with advertising, sales promotion, 
interest on borrowings, the issuance of stock, bad debts, uncollectible 
accounts receivable, contributions, donations, entertainment, fines, 
penalties, lobbying, and research programs.
    (3) The records supporting the entries for overhead and indirect 
construction costs shall show the total amount, rate, and allocation 
basis for each additive, and are subject to audit by representatives of 
the State and Federal Government.
    (e) Material and supply costs. (1) Materials and supplies, if 
available, are to be furnished from company stock except that they may 
be obtained from other sources near the project site when available at a 
lower cost. When not available from company stock, they may be purchased 
either under competitive bids or existing continuing contracts under 
which the lowest available prices are developed. Minor quantities of 
materials and supplies and proprietary products routinely used in the 
utility's operation and essential for the maintenance of system 
compatibility may be excluded from these requirements. The utility shall 
not be required to change its existing standards for materials used in 
permanent changes to its facilities. Costs shall be determined as 
follows:
    (i) Materials and supplies furnished from company stock shall be 
billed at the current stock prices for such new or used materials at 
time of issue.
    (ii) Materials and supplies not furnished from company stock shall 
be billed at actual costs to the utility delivered to the project site.
    (iii) A reasonable cost for plant inspection and testing may be 
included in the costs of materials and supplies when such expense has 
been incurred. The computation of actual costs of materials and supplies 
shall include the deduction of all offered discounts, rebates, and 
allowances.
    (iv) The cost of rehabilitating rather than replacing existing 
utility facilities to meet the requirements of a project is 
reimbursable, provided this cost does not exceed replacement costs.
    (2) Materials recovered from temporary use and accepted for reuse by 
the utility shall be credited to the project at prices charged to the 
job, less a considertion for loss in service

[[Page 208]]

life at 10 percent. Materials recovered from the permanent facility of 
the utility that are accepted by the utility for return to stock shall 
be credited to the project at the current stock prices of such used 
materials. Materials recovered and not accepted for reuse by the 
utility, if determined to have a net sale value, shall be sold to the 
highest bidder by the TD or utility following an opportunity for TD 
inspection and appropriate solicitation for bids. If the utility 
practices a system of periodic disposal by sale, credit to the project 
shall be at the going prices supported by records of the utility.
    (3) Federal participation may be approved for the total cost of 
removal when either such removal is required by the highway construction 
or the existing facilities cannot be abandoned in place for aesthetic or 
safety reasons. When the utility facilities can be abandoned in place 
but the utility or highway constructor elects to remove and recover the 
materials, Federal funds shall not participate in removal costs which 
exceed the value of the materials recovered.
    (4) The actual and direct costs of handling and loading materials 
and supplies at company stores or material yards, and of unloading and 
handling recovered materials accepted by the utility at its stores or 
material yards are reimbursable. In lieu of actual costs, average rates 
which are representative of actual costs may be used if approved by the 
STD and the FHWA. These average rates should be adjusted at least once 
annually to take into account known anticipated changes and correction 
for any over or under applied costs for the preceding period. At the 
option of the utility, 5 percent of the amounts billed for the materials 
and supplies issued from company stores and material yards or the value 
of recovered materials will be reimbursed in lieu of actual or average 
costs for handling.
    (f) Equipment costs. The average or actual costs of operation, minor 
maintenance, and depreciation of utility-owned equipment may be 
reimbursed. Reimbursement for utility-owned vehicles may be made at 
average or actual costs. When utility-owned equipment is not available, 
reimbursement will be limited to the amount of rental paid (1) to the 
lowest qualified bidder, (2) under existing continuing contracts at 
reasonable costs, or (3) as an exception by negotiation when paragraph 
(f) (1) and (2) of this section are impractical due to project location 
or schedule.
    (g) Transportation costs. (1) The utility's cost, consistent with 
its overall policy, of necessary employee transportation and subsistence 
directly attributable to the project is reimbursable.
    (2) Reasonable cost for the movement of materials, supplies, and 
equipment to the project and necessary return to storage including the 
associated cost of loading and unloading equipment is reimbursable.
    (h) Credits. (1) Credit to the highway project will be required for 
the cost of any betterments to the facility being replaced or adjusted, 
and for the salvage value of the materials removed.
    (2) Credit to the highway project will be required for the accrued 
depreciation of a utility facility being replaced, such as a building, 
pumping station, filtration plant, power plant, substation, or any other 
similar operational unit. Such accrued depreciation is that amount based 
on the ratio between the period of actual length of service and total 
life expectancy applied to the original cost. Credit for accrued 
depreciation shall not be required for a segment of the utility's 
service, distribution, or transmission lines.
    (3) No betterment credit is required for additions or improvements 
which are:
    (i) Required by the highway project,
    (ii) Replacement devices or materials that are of equivalent 
standards although not identical,
    (iii) Replacement of devices or materials no longer regularly 
manufactured with next highest grade or size,
    (iv) Required by law under governmental and appropriate regulatory 
commission code, or
    (v) Required by current design practices regularly followed by the 
company in its own work, and there is a direct benefit to the highway 
project.
    (4) When the facilities, including equipment and operating 
facilities, described in Sec. 645.117(h)(2) are not being replaced, but 
are being rehabilitated

[[Page 209]]

and/or moved, as necessitated by the highway project, no credit for 
accrued depreciation is needed.
    (5) In no event will the total of all credits required under the 
provisions of this regulation exceed the total costs of adjustment 
exclusive of the cost of additions or improvements necessitated by the 
highway construction.
    (i) Billings. (1) After the executed TD/utility agreement has been 
approved by the FHWA, the utility may be reimbursed through the STD by 
progress billings for costs incurred. Cost for materials stockpiled at 
the project site or specifically purchased and delivered to the utility 
for use on the project may also be reimbursed on progress billings 
following approval of the executed TD/utility agreement.
    (2) The utility shall provide one final and complete billing of all 
costs incurred, or of the agreed-to lump-sum, within one year following 
completion of the utility relocation work, otherwise previous payments 
to the utility may be considered final, except as agreed to between the 
STD and the utility. Billings received from utilities more than one year 
following completion of the utility relocation work may be paid if the 
STD so desires, and Federal-aid highway funds may participate in these 
payments.
    (3) All utility cost records and accounts relating to the project 
are subject to audit by representatives of the State and Federal 
Government for a period of 3 years from the date final payment has been 
received by the utility.

(Information collection requirements in paragraph (i) were approved by 
the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2125-0159)

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 60 FR 34850, July 5, 1995; 65 
FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 645.119  Alternate procedure.

    (a) This alternate procedure is provided to simplify the processing 
of utility relocations or adjustments under the provisions of this 
regulation. Under this procedure, except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, the STD is to act in the relative 
position of the FHWA for reviewing and approving the arrangements, fees, 
estimates, plans, agreements, and other related matters required by this 
regulation as prerequisites for authorizing the utility to proceed with 
and complete the work.
    (b) The scope of the STD's approval authority under the alternate 
procedure includes all actions necessary to advance and complete all 
types of utility work under the provisions of this regulation except in 
the following instances:
    (1) Utility relocations and adjustments involving major transfer, 
production, and storage facilities such as generating plants, power feed 
stations, pumping stations and reservoirs.
    (2) Utility relocations falling within the scope of Sec. 645.113 
(h), (i), and (j), and Sec. 645.107(i) of this regulation.
    (c) To adopt the alternate procedure, the STD must file a formal 
application for approval by the FHWA. The application must include the 
following:
    (1) The STD's written policies and procedures for administering and 
processing Federal-aid utility adjustments. Those policies and 
procedures must make adequate provisions with respect to the following:
    (i) Compliance with the requirements of this regulation, except as 
otherwise provided by Sec. 645.119(b), and the provisions of 23 CFR 
part 645, subpart B, Accommodation of Utilities.
    (ii) Advance utility liaison, planning, and coordination measures 
for providing adequate lead time and early scheduling of utility 
relocation to minimize interference with the planned highway 
construction.
    (iii) Appropriate administrative, legal, and engineering review and 
coordination procedures as needed to establish the legal basis of the 
TD's payment; the extent of eligibility of the work under State and 
Federal laws and regulations; the more restrictive payment standards 
under Sec. 645.103(d) of this regulation; the necessity of the proposed 
utility work and its compatibility with proposed highway improvements; 
and the uniform treatment of all utility matters and actions, consistent 
with sound management practices.
    (iv) Documentation of actions taken in compliance with STD policies 
and

[[Page 210]]

the provisions of this regulation, shall be retained by the STD.
    (2) A statement signed by the chief administrative officer of the 
STD certifying that:
    (i) Federal-aid utility relocations will be processed in accordance 
with the applicable provisions of this regulation, and the STD's utility 
policies and procedures submitted under Sec. 645.119(c)(1).
    (ii) Reimbursement will be requested only for those costs properly 
attributable to the proposed highway construction and eligible for 
participation under the provisions of this regulation.
    (d) The STD's application and any changes to it will be submitted to 
the FHWA for review and approval.
    (e) After the alternate procedure has been approved, the FHWA may 
authorize the STD to proceed with utility relocation on a project in 
accordance with the certification, subject to the following conditions:
    (1) The utility work must be included in an approved program.
    (2) The STD must submit a request in writing for such authorization. 
The request shall include a list of the utility relocations to be 
processed under the alternate procedure, along with the best available 
estimate of the total costs involved.
    (f) The FHWA may suspend approval of the alternate procedure when 
any FHWA review discloses noncompliance with the certification. Federal 
funds will not participate in relocation costs incurred that do not 
comply with the requirements under Sec. 645.119(c)(1).

(Information collection requirements in paragraph (c) were approved by 
the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2125-0533)

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 65 FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R04>
                  Subpart B_Accommodation of Utilities

    Source: 50 FR 20354, May 15, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 645.201  Purpose.

    To prescribe policies and procedures for accommodating utility 
facilities and private lines on the right-of-way of Federal-aid or 
direct Federal highway projects.


<R05>
Sec. 645.203  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to:
    (a) New utility installations within the right-of-way of Federal-aid 
or direct Federal highway projects,
    (b) Existing utility facilities which are to be retained, relocated, 
or adjusted within the right-of-way of active projects under development 
or construction when Federal-aid or direct Federal highway funds are 
either being or have been used on the involved highway facility. When 
existing utility installations are to remain in place without 
adjustments on such projects the transportation department and utility 
are to enter into an appropriate agreement as discussed in Sec. 645.213 
of this part,
    (c) Existing utility facilities which are to be adjusted or 
relocated under the provisions of Sec. 645.209(k), and
    (d) Private lines which may be permitted to cross the right-of-way 
of a Federal-aid or direct Federal highway project pursuant to State law 
and regulations and the provisions of this subpart. Longitudinal use of 
such right-of-way by private lines is to be handled under the provisions 
of 23 CFR 1.23(c).


<R05>
Sec. 645.205  Policy.

    (a) Pursuant to the provisions of 23 CFR 1.23, it is in the public 
interest for utility facilities to be accommodated on the right-of-way 
of a Federal-aid or direct Federal highway project when such use and 
occupancy of the highway right-of-way do not adversely affect highway or 
traffic safety, or otherwise impair the highway or its aesthetic 
quality, and do not conflict with the provisions of Federal, State or 
local laws or regulations.
    (b) Since by tradition and practice highway and utility facilities 
frequently coexist within common right-of-way or along the same 
transportation corridors, it is essential in such situations that these 
public service facilities be compatibly designed and operated. In the 
design of new highway facilities consideration should be given to 
utility service needs of the area traversed if such service is to be 
provided from utility facilities on or near the

[[Page 211]]

highway. Similarly the potential impact on the highway and its users 
should be considered in the design and location of utility facilities on 
or along highway right-of-way. Efficient, effective and safe joint 
highway and utility development of transportation corridors is important 
along high speed and high volume roads, such as major arterials and 
freeways, particularly those approaching metropolitan areas where space 
is increasingly limited. Joint highway and utility planning and 
development efforts are encouraged on Federal-aid highway projects.
    (c) The manner is which utilities cross or otherwise occupy the 
right-of-way of a direct Federal or Federal-aid highway project can 
materially affect the highway, its safe operation, aesthetic quality, 
and maintenance. Therefore, it is necessary that such use and occupancy, 
where authorized, be regulated by transportation departments in a manner 
which preserves the operational safety and the functional and aesthetic 
quality of the highway facility. This subpart shall not be construed to 
alter the basic legal authority of utilities to install their facilities 
on public highways pursuant to law or franchise and reasonable 
regulation by transportation departments with respect to location and 
manner of installation.
    (d) When utilities cross or otherwise occupy the right-of-way of a 
direct Federal or Federal-aid highway project on Federal lands, and when 
the right-of-way grant is for highway purposes only, the utility must 
also obtain and comply with the terms of a right-of-way or other 
occupancy permit for the Federal agency having jurisdiction over the 
underlying land.

[50 FR 20354, May 15, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 2833, Feb. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 645.207  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this regulation, the following definitions shall 
apply:
    Aesthetic quality--those desirable characteristics in the appearance 
of the highway and its environment, such as harmony between or blending 
of natural and manufactured objects in the environment, continuity of 
visual form without distracting interruptions, and simplicity of designs 
which are desirably functional in shape but without clutter.
    Border area--the area between the traveled way and the right-of-way 
line.
    Clear roadside policy--that policy employed by a transportation 
department to provide a clear zone in order to increase safety, improve 
traffic operations, and enhance the aesthetic quality of highways by 
designing, constructing and maintaining highway roadsides as wide, flat, 
and rounded as practical and as free as practical from natural or 
manufactured hazards such as trees, drainage structures, nonyielding 
sign supports, highway lighting supports, and utility poles and other 
ground-mounted structures. The policy should address the removal of 
roadside obstacles which are likely to be associated with accident or 
injury to the highway user, or when such obstacles are essential, the 
policy should provide for appropriate countermeasures to reduce hazards. 
Countermeasures include placing utility facilities at locations which 
protect out-of-control vehicles, using breakaway features, using impact 
attenuation devices, or shielding. In all cases full consideration shall 
be given to sound engineering principles and economic factors.
    Clear zone--the total roadside border area starting at the edge of 
the traveled way, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area 
may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, 
and/or the area at the toe of a non-recoverable slope available for safe 
use by an errant vehicle. The desired width is dependent upon the 
traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. The current 
edition of the AASHTO ``Roadside Design Guide'' should be used as a 
guide for establishing clear zones for various types of highways and 
operating conditions. This publication is available for inspection and 
copying from the FHWA Washington Headquarters and all FHWA Division 
Offices as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7. Copies of current AASHTO 
publications are available for purchase from the American Association of 
State Highway and Transportation Officials, Suite 225, 444 North Capitol 
Street, NW., Washington, D.C.

[[Page 212]]

20001, or electronically at http://www.aashto.org.
    Direct Federal highway projects--those active or completed highway 
projects such as projects under the Federal Lands Highways Program which 
are under the direct administration of the Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA)
    Federal-aid highway projects--those active or completed highway 
projects administered by or through a State transportation department 
which involve or have involved the use of Federal-aid highway funds for 
the development, acquisition of right-of-way, construction or 
improvement of the highway or related facilities, including highway 
beautification projects under 23 U.S.C. 319, Landscaping and Scenic 
Enhancement.
    Freeway--a divided arterial highway with full control of access.
    Highway--any public way for vehicular travel, including the entire 
area within the right-of-way and related facilities constructed or 
improved in whole or in part with Federal-aid or direct Federal highway 
funds.
    Transportation department--that department, agency, commission, 
board, or official of any State or political subdivision thereof, 
charged by its law with the responsibility for highway administration.
    Private lines--privately owned facilities which convey or transmit 
the commodities outlined in the definition of utility facility of this 
section, but devoted exclusively to private use.
    Right-of-way--real property, or interests therein, acquired, 
dedicated or reserved for the construction, operation, and maintenance 
of a highway in which Federal-aid or direct Federal highway funds are or 
have been involved in any stage of development. Lands acquired under 23 
U.S.C. 319 shall be considered to be highway right-of-way.
    State transportation department--the transportation department of 
one of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico.
    Use and occupancy agreement--the document (written agreement or 
permit) by which the transportation department approves the use and 
occupancy of highway right-of-way by utility facilities or private 
lines.
    Utility facility--privately, publicly or cooperatively owned line, 
facility, or system for producing, transmitting, or distributing 
communications, cable television, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, 
oil, crude products, water, steam, waste, storm water not connected with 
highway drainage, or any other similar commodity, including any fire or 
police signal system or street lighting system, which directly or 
indirectly serves the public. The term utility shall also mean the 
utility company inclusive of any substantially owned or controlled 
subsidiary. For the purposes of this part, the term includes those 
utility-type facilities which are owned or leased by a government agency 
for its own use, or otherwise dedicated solely to governmental use. The 
term utility includes those facilities used solely by the utility which 
are a part of its operating plant.

[50 FR 20345, May 15, 1985, as amended at 51 FR 16834, May 7, 1986; 53 
FR 2833, Feb. 2, 1988; 55 FR 25828, June 25, 1990; 60 FR 34850, July 5, 
1995; 61 FR 12022, Mar. 25, 1996; 65 FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 645.209  General requirements.

    (a) Safety. Highway safety and traffic safety are of paramount, but 
not of sole, importance when accommodating utility facilities within 
highway right-of-way. Utilities provide an essential public service to 
the general public. Traditionally, as a matter of sound economic public 
policy and law, utilities have used public road right-of-way for 
transmitting and distributing their services. The lack of sufficient 
right-of-way width to accommodate utilities outside the desirable clear 
zone, in and of itself, is not a valid reason to preclude utilities from 
occupying the highway right-of-way. However, due to the nature and 
volume of highway traffic, the effect of such joint use on the traveling 
public must be carefully considered by transportation departments before 
approval of utility use of the right-of-way of Federal-aid or direct 
Federal highway projects is given. Adjustments in the operating 
characteristics of the utility or the highway or other special efforts 
may be necessary to increase the compatibility of utility-highway joint 
use. The possibility

[[Page 213]]

of this joint use should be a consideration in establishing right-of-way 
requirements for highway projects. In any event, the design, location, 
and manner in which utilities use and occupy the right-of-way of 
Federal-aid or direct Federal highway projects must conform to the clear 
roadside policies for the highway involved and otherwise provide for a 
safe traveling environment as required by 23 U.S.C. 109(l)(1).
    (b) New above ground installations. On Federal-aid or direct Federal 
highway projects, new above ground utility installations, where 
permitted, shall be located as far from the traveled way as possible, 
preferably along the right-of-way line. No new above ground utility 
installations are to be allowed within the established clear zone of the 
highway unless a determination has been made by the transportation 
department that placement underground is not technically feasible or is 
unreasonably costly and there are no feasible alternate locations. In 
exceptional situations when it is essential to locate such above ground 
utility facilities within the established clear zone of the highway, 
appropriate countermeasures to reduce hazards shall be used. 
Countermeasures include placing utility facilities at locations which 
protect or minimize exposure to out-of-control vehicles, using breakaway 
features, using impact attenuation devices, using delineation, or 
shielding.
    (c) Installations within freeways. (1) Each State transportation 
department shall submit an accommodation plan in accordance with 
Sec. Sec. 645.211 and 645.215 which addresses how the State 
transportation department will consider applications for longitudinal 
utility installations within the access control lines of a freeway. This 
includes utility installations within interchange areas which must be 
constructed or serviced by direct access from the main lanes or ramps. 
If a State transportation department elects to permit such use, the plan 
must address how the State transportation department will oversee such 
use consistent with this subpart, Title 23 U.S.C., and the safe and 
efficient use of the highways.
    (2) Any accommodation plan shall assure that installations satisfy 
the following criteria:
    (i) The effects utility installations will have on highway and 
traffic safety will be ascertained, since in no case shall any use be 
permitted which would adversely affect safety.
    (ii) The direct and indirect environmental and economic effects of 
any loss of productive agricultural land or any productivity of any 
agricultural land which would result from the disapproval of the use of 
such right-of-way for accommodation of such utility facility will be 
evaluated.
    (iii) These environmental and economic effects together with any 
interference with or impairment of the use of the highway in such right-
of-way which would result from the use of such right-of-way for the 
accommodation of such utility facility will be considered.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) A utility strip will be established along the outer edge of the 
right-of-way by locating a utility access control line between the 
proposed utility installation and the through roadway and ramps. 
Existing fences should be retained and, except along sections of 
freeways having frontage roads, planned fences should be located at the 
freeway right-of-way line. The State or political subdivision is to 
retain control of the utility strip right-of-way including its use by 
utility facilities. Service connections to adjacent properties shall not 
be permitted from within the utility strip.
    (3) Nothing in this part shall be construed as prohibiting a 
transportation department from adopting a more restrictive policy than 
that contained herein with regard to longitudinal utility installations 
along freeway right-of-way and access for constructing and/or for 
servicing such installations.
    (d) Uniform policies and procedures. For a transportation department 
to fulfill its responsibilities to control utility use of Federal-aid 
highway right-of-way within the State and its political subdivisions, it 
must exercise or cause to be exercised, adequate regulation over such 
use and occupancy through the establishment and enforcement of 
reasonably uniform policies and procedures for utility accommodation.

[[Page 214]]

    (e) Private lines. Because there are circumstances when private 
lines may be allowed to cross or otherwise occupy the right-of-way of 
Federal-aid projects, transportation departments shall establish uniform 
policies for properly controlling such permitted use. When permitted, 
private lines must conform to the provisions of this part and the 
provisions of 23 CFR 1.23(c) for longitudinal installations.
    (f) Direct Federal highway projects. On direct Federal highway 
projects, the FHWA will apply, or cause to be applied, utility and 
private line accommodation policies similar to those required on 
Federal-aid highway projects. When appropriate, agreements will be 
entered into between the FHWA and the transportation department or other 
government agencies to ensure adequate control and regulation of use by 
utilities and private lines of the right-of-way on direct Federal 
highway projects.
    (g) Projects where state lacks authority. On Federal-aid highway 
projects where the State transportation department does not have legal 
authority to regulate highway use by utilities and private lines, the 
State transportation department must enter into formal agreements with 
those local officials who have such authority. The agreements must 
provide for a degree of protection to the highway at least equal to the 
protection provided by the State transportation department's utility 
accommodation policy approved under the provisions of Sec. 645.215(b) 
of this part. The project agreement between the State transportation 
department and the FHWA on all such Federal-aid highway projects shall 
contain a special provision incorporating the formal agreements with the 
responsible local officials.
    (h) Scenic areas. New utility installations, including those needed 
for highway purposes, such as for highway lighting or to serve a weigh 
station, rest area or recreation area, are not permitted on highway 
right-of-way or other lands which are acquired or improved with Federal-
aid or direct Federal highway funds and are located within or adjacent 
to areas of scenic enhancement and natural beauty. Such areas include 
public park and recreational lands, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, 
historic sites as described in 23 U.S.C. 138, scenic strips, overlooks, 
rest areas and landscaped areas. The State transportation department may 
permit exceptions provided the following conditions are met:
    (1) New underground or aerial installations may be permitted only 
when they do not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or 
terrain features visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic 
quality of the lands being traversed.
    (2) Aerial installations may be permitted only when:
    (i) Other locations are not available or are unusually difficult and 
costly, or are less desirable from the standpoint of aesthetic quality,
    (ii) Placement underground is not technically feasible or is 
unreasonably costly, and
    (iii) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will 
employ suitable designs and materials, which give the greatest weight to 
the aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed. Suitable designs 
include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole 
construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
    (3) For new utility installations within freeways, the provisions of 
paragraph (c) of this section must also be satisfied.
    (i) Joint use agreements. When the utility has a compensable 
interest in the land occupied by its facilities and such land is to be 
jointly occupied and used for highway and utility purposes, the 
transportation department and utility shall agree in writing as to the 
obligations and responsibilities of each party. Such joint-use 
agreements shall incorporate the conditions of occupancy for each party, 
including the rights vested in the transportation department and the 
rights and privileges retained by the utility. In any event, the 
interest to be acquired by or vested in the transportation department in 
any portion of the right-of-way of a Federal-aid or direct Federal 
highway project to be vacated, used or occupied by utilities or private 
lines, shall be

[[Page 215]]

adequate for the construction, safe operation, and maintenance of the 
highway project.
    (j) Traffic control plan. Whenever a utility installation, 
adjustment or maintenance activity will affect the movement of traffic 
or traffic safety, the utility shall implement a traffic control plan 
and utilize traffic control devices as necessary to ensure the safe and 
expeditious movement of traffic around the work site and the safety of 
the utility work force in accordance with procedures established by the 
transportation department. The traffic control plan and the application 
of traffic control devices shall conform to the standards set forth in 
the current edition of the ``Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices'' 
(MUTCD) and 23 CFR part 630, subpart J. This publication is available 
for inspection and copying from the FHWA Washington Headquarters and all 
FHWA Division Offices as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7.
    (k) Corrective measures. When the transportation department 
determines that existing utility facilities are likely to be associated 
with injury or accident to the highway user, as indicated by accident 
history or safety studies, the transportation department shall initiate 
or cause to be initiated in consultation with the affected utilities, 
corrective measures to provide for a safer traffic environment. The 
corrective measures may include changes to utility or highway facilities 
and should be prioritized to maximum safety benefits in the most cost-
effective manner. The scheduling of utility safety improvements should 
take into consideration planned utility replacement or upgrading 
schedules, accident potential, and the availability of resources. It is 
expected that the requirements of this paragraph will result in an 
orderly and positive process to address the identified utility hazard 
problems in a timely and reasonable manner with due regard to the effect 
of the corrective measures on both the utility consumer and the road 
user. The type of corrective measures are not prescribed. Any requests 
received involving Federal participation in the cost of adjusting or 
relocating utility facilities pursuant to this paragrpah shall be 
subject to the provisions of 23 CFR part 645, subpart A, Utility 
Relocations, Adjustments and Reimbursement, and 23 CFR part 924, Highway 
Safety Improvement Program.
    (l) Wetlands. The installation of privately owned lines or conduits 
on the right-of-way of Federal-aid or direct Federal highway projects 
for the purpose of draining adjacent wetlands onto the highway right-of-
way is considered to be inconsistent with Executive Order 11990, 
Protection of Wetlands, dated May 24, 1977, and shall be prohibited.
    (m) Utility determination. In determining whether a proposed 
installation is a utility or not, the most important consideration is 
how the STD views it under its own State laws and/or regulations.

[50 FR 20354, May 15, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 2833, Feb. 2, 1988; 60 
FR 34851, July 5, 1995; 65 FR 70311, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 645.211  State transportation department accommodation policies.

    The FHWA should use the current editions of the AASHTO publications, 
``A Guide for Accommodating Utilities Within Highway Right-of-Way'' and 
``Roadside Design Guide'' to assist in the evaluation of adequacy of STD 
utility accommodation policies. These publications are available for 
inspection from the FHWA Washington Headquarters and all FHWA Division 
Offices as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7. Copies of current AASHTO 
publications are available for purchase from the American Association of 
State Highway and Transportation Officials, Suite 225, 444 North Capitol 
Street NW., Washington, DC 20001, or electronically at http://
www.aashto.org. At a minimum, such policies shall make adequate 
provisions with respect to the following:
    (a) Utilities must be accommodated and maintained in a manner which 
will not impair the highway or adversely affect highway or traffic 
safety. Uniform procedures controlling the manner, nature and extent of 
such utility use shall be established.
    (b) Consideration shall be given to the effect of utility 
installations in regard to safety, aesthetic quality, and the costs or 
difficulty of highway and utility construction and maintenance.

[[Page 216]]

    (c) The State transportation department's standards for regulating 
the use and occupancy of highway right-of-way by utilities must include, 
but are not limited to, the following:
    (1) The horizontal and vertical location requirements and clearances 
for the various types of utilities must be clearly stated. These must be 
adequate to ensure compliance with the clear roadside policies for the 
particular highway involved.
    (2) The applicable provisions of government or industry codes 
required by law or regulation must be set forth or appropriately 
referenced, including highway design standards or other measures which 
the State transportation department deems necessary to provide adequate 
protection to the highway, its safe operation, aesthetic quality, and 
maintenance.
    (3) Specifications for and methods of installation; requirements for 
preservation and restoration of highway facilities, appurtenances, and 
natural features and vegetation on the right-of-way; and limitations on 
the utility's activities within the right-of-way including installation 
within areas set forth by Sec. 645.209(h) of this part should be 
prescribed as necessary to protect highway interests.
    (4) Measures necessary to protect traffic and its safe operation 
during and after installation of facilities, including control-of-access 
restrictions, provisions for rerouting or detouring traffic, traffic 
control measures to be employed, procedures for utility traffic control 
plans, limitations on vehicle parking and materials storage, protection 
of open excavations, and the like must be provided.
    (5) A State transportation department may deny a utility's request 
to occupy highway right-of-way based on State law, regulation, or 
ordinances or the State transportation department's policy. However, in 
any case where the provisions of this part are to be cited as the basis 
for disapproving a utility's request to use and occupy highway right-of-
way, measures must be provided to evaluate the direct and indirect 
environmental and economic effects of any loss of productive 
agricultural land or any impairment of the productivity of any 
agricultural land that would result from the disapproval. The 
environmental and economic effects on productive agricultural land 
together with the possible interference with or impairment of the use of 
the highway and the effect on highway safety must be considered in the 
decision to disapprove any proposal by a utility to use such highway 
right-of-way.
    (d) Compliance with applicable State laws and approved State 
transportation department utility accommodation policies must be 
assured. The responsible State transportation department's file must 
contain evidence of the written arrangements which set forth the terms 
under which utility facilities are to cross or otherwise occupy highway 
right-of-way. All utility installations made on highway right-of-way 
shall be subject to written approval by the State transportation 
department. However, such approval will not be required where so 
provided in the use and occupancy agreement for such matters as utility 
facility maintenance, installation of service connections on highways 
other than freeways, or emergency operations.
    (e) The State transportation department shall set forth in its 
utility accommodation plan detailed procedures, criteria, and standards 
it will use to evaluate and approve individual applications of utilities 
on freeways under the provisions of Sec. 645.209(c) of this part. The 
State transportation department also may develop such procedures, 
criteria and standards by class of utility. In defining utility classes, 
consideration may be given to distinguishing utility services by type, 
nature or function and their potential impact on the highway and its 
user.
    (f) The means and authority for enforcing the control of access 
restrictions applicable to utility use of controlled access highway 
facilities should be clearly set forth in the State transportation 
department plan.

(Information collection requirements in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) were 
approved under control number 2125-0522, and paragraph (d) under control 
number 2125-0514)

[50 FR 20354, May 15, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 2834, Feb. 2, 1988; 55 
FR 25828, June 25, 1990; 65 FR 70312, Nov. 22, 2000]

[[Page 217]]


<R05>
Sec. 645.213  Use and occupancy agreements (permits).

    The written arrangements, generally in the form of use and occupancy 
agreements setting forth the terms under which the utility is to cross 
or otherwise occupy the highway right-of-way, must include or 
incorporate by reference:
    (a) The transportation department standards for accommodating 
utilities. Since all of the standards will not be applicable to each 
individual utility installation, the use and occupancy agreement must, 
as a minimum, describe the requirements for location, construction, 
protection of traffic, maintenance, access restriction, and any special 
conditions applicable to each installation.
    (b) A general description of the size, type, nature, and extent of 
the utility facilities being located within the highway right-of-way.
    (c) Adequate drawings or sketches showing the existing and/or 
proposed location of the utility facilities within the highway right-of-
way with respect to the existing and/or planned highway improvements, 
the traveled way, the right-of-way lines and, where applicable, the 
control of access lines and approved access points.
    (d) The extent of liability and responsibilities associated with 
future adjustment of the utilities to accommodate highway improvements.
    (e) The action to be taken in case of noncompliance with the 
transportation department's requirements.
    (f) Other provisions as deemed necessary to comply with laws and 
regulations.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2125-0522)


<R05>
Sec. 645.215  Approvals.

    (a) Each State transportation department shall submit a statement to 
the FHWA on the authority of utilities to use and occupy the right-of-
way of State highways, the State transportation department's power to 
regulate such use, and the policies the State transportation department 
employs or proposes to employ for accommodating utilities within the 
right-of-way Federal-aid highways under its jurisdiction. Statements 
previously submitted and approved by the FHWA need not be resubmitted 
provided the statement adequately addresses the requirements of this 
part. When revisions are deemed necessary the changes to the previously 
approved statement may be submitted separately to the FHWA for approval. 
The State transportation department shall include similar information on 
the use and occupancy of such highways by private lines where permitted. 
The State shall identify those areas, if any, of Federal-aid highways 
within its borders where the State transportation department is without 
legal authority to regulate use by utilities. The statement shall 
address the nature of the formal agreements with local officials 
required by Sec. 645.209(g) of this part. It is expected that the 
statements required by this part or necessary revisions to previously 
submitted and approved statements will be submitted to FHWA within 1 
year of the effective date of this regulation.
    (b) Upon determination by the FHWA that a State transportation 
department's policies satisfy the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 109, 111, and 
116, and 23 CFR 1.23 and 1.27, and meet the requirements of this 
regulation, the FHWA will approve their use on Federal-aid highway 
projects in that State
    (c) Any changes, additions or deletions the State transportation 
department proposes to the approved policies are subject to FHWA 
approval.
    (d) When a utility files a notice or makes an individual application 
or request to a STD to use or occupy the right-of-way of a Federal-aid 
highway project, the STD is not required to submit the matter to the 
FHWA for prior concurrence, except when the proposed installation is not 
in accordance with this regulation or with the STD's utility 
accommodation policy approved by the FHWA for use on Federal-aid highway 
projects.
    (e) The State transportation department's practices under the 
policies or agreements approved under Sec. 645.215(b)

[[Page 218]]

of this part shall be periodically reviewed by the FHWA.

(Information collection requirements in paragraph (a) were approved by 
the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2125-0514)

[50 FR 20354, May 15, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 2834, Feb. 2, 1988; 60 
FR 34851, July 5, 1995; 65 FR 70312, Nov. 22, 2000]


<R03>
PART 646_RAILROADS--Table of Contents




             Subpart A_Railroad-Highway Insurance Protection

Sec.
646.101 Purpose.
646.103 Application.
646.105 Contractor's public liability and property damage insurance.
646.107 Railroad protective insurance.
646.109 Types of coverage.
646.111 Amount of coverage.

                   Subpart B_Railroad-Highway Projects

646.200 Purpose and applicability.
646.202 [Reserved]
646.204 Definitions.
646.206 Types of projects.
646.208 Funding.
646.210 Classification of projects and railroad share of the cost.
646.212 Federal share.
646.214 Design.
646.216 General procedures.
646.218 Simplified procedure for accelerating grade crossing 
          improvements.
646.220 Alternate Federal-State procedure.

Appendix to Subpart B--Horizontal and Vertical Clearance Provisions for 
          Overpass and Underpass Structures

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 109(e), 120(c), 130, 133(d)(1), and 315; 49 CFR 
1.48(b).


<R04>
             Subpart A_Railroad-Highway Insurance Protection

    Source: 39 FR 36474, Oct. 10, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 646.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe provisions under which 
Federal funds may be applied to the costs of public liability and 
property damage insurance obtained by contractors (a) for their own 
operations, and (b) on behalf of railroads on or about whose right-of-
way the contractors are required to work in the construction of highway 
projects financed in whole or in part with Federal funds.


<R05>
Sec. 646.103  Application.

    (a) This part applies:
    (1) To a contractors' legal liability for bodily injury to, or death 
of, persons and for injury to, or destruction of, property.
    (2) To the liability which may attach to railroads for bodily injury 
to, or death of, persons and for injury to, or destruction of, property.
    (3) To damage to property owned by or in the care, custody or 
control of the railroads, both as such liability or damage may arise out 
of the contractor's operations, or may result from work performed by 
railroads at or about railroad rights-of-way in connection with projects 
financed in whole or in part with Federal funds.
    (b) Where the highway construction is under the direct supervision 
of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), all references herein to 
the State shall be considered as references to the FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 646.105  Contractor's public liability and property damage insurance.

    (a) Contractors may be subject to liability with respect to bodily 
injury to or death of persons, and injury to, or destruction of 
property, which may be suffered by persons other than their own 
employees as a result of their operations in connection with 
construction of highway projects located in whole or in part within 
railroad right-of-way and financed in whole or in part with Federal 
funds. Protection to cover such liability of contractors shall be 
furnished under regular contractors' public liability and property 
damage insurance policies issued in the names of the contractors. Such 
policies shall be so written as to furnish protection to contractors 
respecting their operations in performing work covered by their 
contract.
    (b) Where a contractor sublets a part of the work on any project to 
a subcontractor, the contractor shall be required to secure insurance 
protection in his own behalf under contractor's public liability and 
property damage insurance policies to cover any liability imposed on him 
by law for damages

[[Page 219]]

because of bodily injury to, or death of, persons and injury to, or 
destruction of, property as a result of work undertaken by such 
subcontractors. In addition, the contractor shall provide for and on 
behalf of any such subcontractors protection to cover like liability 
imposed upon the latter as a result of their operations by means of 
separate and individual contractor's public liability and property 
damage policies; or, in the alternative, each subcontractor shall 
provide satisfactory insurance on his own behalf to cover his individual 
operations.
    (c) The contractor shall furnish to the State highway department 
evidence satisfactory to such department and to the FHWA that the 
insurance coverages required herein have been provided. The contractor 
shall also furnish a copy of such evidence to the railroad or railroads 
involved. The insurance specified shall be kept in force until all work 
required to be performed shall have been satisfactorily completed and 
accepted in accordance with the contract under which the construction 
work is undertaken.


<R05>
Sec. 646.107  Railroad protective insurance.

    In connection with highway projects for the elimination of hazards 
of railroad-highway crossings and other highway construction projects 
located in whole or in part within railroad right-of-way, railroad 
protective liability insurance shall be purchased on behalf of the 
railroad by the contractor. The standards for railroad protective 
insurance established by Sec. Sec. 646.109 through 646.111 shall be 
adhered to insofar as the insurance laws of the State will permit.

[39 FR 36474, Oct. 10, 1974, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 646.109  Types of coverage.

    (a) Coverage shall be limited to damage suffered by the railroad on 
account of occurrences arising out of the work of the contractor on or 
about the railroad right-of-way, independent of the railroad's general 
supervision or control, except as noted in Sec. 646.109(b) (4).
    (b) Coverage shall include:
    (1) Death of or bodily injury to passengers of the railroad and 
employees of the railroad not covered by State workmen's compensation 
laws;
    (2) Personal property owned by or in the care, custody or control of 
the railroads;
    (3) The contractor, or any of his agents or employees who suffer 
bodily injury or death as the result of acts of the railroad or its 
agents, regardless of the negligence of the railroad;
    (4) Negligence of only the following classes of railroad employees:
    (i) Any supervisory employee of the railroad at the job site;
    (ii) Any employee of the railroad while operating, attached to, or 
engaged on, work trains or other railroad equipment at the job site 
which are assigned exclusively to the contractor; or
    (iii) Any employee of the railroad not within (b)(4) (i) or (ii) who 
is specifically loaned or assigned to the work of the contractor for 
prevention of accidents or protection of property, the cost of whose 
services is borne specifically by the contractor or governmental 
authority.


<R05>
Sec. 646.111  Amount of coverage.

    (a) The maximum dollar amounts of coverage to be reimbursed from 
Federal funds with respect to bodily injury, death and property damage 
is limited to a combined amount of $2 million per occurrence with an 
aggregate of $6 million applying separately to each annual period except 
as provided in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) In cases involving real and demonstrable danger of appreciably 
higher risks, higher dollar amounts of coverage for which premiums will 
be reimbursable from Federal funds shall be allowed. These larger 
amounts will depend on circumstances and shall be written for the 
individual project in accordance with standard underwriting practices 
upon approval of the FHWA.

[39 FR 36474, Oct. 10, 1974, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982]


<R04>
                   Subpart B_Railroad-Highway Projects

    Source: 40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 220]]


<R05>
Sec. 646.200  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe policies and 
procedures for advancing Federal-aid projects involving railroad 
facilities.
    (b) This subpart, and all references hereinafter made to projects, 
applies to Federal-aid projects involving railroad facilities, including 
projects for the elimination of hazards of railroad-highway crossings, 
and other projects which use railroad properties or which involve 
adjustments required by highway construction to either railroad 
facilities or facilities that are jointly owned or used by railroad and 
utility companies.
    (c) Additional instructions for projects involving the elimination 
of hazards of railroad/highway grade crossings pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 130 
are set forth in 23 CFR part 924.
    (d) Procedures on reimbursement for projects undertaken pursuant to 
this subpart are set forth in 23 CFR part 140, subpart I.
    (e) Procedures on insurance required of contractors working on or 
about railroad right-of-way are set forth in 23 CFR part 646, subpart A.

[40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 20795, Mar. 31, 1980; 62 
FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 646.202  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 646.204  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply:
    Active warning devices means those traffic control devices activated 
by the approach or presence of a train, such as flashing light signals, 
automatic gates and similar devices, as well as manually operated 
devices and crossing watchmen, all of which display to motorists 
positive warning of the approach or presence of a train.
    Company shall mean any railroad or utility company including any 
wholly owned or controlled subsidiary thereof.
    Construction shall mean the actual physical construction to improve 
or eliminate a railroad-highway grade crossing or accomplish other 
railroad involved work.
    A diagnostic team means a group of knowledgeable representatives of 
the parties of interest in a railroad-highway crossing or a group of 
crossings.
    Main line railroad track means a track of a principal line of a 
railroad, including extensions through yards, upon which trains are 
operated by timetable or train order or both, or the use of which is 
governed by block signals or by centralized traffic control.
    Passive warning devices means those types of traffic control 
devices, including signs, markings and other devices, located at or in 
advance of grade crossings to indicate the presence of a crossing but 
which do not change aspect upon the approach or presence of a train.
    Preliminary engineering shall mean the work necessary to produce 
construction plans, specifications, and estimates to the degree of 
completeness required for undertaking construction thereunder, including 
locating, surveying, designing, and related work.
    Railroad shall mean all rail carriers, publicly-owned, private, and 
common carriers, including line haul freight and passenger railroads, 
switching and terminal railroads and passenger carrying railroads such 
as rapid transit, commuter and street railroads.
    Utility shall mean the lines and facilities for producing, 
transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, 
heat, gas, oil, water, steam, sewer and similar commodities.

[40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 62 FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 646.206  Types of projects.

    (a) Projects for the elimination of hazards, to both vehicles and 
pedestrians, of railroad-highway crossings may include but are not 
limited to:
    (1) Grade crossing elimination;
    (2) Reconstruction of existing grade separations; and
    (3) Grade crossing improvements.
    (b) Other railroad-highway projects are those which use railroad 
properties or involve adjustments to railroad facilities required by 
highway construction but do not involve the elimination of hazards of 
railroad-highway crossings. Also included are adjustments to facilities 
that are jointly owned or used by railroad and utility companies.

[[Page 221]]


<R05>
Sec. 646.208  Funding.

    (a) Railroad/highway crossing projects may be funded through the 
Federal-aid funding source appropriate for the involved project.
    (b) Projects for the elimination of hazards at railroad/highway 
crossings may, at the option of the State, be funded with the funds 
provided by 23 U.S.C. 133(d)(1).

[62 FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 646.210  Classification of projects and railroad share of the cost.

    (a) State laws requiring railroads to share in the cost of work for 
the elimination of hazards at railroad-highway crossings shall not apply 
to Federal-aid projects.
    (b) Pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 130(b), and 49 CFR 1.48:
    (1) Projects for grade crossing improvements are deemed to be of no 
ascertainable net benefit to the railroads and there shall be no 
required railroad share of the costs.
    (2) Projects for the reconstruction of existing grade separations 
are deemed to generally be of no ascertainable net benefit to the 
railroad and there shall be no required railroad share of the costs, 
unless the railroad has a specific contractual obligation with the State 
or its political subdivision to share in the costs.
    (3) On projects for the elimination of existing grade crossings at 
which active warning devices are in place or ordered to be installed by 
a State regulatory agency, the railroad share of the project costs shall 
be 5 percent.
    (4) On projects for the elimination of existing grade crossings at 
which active warning devices are not in place and have not been ordered 
installed by a State regulatory agency, or on projects which do not 
eliminate an existing crossing, there shall be no required railroad 
share of the project cost.
    (c) The required railroad share of the cost under Sec. 646.210(b) 
(3) shall be based on the costs for preliminary engineering, right-of-
way and construction within the limits described below:
    (1) Where a grade crossing is eliminated by grade separation, the 
structure and approaches required to transition to a theoretical highway 
profile which would have been constructed if there were no railroad 
present, for the number of lanes on the existing highway and in 
accordance with the current design standards of the State highway 
agency.
    (2) Where another facility, such as a highway or waterway, requiring 
a bridge structure is located within the limits of a grade separation 
project, the estimated cost of a theoretical structure and approaches as 
described in Sec. 646.210(c) (1) to eliminate the railroad-highway 
grade crossing without considering the presence of the waterway or other 
highway.
    (3) Where a grade crossing is eliminated by railroad or highway 
relocation, the actual cost of the relocation project, the estimated 
cost of the relocation project, or the estimated cost of a structure and 
approaches as described in Sec. 646.210(c)(1), whichever is less.
    (d) Railroads may voluntarily contribute a greater share of project 
costs than is required. Also, other parties may voluntarily assume the 
railroad's share.


<R05>
Sec. 646.212  Federal share.

    (a) General. (1) Federal funds are not eligible to participate in 
costs incurred solely for the benefit of the railroad.
    (2) At grade separations Federal funds are eligible to participate 
in costs to provide space for more tracks than are in place when the 
railroad establishes to the satisfaction of the State highway agency and 
FHWA that it has a definite demand and plans for installation of the 
additional tracks within a reasonable time.
    (3) The Federal share of the cost of a grade separation project 
shall be based on the cost to provide horizontal and/or vertical 
clearances used by the railroad in its normal practice subject to 
limitations as shown in the appendix or as required by a State 
regulatory agency.
    (b) The Federal share of railroad/highway crossing projects may be:
    (1) Regular pro rata sharing as provided by 23 U.S.C. 120(a) and 
120(b).
    (2) One hundred percent Federal share, as provided by 23 U.S.C. 
120(c).

[[Page 222]]

    (3) Ninety percent Federal share for funds made available through 23 
U.S.C. 133(d)(1).

[40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982; 53 
FR 32218, Aug. 24, 1988; 62 FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 646.214  Design.

    (a) General. (1) Facilities that are the responsibility of the 
railroad for maintenance and operation shall conform to the 
specifications and design standards used by the railroad in its normal 
practice, subject to approval by the State highway agency and FHWA.
    (2) Facilities that are the responsibility of the highway agency for 
maintenance and operation shall conform to the specifications and design 
standards and guides used by the highway agency in its normal practice 
for Federal-aid projects.
    (b) Grade crossing improvements. (1) All traffic control devices 
proposed shall comply with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform 
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways supplemented to the 
extent applicable by State standards.
    (2) Pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 109(e), where a railroad-highway grade 
crossing is located within the limits of or near the terminus of a 
Federal-aid highway project for construction of a new highway or 
improvement of the existing roadway, the crossing shall not be opened 
for unrestricted use by traffic or the project accepted by FHWA until 
adequate warning devices for the crossing are installed and functioning 
properly.
    (3)(i) Adequate warning devices, under Sec. 646.214(b) (2) or on 
any proj ect where Federal-aid funds participate in the installation of 
the devices are to include automatic gates with flashing light signals 
when one or more of the following conditions exist:
    (A) Multiple main line railroad tracks.
    (B) Multiple tracks at or in the vicinity of the crossing which may 
be occupied by a train or locomotive so as to obscure the movement of 
another train approaching the crossing.
    (C) High Speed train operation combined with limited sight distance 
at either single or multiple track crossings.
    (D) A combination of high speeds and moderately high volumes of 
highway and railroad traffic.
    (E) Either a high volume of vehicular traffic, high number of train 
movements, substantial numbers of schoolbuses or trucks carrying 
hazardous materials, unusually restricted sight distance, continuing 
accident occurrences, or any combination of these conditions.
    (F) A diagnostic team recommends them.
    (ii) In individual cases where a diagnostic team justifies that 
gates are not appropriate, FHWA may find that the above requirements are 
not applicable.
    (4) For crossings where the requirements of Sec. 646.214(b) (3) are 
not applicable, the type of warning device to be installed, whether the 
determination is made by a State regulatory agency, State highway 
agency, and/or the railroad, is subject to the approval of FHWA.
    (c) Grade crossing elimination. All crossings of railroads and 
highways at grade shall be eliminated where there is full control of 
access on the highway (a freeway) regardless of the volume of railroad 
or highway traffic.

[40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 47 FR 33955, Aug. 5, 1982; 62 
FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 646.216  General procedures.

    (a) General. Unless specifically modified herein, applicable 
Federal-aid procedures govern projects undertaken pursuant to this 
subpart.
    (b) Preliminary engineering and engineering services. (1) As 
mutually agreed to by the State highway agency and railroad, and subject 
to the provisions of Sec. 646.216(b) (2), preliminary engineering work 
on railroad-highway projects may be accomplished by one of the following 
methods:
    (i) The State or railroad's engineering forces;
    (ii) An engineering consultant selected by the State after 
consultation with the railroad, and with the State administering the 
contract; or
    (iii) An engineering consultant selected by the railroad, with the 
approval of the State and with the railroad administering the contract.

[[Page 223]]

    (2) Where a railroad is not adequately staffed, Federal-aid funds 
may participate in the amounts paid to engineering consultants and 
others for required services, provided such amounts are not based on a 
percentage of the cost of construction, either under contracts for 
individual projects or under existing written continuing contracts where 
such work is regularly performed for the railroad in its own work under 
such contracts at reasonable costs.
    (c) Rights-of-way. (1) Acquisition of right-of-way by a State 
highway agency on behalf of a railroad or acquisition of nonoperating 
real property from a railroad shall be in accordance with the Uniform 
Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 
(42 U.S.C. 4601 et seq.) and applicable FHWA right-of-way procedures in 
23 CFR, chapter I, subchapter H. On projects for the elimination of 
hazards of railroad-highway crossings by the relocation of railroads, 
acquisition or replacement right-of-way by a railroad shall be in 
accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4601 et seq.
    (2) Where buildings and other depreciable structures of the railroad 
(such as signal towers, passenger stations, depots, and other buildings, 
and equipment housings) which are integral to operation of railroad 
traffic are wholly or partly affected by a highway project, the costs of 
work necessary to functionally restore such facilities are eligible for 
participation. However, when replacement of such facilities is 
necessary, credits shall be made to the cost of the project for:
    (i) Accrued depreciation, which is that amount based on the ratio 
between the period of actual length of service and total life expectancy 
applied to the original cost.
    (ii) Additions or improvements which provide higher quality or 
increased service capability of the facility and which are provided 
solely for the benefit of the railroad.
    (iii) Actual salvage value of the material recovered from the 
facility being replaced. Total credits to a project shall not be 
required in excess of the replacement cost of the facility.
    (3) Where Federal funds participate in the cost of replacement 
right-of-way, there will be no charge to the project for the railroad's 
existing right-of-way being transferred to the State highway agency 
except when the value of the right-of-way being taken exceeds the value 
of the replacement right-of-way.
    (d) State-railroad agreements. (1) Where construction of a Federal-
aid project requires use of railroad properties or adjustments to 
railroad facilities, there shall be an agreement in writing between the 
State highway agency and the railroad company.
    (2) The written agreement between the State and the railroad shall, 
as a minimum include the following, where applicable:
    (i) The provisions of this subpart and of 23 CFR part 140, subpart 
I, incorporated by reference.
    (ii) A detailed statement of the work to be performed by each party.
    (iii) Method of payment (either actual cost or lump sum),
    (iv) For projects which are not for the elimination of hazards of 
railroad-highway crossings, the extent to which the railroad is 
obligated to move or adjust its facilities at its own expense,
    (v) The railroad's share of the project cost,
    (vi) An itemized estimate of the cost of the work to be performed by 
the railroad,
    (vii) Method to be used for performing the work, either by railroad 
forces or by contract,
    (viii) Maintenance responsibility,
    (ix) Form, duration, and amounts of any needed insurance,
    (x) Appropriate reference to or identification of plans and 
specifications,
    (xi) Statements defining the conditions under which the railroad 
will provide or require protective services during performance of the 
work, the type of protective services and the method of reimbursement to 
the railroad, and
    (xii) Provisions regarding inspection of any recovered materials.
    (3) On work to be performed by the railroad with its own forces and 
where the State highway agency and railroad agree, subject to approval 
by FHWA, an agreement providing for a lump sum payment in lieu of later 
determination of actual costs may be used for any of the following:

[[Page 224]]

    (i) Installation or improvement of grade crossing warning devices 
and/or grade crossing surfaces, regardless of cost, or
    (ii) Any other eligible work where the estimated cost to the State 
of the proposed railroad work does not exceed $100,000 or
    (iii) Where FHWA finds that the circumstances are such that this 
method of developing costs would be in the best interest of the public.
    (4) Where the lump sum method of payment is used, periodic reviews 
and analyses of the railroad's methods and cost data used to develop 
lump sum estimates will be made.
    (5) Master agreements between a State and a railroad on an areawide 
or statewide basis may be used. These agreements would contain the 
specifications, regulations, and provisions required in conjunction with 
work performed on all projects. Supporting data for each project or 
group of projects must, when combined with the master agreement by 
reference, satisfy the provisions of Sec. 646.216(d)(2).
    (6) Official orders issued by regulatory agencies will be accepted 
in lieu of State-railroad agreements only where, together with 
supplementary written understandings between the State and the railroad, 
they include the items required by Sec. 646.216(d) (2).
    (7) In extraordinary cases where FHWA finds that the circumstances 
are such that requiring such agreement or order would not be in the best 
interest of the public, projects may be approved for construction with 
the aid of Federal funds, provided satisfactory commitments have been 
made with respect to construction, maintenance and the railroad share of 
project costs.
    (e) Authorizations. (1) The costs of preliminary engineering, right-
of-way acquisition, and construction incurred after the date each phase 
of the work is included in an approved statewide transportation 
improvement program and authorized by the FHWA are eligible for Federal-
aid participation. Preliminary engineering and right-of-way acquisition 
costs which are otherwise eligible, but incurred by a railroad prior to 
authorization by the FHWA, although not reimbursable, may be included as 
part of the railroad share of project cost where such a share is 
required.
    (2) Prior to issuance of authorization by FHWA either to advertise 
the physical construction for bids or to proceed with force account 
construction for railroad work or for other construction affected by 
railroad work, the following must be accomplished:
    (i) The plans, specifications and estimates must be approved by 
FHWA.
    (ii) A proposed agreement between the State and railroad must be 
found satisfactory by FHWA. Before Federal funds may be used to 
reimburse the State for railroad costs the executed agreement must be 
approved by FHWA. However, cost for materials stockpiled at the project 
site or specifically purchased and delivered to the company for use on 
the project may be reimbursed on progress billings prior to the approval 
of the executed State-Railroad Agreement in accordance with 23 CFR 
140.922(a) and Sec. 646.218 of this part.
    (iii) Adequate provisions must be made for any needed easements, 
right-of-way, temporary crossings for construction purposes or other 
property interests.
    (iv) The pertinent portions of the State-railroad agreement 
applicable to any protective services required during performance of the 
work must be included in the project specifications and special 
provisions for any construction contract.
    (3) In unusual cases, pending compliance with Sec. 646.216(e) (2) 
(ii), (iii) and (iv), authorization may be given by FHWA to advertise 
for bids for highway construction under conditions where a railroad 
grants a right-of-entry to its property as necessary to prosecute the 
physical construction.
    (f) Construction. (1) Construction may be accomplished by:
    (i) Railroad force account,
    (ii) Contracting with the lowest qualified bidder based on 
appropriate solicitation,
    (iii) Existing continuing contracts at reasonable costs, or
    (iv) Contract without competitive bidding, for minor work, at 
reasonable costs.
    (2) Reimbursement will not be made for any increased costs due to 
changes in plans:

[[Page 225]]

    (i) For the convenience of the contractor, or
    (ii) Not approved by the State and FHWA.
    (3) The State and FHWA shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to 
inspect materials recovered by the railroad prior to disposal by sale or 
scrap. This requirement will be satisfied by the railroad giving written 
notice, or oral notice with prompt written confirmation, to the State of 
the time and place where the materials will be available for inspection. 
The giving of notice is the responsibility of the railroad, and it may 
be held accountable for full value of materials disposed of without 
notice.
    (4) In addition to normal construction costs, the following 
construction costs are eligible for participation with Federal-aid funds 
when approved by the State and FHWA:
    (i) The cost of maintaining temporary facilities of a railroad 
company required by and during the highway construction to the extent 
that such costs exceed the documented normal cost of maintaining the 
permanent facilities.
    (ii) The cost of stage or extended construction involving grade 
corrections and/or slope stabilization for permanent tracks of a 
railroad which are required to be relocated on new grade by the highway 
construction. Stage or extended construction will be approved by FHWA 
only when documentation submitted by the State establishes the proposed 
method of construction to be the only practical method and that the cost 
of the extended construction within the period specified is estimated to 
be less than the cost of any practicable alternate procedure.
    (iii) The cost of restoring the company's service by adustments of 
existing facilities away from the project site, in lieu of and not to 
exceed the cost of replacing, adjusting or relocating facilities at the 
project site.
    (iv) The cost of an addition or improvement to an existing railroad 
facility which is required by the highway construction.

[40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975, as amended at 40 FR 29712, July 15, 1975; 47 
FR 33956, Aug. 5, 1982; 62 FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 646.218  Simplified procedure for accelerating grade crossing 
improvements.

    (a) The procedure set forth in this section is encouraged for use in 
simplifying and accelerating the processing of single or multiple grade 
crossing improvements.
    (b) Eligible preliminary engineering costs may include those 
incurred in selecting crossings to be improved, determining the type of 
improvement for each crossing, estimating the cost and preparing the 
required agreement.
    (c) The written agreement between a State and a railroad shall 
contain as a minimum:
    (1) Identification of each crossing location.
    (2) Description of improvement and estimate of cost for each 
crossing location.
    (3) Estimated schedule for completion of work at each location.
    (d) Following programming, authorization and approval of the 
agreement under Sec. 646.218(c), FHWA may authorize construction, 
including acquisition of warning device materials, with the condition 
that work at any particular location will not be undertaken until the 
proposed or executed State-railroad agreement under Sec. 646.216(d) (2) 
is found satisfactory by FHWA and the final plans, specifications, and 
estimates are approved and with the condition that only material 
actually incorporated into the project will be eligible for Federal 
participation.
    (e) Work programmed and authorized under this simplified procedure 
should include only that which can reasonably be expected to reach the 
construction stage within one year and be completed within two years 
after the initial authorization date.


<R05>
Sec. 646.220  Alternate Federal-State procedure.

    (a) On other than Interstate projects, an alternate procedure may be 
used, at the election of the State, for processing certain types of 
railroad-highway work. Under this procedure, the State highway agency 
will act in the relative position of FHWA for reviewing and approving 
projects.

[[Page 226]]

    (b) The scope of the State's approval authority under the alternate 
procedure includes all actions necessary to advance and complete the 
following types of railroad-highway work:
    (1) All types of grade crossing improvements under Sec. 646.206(a) 
(3).
    (2) Minor adjustments to railroad facilities under Sec. 646.206(b).
    (c) The following types of work are to be reviewed and approved in 
the normal manner, as prescribed elsewhere in this subpart.
    (1) All projects under Sec. 646.206(a) (1) and (2).
    (2) Major adjustments to railroad facilities under Sec. 646.206(b).
    (d) Any State wishing to adopt the alternate procedure may file a 
formal application for approval by FHWA. The application must include 
the following:
    (1) The State's written policies and procedures for administering 
and processing Federal-aid railroad-highway work, which make adequate 
provisions with respect to all of the following:
    (i) Compliance with the provisions of title 23 U.S.C., title 23 CFR, 
and other applicable Federal laws and Executive Orders.
    (ii) Compliance with this subpart and 23 CFR part 140, subpart I and 
23 CFR part 172.
    (iii) For grade crossing safety improvements, compliance with the 
requirements of 23 CFR part 924.
    (2) A statement signed by the Chief Administrative Officer of the 
State highway agency certifying that:
    (i) The work will be done in accordance with the applicable 
provisions of the State's policies and procedures submitted under Sec. 
646.220(d)(1), and
    (ii) Reimbursement will be requested in only those costs properly 
attributable to the highway construction and eligible for Federal fund 
participation.
    (e) When FHWA has approved the alternate procedure, it may authorize 
the State to proceed in accordance with the State's certification, 
subject to the following conditions:
    (1) The work has been programmed.
    (2) The State submits in writing a request for such authorization 
which shall include a list of the improvements or adjustments to be 
processed under the alternate procedure, along with the best available 
estimate of cost.
    (f) The FHWA Regional Administrator may suspend approval of the 
certified procedure, where FHWA reviews disclose noncompliance with the 
certification. Federal-aid funds will not be eligible to participate in 
costs that do not qualify under Sec. 646.220(d)(1).

[40 FR 16059, Apr. 9, 1975; 40 FR 29712, July 15, 1975; 40 FR 31211, 
July 25, 1975; 42 FR 30835, June 17, 1977, as amended at 45 FR 20795, 
Mar. 31, 1980]

  Appendix to Subpart B of Part 646--Horizontal and Vertical Clearance 
            Provisions for Overpass and Underpass Structures

    The following implements provisions of 23 CFR 646.212(a)(3).
a. Lateral Geometrics
    A cross section with a horizontal distance of 6.1 meters, measured 
at right angles from the centerline of track at the top of rails, to the 
face of the embankment slope, may be approved. The 6.1-meters distance 
may be increased at individual structure locations as appropriate to 
provide for drainage if justified by a hydraulic analysis or to allow 
adequate room to accommodate special conditions, such as where heavy and 
drifting snow is a problem. The railroad must demonstrate that this is 
its normal practice to address these special conditions in the manner 
proposed. Additionally, this distance may also be increased up to 2.5 
meters as may be necessary for off-track maintenance equipment, provided 
adequate horizontal clearance is not available in adjacent spans and 
where justified by the presence of an existing maintenance road or by 
evidence of future need for such equipment. All piers should be placed 
at least 2.8 meters horizontally from the centerline of the track and 
preferably beyond the drainage ditch. For multiple track facilities, all 
dimensions apply to the centerline of the outside track.
    Any increase above the 6.1-meters horizontal clearance distance must 
be required by specific site conditions and be justified by the railroad 
to the satisfaction of the State highway agency (SHA) and the FHWA.
b. Vertical Clearance
    A vertical clearance of 7.1 meters above the top of rails, which 
includes an allowance for future ballasting of the railroad tracks, may 
be approved. Vertical clearance greater than 7.1 meters may be approved 
when the State regulatory agency having jurisdiction over such matters 
requires a vertical clearance in excess of 7.1 meters or on a site by 
site basis where justified by the railroad to the satisfaction of the 
SHA and the FHWA. A railroad's justification for increased vertical

[[Page 227]]

clearance should be based on an analysis of engineering, operational 
and/or economic conditions at a specific structure location.
    Federal-aid highway funds are also eligible to participate in the 
cost of providing vertical clearance greater than 7.1 meters where a 
railroad establishes to the satisfaction of a SHA and the FHWA that it 
has a definite formal plan for electrification of its rail system where 
the proposed grade separation project is located. The plan must cover a 
logical independent segment of the rail system and be approved by the 
railroad's corporate headquarters. For 25 kv line, a vertical clearance 
of 7.4 meters may be approved. For 50 kv line, a vertical clearance of 
8.0 meters may be approved.
    A railroad's justification to support its plan for electrification 
shall include maps and plans or drawings showing those lines to be 
electrified; actions taken by its corporate headquarters committing it 
to electrification including a proposed schedule; and actions initiated 
or completed to date implementing its electrification plan such as a 
showing of the amounts of funds and identification of structures, if 
any, where the railroad has expended its own funds to provide added 
clearance for the proposed electrification. If available, the railroad's 
justification should include information on its contemplated treatment 
of existing grade separations along the section of its rail system 
proposed for electrification.
    The cost of reconstructing or modifying any existing railroad-
highway grade separation structures solely to accommodate 
electrification will not be eligible for Federal-aid highway fund 
participation.
c. Railroad Structure Width
    Two and eight tenths meters of structure width outside of the 
centerline of the outside tracks may be approved for a structure 
carrying railroad tracks. Greater structure width may be approved when 
in accordance with standards established and used by the affected 
railroad in its normal practice.
    In order to maintain continuity of off-track equipment roadways at 
structures carrying tracks over limited access highways, consideration 
should be given at the preliminary design stage to the feasibility of 
using public road crossings for this purpose. Where not feasible, an 
additional structure width of 2.5 meters may be approved if designed for 
off-track equipment only.

[53 FR 32218, Aug. 24, 1988, as amended at 62 FR 45328, Aug. 27, 1997]


<R03>
PART 650_BRIDGES, STRUCTURES, AND HYDRAULICS--Table of Contents




Subpart A_Location and Hydraulic Design of Encroachments on Flood Plains

Sec.
650.101 Purpose.
650.103 Policy.
650.105 Definitions.
650.107 Applicability.
650.109 Public involvement.
650.111 Location hydraulic studies.
650.113 Only practicable alternative finding.
650.115 Design standards.
650.117 Content of design studies.

 Subpart B_Erosion and Sediment Control on Highway Construction Projects

650.201 Purpose.
650.203 Policy.
650.205 Definitions.
650.207 Plans, specifications, and estimates.
650.209 Construction.
650.211 Guidelines.

             Subpart C_National Bridge Inspection Standards

650.301 Application of standards.
650.303 Inspection procedures.
650.305 Frequency of inspections.
650.307 Qualifications of personnel.
650.309 Inspection report.
650.311 Inventory.

     Subpart D_Highway Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program

650.401 Purpose.
650.403 Definition of terms.
650.405 Eligible projects.
650.407 Application for bridge replacement or rehabilitation.
650.409 Evaluation of bridge inventory.
650.411 Procedures for bridge replacement and rehabilitation projects.
650.413 Funding.
650.415 Reports.

Subparts E-F [Reserved]

         Subpart G_Discretionary Bridge Candidate Rating Factor

650.701 Purpose.
650.703 Eligible projects.
650.705 Application for discretionary bridge funds.
650.707 Rating factor.
650.709 Special considerations.

              Subpart H_Navigational Clearances for Bridges

650.801 Purpose.

[[Page 228]]

650.803 Policy.
650.805 Bridges not requiring a USCG permit.
650.807 Bridges requiring a USCG permit.
650.809 Movable span bridges.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 109(a) and (h), 144, 151, 315, and 319; 33 
U.S.C. 401, 491 et seq.; 511 et seq.; sec. 4(b) of Pub. L. 97-134, 95 
Stat. 1699 (1981); sec. 161 of Pub. L. 97-424, 96 Stat. 2097, at 3135 
(1983); sec. 1311 of Pub. L. 105-178, as added by Pub. L. 105-206, 112 
Stat. 842 (1998); 23 CFR 1.32; 49 CFR 1.48(b); E.O. 11988 (3 CFR, 1977 
Comp., p. 117); Department of Transportation Order 5650.2, dated April 
23, 1979 (44 FR 24678).


<R04>
Subpart A_Location and Hydraulic Design of Encroachments on Flood Plains

    Source: 44 FR 67580, Nov. 26, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 650.101  Purpose.

    To prescribe Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) policies and 
procedures for the location and hydraulic design of highway 
encroachments on flood plains, including direct Federal highway projects 
administered by the FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 650.103  Policy.

    It is the policy of the FHWA:
    (a) To encourage a broad and unified effort to prevent uneconomic, 
hazardous or incompatible use and development of the Nation's flood 
plains,
    (b) To avoid longitudinal encroachments, where practicable,
    (c) To avoid significant encroachments, where practicable,
    (d) To minimize impacts of highway agency actions which adversely 
affect base flood plains,
    (e) To restore and preserve the natural and beneficial flood-plain 
values that are adversely impacted by highway agency actions,
    (f) To avoid support of incompatible flood-plain development,
    (g) To be consistent with the intent of the Standards and Criteria 
of the National Flood Insurance Program, where appropriate, and
    (h) To incorporate ``A Unified National Program for Floodplain 
Management'' of the Water Resources Council into FHWA procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 650.105  Definitions.

    (a) Action shall mean any highway construction, reconstruction, 
rehabilitation, repair, or improvement undertaken with Federal or 
Federal-aid highway funds or FHWA approval.
    (b) Base flood shall mean the flood or tide having a 1-percent 
chance of being exceeded in any given year.
    (c) Base flood plain shall mean the area subject to flooding by the 
base flood.
    (d) Design Flood shall mean the peak discharge, volume if 
appropriate, stage or wave crest elevation of the flood associated with 
the probability of exceedance selected for the design of a highway 
encroachment. By definition, the highway will not be inundated from the 
stage of the design flood.
    (e) Encroachment shall mean an action within the limits of the base 
flood plain.
    (f) Floodproof shall mean to design and construct individual 
buildings, facilities, and their sites to protect against structural 
failure, to keep water out or to reduce the effects of water entry.
    (g) Freeboard shall mean the vertical clearance of the lowest 
structural member of the bridge superstructure above the water surface 
elevation of the overtopping flood.
    (h) Minimize shall mean to reduce to the smallest practicable amount 
or degree.
    (i) Natural and beneficial flood-plain values shall include but are 
not limited to fish, wildlife, plants, open space, natural beauty, 
scientific study, outdoor recreation, agriculture, aquaculture, 
forestry, natural moderation of floods, water quality maintenance, and 
groundwater recharge.
    (j) Overtopping flood shall mean the flood described by the 
probability of exceedance and water surface elevation at which flow 
occurs over the highway, over the watershed divide, or through 
structure(s) provided for emergency relief.
    (k) Practicable shall mean capable of being done within reasonable 
natural, social, or economic constraints.
    (l) Preserve shall mean to avoid modification to the functions of 
the natural flood-plain environment or to maintain

[[Page 229]]

it as closely as practicable in its natural state.
    (m) Regulatory floodway shall mean the flood-plain area that is 
reserved in an open manner by Federal, State or local requirements, 
i.e., unconfined or unobstructed either horizontally or vertically, to 
provide for the discharge of the base flood so that the cumulative 
increase in water surface elevation is no more than a designated amount 
(not to exceed 1 foot as established by the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA) for administering the National Flood Insurance Program).
    (n) Restore shall mean to reestablish a setting or environment in 
which the functions of the natural and beneficial flood-plain values 
adversely impacted by the highway agency action can again operate.
    (o) Risk shall mean the consequences associated with the probability 
of flooding attributable to an encroachment. It shall include the 
potential for property loss and hazard to life during the service life 
of the highway.
    (p) Risk analysis shall mean an economic comparison of design 
alternatives using expected total costs (construction costs plus risk 
costs) to determine the alternative with the least total expected cost 
to the public. It shall include probable flood-related costs during the 
service life of the facility for highway operation, maintenance, and 
repair, for highway-aggravated flood damage to other property, and for 
additional or interrupted highway travel.
    (q) Significant encroachment shall mean a highway encroachment and 
any direct support of likely base flood-plain development that would 
involve one or more of the following construction-or flood-related 
impacts:
    (1) A significant potential for interruption or termination of a 
transportation facility which is needed for emergency vehicles or 
provides a community's only evacuation route.
    (2) A significant risk, or
    (3) A significant adverse impact on natural and beneficial flood-
plain values.
    (r) Support base flood-plain development shall mean to encourage, 
allow, serve, or otherwise facilitate additional base flood-plain 
development. Direct support results from an encroachment, while indirect 
support results from an action out of the base flood plain.


<R05>
Sec. 650.107  Applicability.

    (a) The provisions of this regulation shall apply to all 
encroachments and to all actions which affect base flood plains, except 
for repairs made with emergency funds (23 CFR part 668) during or 
immediately following a disaster.
    (b) The provisions of this regulation shall not apply to or alter 
approvals or authorizations which were given by FHWA pursuant to 
regulations or directives in effect before the effective date of this 
regulation.


<R05>
Sec. 650.109  Public involvement.

    Procedures which have been established to meet the public 
involvement requirements of 23 CFR part 771 shall be used to provide 
opportunity for early public review and comment on alternatives which 
contain encroachments.

[53 FR 11065, Apr. 5, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 650.111  Location hydraulic studies.

    (a) National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) maps or information 
developed by the highway agency, if NFIP maps are not available, shall 
be used to determine whether a highway location alternative will include 
an encroachment.
    (b) Location studies shall include evaluation and discussion of the 
practicability of alternatives to any longitudinal encroachments.
    (c) Location studies shall include discussion of the following 
items, commensurate with the significance of the risk or environmental 
impact, for all alternatives containing encroachments and for those 
actions which would support base flood-plain development:
    (1) The risks associated with implementation of the action,
    (2) The impacts on natural and beneficial flood-plain values,
    (3) The support of probable incompatible flood-plain development,

[[Page 230]]

    (4) The measures to minimize flood-plain impacts associated with the 
action, and
    (5) The measures to restore and preserve the natural and beneficial 
flood-plain values impacted by the action.
    (d) Location studies shall include evaluation and discussion of the 
practicability of alternatives to any significant encroachments or any 
support of incompatible flood-plain development.
    (e) The studies required by Sec. 650.111 (c) and (d) shall be 
summarized in environmental review documents prepared pursuant to 23 CFR 
part 771.
    (f) Local, State, and Federal water resources and flood-plain 
management agencies should be consulted to determine if the proposed 
highway action is consistent with existing watershed and flood-plain 
management programs and to obtain current information on development and 
proposed actions in the affected watersheds.


<R05>
Sec. 650.113  Only practicable alternative finding.

    (a) A proposed action which includes a significant encroachment 
shall not be approved unless the FHWA finds that the proposed 
significant encroachment is the only practicable alternative. This 
finding shall be included in the final environmental document (final 
environmental impact statement or finding of no significant impact) and 
shall be supported by the following information:
    (1) The reasons why the proposed action must be located in the flood 
plain,
    (2) The alternatives considered and why they were not practicable, 
and
    (3) A statement indicating whether the action conforms to applicable 
State or local flood-plain protection standards.
    (b) [Reserved]

[44 FR 67580, Nov. 26, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 29274, June 24, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 650.115  Design standards.

    (a) The design selected for an encroachment shall be supported by 
analyses of design alternatives with consideration given to capital 
costs and risks, and to other economic, engineering, social and 
environmental concerns.
    (1) Consideration of capital costs and risks shall include, as 
appropriate, a risk analysis or assessment which includes:
    (i) The overtopping flood or the base flood, whichever is greater, 
or
    (ii) The greatest flood which must flow through the highway drainage 
structure(s), where overtopping is not practicable. The greatest flood 
used in the analysis is subject to state-of-the-art capability to 
estimate the exceed ance probability.
    (2) The design flood for encroachments by through lanes of 
Interstate highways shall not be less than the flood with a 2-percent 
chance of being exceeded in any given year. No minimum design flood is 
specified for Interstate highway ramps and frontage roads or for other 
highways.
    (3) Freeboard shall be provided, where practicable, to protect 
bridge structures from debris- and scour-related failure.
    (4) The effect of existing flood control channels, levees, and 
reservoirs shall be considered in estimating the peak discharge and 
stage for all floods considered in the design.
    (5) The design of encroachments shall be consistent with standards 
established by the FEMA, State, and local governmental agencies for the 
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program for:
    (i) All direct Federal highway actions, unless the standards are 
demonstrably inappropriate, and
    (ii) Federal-aid highway actions where a regulatory floodway has 
been designated or where studies are underway to establish a regulatory 
floodway.
    (b) Rest area buildings and related water supply and waste treatment 
facilities shall be located outside the base flood plain, where 
practicable. Rest area buildings which are located on the base flood 
plain shall be floodproofed against damage from the base flood.
    (c) Where highway fills are to be used as dams to permanently 
impound water more than 50 acre-feet (6.17x10\4\ cubic metres) in volume 
or 25 feet (7.6 metres) deep, the hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural 
design of the fill and appurtenant spillways shall have the

[[Page 231]]

approval of the State or Federal agency responsible for the safety of 
dams or like structures within the State, prior to authorization by the 
Division Administrator to advertise for bids for construction.


<R05>
Sec. 650.117  Content of design studies.

    (a) The detail of studies shall be commensurate with the risk 
associated with the encroachment and with other economic, engineering, 
social or environmental concerns.
    (b) Studies by highway agencies shall contain:
    (1) The hydrologic and hydraulic data and design computations,
    (2) The analysis required by Sec. 650.115(a), and
    (3) For proposed direct Federal highway actions, the reasons, when 
applicable, why FEMA criteria (44 CFR 60.3, formerly 24 CFR 1910.3) are 
demonstrably inappropriate.
    (c) For encroachment locations, proj ect plans shall show:
    (1) The magnitude, approximate probability of exceedance and, at 
appropriate locations, the water surface elevations associated with the 
overtopping flood or the flood of Sec. 650.115(a)(1)(ii), and
    (2) The magnitude and water surface elevation of the base flood, if 
larger than the overtopping flood.


<R04>
 Subpart B_Erosion and Sediment Control on Highway Construction Projects

    Source: 59 FR 37939, July 26, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 650.201  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to prescribe policies and procedures 
for the control of erosion, abatement of water pollution, and prevention 
of damage by sediment deposition from all construction projects funded 
under title 23, United States Code.


<R05>
Sec. 650.203  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) that 
all highways funded in whole or in part under title 23, United States 
Code, shall be located, designed, constructed and operated according to 
standards that will minimize erosion and sediment damage to the highway 
and adjacent properties and abate pollution of surface and ground water 
resources. Guidance for the development of standards used to minimize 
erosion and sediment damage is referenced in Sec. 650.211 of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 650.205  Definitions.

    Erosion control measures and practices are actions that are taken to 
inhibit the dislodging and transporting of soil particles by water or 
wind, including actions that limit the area of exposed soil and minimize 
the time the soil is exposed.
    Permanent erosion and sediment control measures and practices are 
installations and design features of a construction project which remain 
in place and in service after completion of the project.
    Pollutants are substances, including sediment, which cause 
deterioration of water quality when added to surface or ground waters in 
sufficient quantity.
    Sediment control measures and practices are actions taken to control 
the deposition of sediments resulting from surface runoff.
    Temporary erosion and sediment control measures and practices are 
actions taken on an interim basis during construction to minimize the 
disturbance, transportation, and unwanted deposition of sediment.


<R05>
Sec. 650.207  Plans, specifications and estimates.

    (a) Emphasis shall be placed on erosion control in the preparation 
of plans, specifications and estimates.
    (b) All reasonable steps shall be taken to insure that highway 
project designs for the control of erosion and sedimentation and the 
protection of water quality comply with applicable standards and 
regulations of other agencies.

[39 FR 36332, Oct. 9, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 650.209  Construction.

    (a) Permanent erosion and sediment control measures and practices 
shall be established and implemented at the earliest practicable time 
consistent with good construction and management practices.

[[Page 232]]

    (b) Implementation of temporary erosion and sediment control 
measures and practices shall be coordinated with permanent measures to 
assure economical, effective, and continuous control throughout 
construction.
    (c) Erosion and sediment control measures and practices shall be 
monitored and maintained or revised to insure that they are fulfilling 
their intended function during the construction of the project.
    (d) Federal-aid funds shall not be used in erosion and sediment 
control actions made necessary because of contractor oversight, 
carelessness, or failure to implement sufficient control measures.
    (e) Pollutants used during highway construction or operation and 
material from sediment traps shall not be stockpiled or disposed of in a 
manner which makes them susceptible to being washed into any watercourse 
by runoff or high water. No pollutants shall be deposited or disposed of 
in watercourses.


<R05>
Sec. 650.211  Guidelines.

    (a) The FHWA adopts the AASHTO Highway Drainage Guidelines, Volume 
III, ``Erosion and Sediment Control in Highway Construction,'' 1992,\1\ 
as guidelines to be followed on all construction projects funded under 
title 23, United States Code. These guidelines are not intended to 
preempt any requirements made by or under State law if such requirements 
are more stringent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ This document is available for inspection from the FHWA 
headquarters and field offices as prescribed by 49 CFR part 7, appendix 
D. It may be purchased from the American Association of State Highway 
and Transportation Officials offices at Suite 225, 444 North Capitol 
Street, NW., Washington, DC 20001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Each State highway agency should apply the guidelines referenced 
in paragraph (a) of this section or apply its own guidelines, if these 
guidelines are more stringent, to develop standards and practices for 
the control of erosion and sediment on Federal-aid construction 
projects. These specific standards and practices may reference available 
resources, such as the procedures presented in the AASHTO ``Model 
Drainage Manual,'' 1991.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ This document is available for inspection from the FHWA 
headquarters and field offices as prescribed by 49 CFR part 7, appendix 
D. It may be purchased from the American Association of State Highway 
and Transportation Officials offices at Suite 225, 444 North Capitol 
Street, NW., Washington, DC 20001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Consistent with the requirements of section 6217(g) of the 
Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-508, 
104 Stat. 1388-299), highway construction projects funded under title 
23, United States Code, and located in the coastal zone management areas 
of States with coastal zone management programs approved by the United 
States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, should utilize ``Guidance Specifying Management Measures 
for Sources of Nonpoint Source Pollution in Coastal Waters,'' 84-B-92-
002, U.S. EPA, January 1993.\3\ State highway agencies should refer to 
this Environmental Protection Agency guidance document for the design of 
projects within coastal zone management areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ This document is available for inspection and copying as 
prescribed by 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R04>
             Subpart C_National Bridge Inspection Standards


<R05>
Sec. 650.301  Application of standards.

    The National Bridge Inspection Standards in this part apply to all 
structures defined as bridges located on all public roads. In acordance 
with the AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials) Transportation Glossary, a bridge is defined 
as a structure including supports erected over a depression or an 
obstruction, such as water, highway, or railway, and having a track or 
passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads, and having an 
opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than 20 feet 
between undercopings of abutments or spring lines of arches, or extreme 
ends of openings for multiple boxes; it may also include multiple pipes, 
where the clear distance between openings is less

[[Page 233]]

than half of the smaller contiguous opening.

[44 FR 25435, May 1, 1979, as amended at 51 FR 16834, May 7, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 650.303  Inspection procedures.

    (a) Each highway department shall include a bridge inspection 
organization capable of performing inspections, preparing reports, and 
determining ratings in acordance with the provisions of the AASHTO 
Manual \1\ and the Standards contained herein.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The AASHTO Manual referred to in this part is the Manual for 
Maintenance Inspection of Bridges 1983 together with subsequent interim 
changes or the most recent version of the AASHTO Manual published by the 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. A 
copy of the Manual may be examined during normal business hours at the 
office of each Division Administrator of the Federal Highway 
Administration, at the office of each Regional Federal Highway 
Administrator, and at the Washington Headquarters of the Federal Highway 
Administration. The addresses of those document insepction facilities 
are set forth in appendix D to part 7 of the regulations of the Office 
of the Secretary (49 CFR part 7). In addition, a copy of the Manual may 
be secured upon payment in advance by writing to the American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, 444 N. 
Capitol Street, NW., Suite 225, Washington, DC 20001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Bridge inspectors shall meet the minimum qualifications stated 
in Sec. 650.307.
    (c) Each structure required to be inspected under the Standards 
shall be rated as to its safe load carrying capacity in accordance with 
section 4 of the AASHTO Manual. If it is determined under this rating 
procedure that the maximum legal load under State law exceeds the load 
permitted under the Operating Rating, the bridge must be posted in 
conformity with the AASHTO Manual or in accordance with State law.
    (d) Inspection records and bridge inventories shall be prepared and 
maintained in accordance with the Standards.
    (e) The individual in charge of the organizational unit that has 
been delegated the responsibilities for bridge inspection, reporting and 
inventory shall determine and designate on the individual inspection and 
inventory records and maintain a master list of the following:
    (1) Those bridges which contain fracture critical members, the 
location and description of such members on the bridge and the 
inspection frequency and procedures for inspection of such members. 
(Fracture critical members are tension members of a bridge whose failure 
will probably cause a portion of or the entire bridge to collapse.)
    (2) Those bridges with underwater members which cannot be visually 
evaluated during periods of low flow or examined by feel for condition, 
integrity and safe load capacity due to excessive water depth or 
turbidity. These members shall be described, the inspection frequency 
stated, not to exceed five years, and the inspection procedure 
specified.
    (3) Those bridges which contain unique or special features requiring 
additional attention during inspection to ensure the safety of such 
bridges and the inspection frequency and procedure for inspection of 
each such feature.
    (4) The date of last inspection of the features designated in 
paragraphs (e)(1) through (3) of this section and a description of the 
findings and follow-up actions, if necessary, resulting from the most 
recent inspection of fracture critical details, underwater members or 
special features of each so designated bridge.

[36 FR 7851, Apr. 27, 1971. Redesignated at 39 FR 10430, Mar. 20, 1974, 
as amended at 44 FR 25435, May 1, 1979; 53 FR 32616, Aug. 26, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 650.305  Frequency of inspections.

    (a) Each bridge is to be inspected at regular intervals not to 
exceed 2 years in accordance with section 2.3 of the AASHTO Manual.
    (b) Certain types or groups of bridges will require inspection at 
less than 2-year intervals. The depth and frequency to which bridges are 
to be inspected will depend on such factors as age, traffic 
characteristics, state of maintenance, and known deficiencies. The 
evaluation of these factors will be the responsibility of the individual 
in charge of the inspection program.
    (c) The maximum inspection interval may be increased for certain 
types or groups of bridges where past inspection reports and favorable 
experience and

[[Page 234]]

analysis justify the increased interval of inspection. If a State 
proposes to inspect some bridges at greater than the specified two-year 
interval, the State shall submit a detailed proposal and supporting data 
to the Federal Highway Administrator for approval. The maximum time 
period between inspections shall not exceed four years.

[36 FR 7851, Apr. 27, 1971. Redesignated at 39 FR 10430, Mar. 20, 1974, 
as amended at 39 FR 29590, Aug. 16, 1974; 53 FR 32616, Aug. 26, 1988; 57 
FR 53281, Nov. 9, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 650.307  Qualifications of personnel.

    (a) The individual in charge of the organizational unit that has 
been delegated the responsibilities for bridge inspection, reporting, 
and inventory shall possess the following minimum qualifications:
    (1) Be a registered professional engineer; or
    (2) Be qualified for registration as a professional engineer under 
the laws of the State; or
    (3) Have a minimum of 10 years experience in bridge inspection 
assignments in a responsible capacity and have completed a comprehensive 
training course based on the ``Bridge Inspector's Training Manual,'' \2\ 
which has been developed by a joint Federal-State task force, and 
subsequent additions to the manual.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The ``Bridge Inspector's Training Manual'' may be purchased from 
the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC 20402.
    \3\ The following publications are supplements to the ``Bridge 
Inspector's Training Manual'': ``Bridge Inspector's Manual for Movable 
Bridges.'' 1977, GPO Stock No. 050-002-00103-5; ``Culvert Inspector's 
Training Manual,'' July 1986, GPO Stock No. 050-001-0030-7; and 
``Inspection of Fracture Critical Bridge Members,'' 1986, GPO Stock No. 
050-001-00302-3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) An individual in charge of a bridge inspection team shall 
possess the following minimum qualifications:
    (1) Have the qualifications specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section; or
    (2) Have a minimum of 5 years experience in bridge inspection 
assignments in a responsible capacity and have completed a comprehensive 
training course based on the ``Bridge Inspector's Training Manual,'' 
which has been developed by a joint Federal-State task force.
    (3) Current certification as a Level III or IV Bridge Safety 
Inspector under the National Society of Professional Engineer's program 
for National Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET) \4\ is an 
alternate acceptable means for establishing that a bridge inspection 
team leader is qualified.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ For information on NICET program certification contact: National 
Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies, 1420 King 
Street, Alexandria, Virginia 22314, Attention: John D. Antrim, P.E., 
Phone (703) 684-2835.

[36 FR 7851, Apr. 27, 1971. Redesignated at 39 FR 10430, Mar. 20, 1974, 
as amended at 44 FR 25435, May 1, 1979; 53 FR 32616, Aug. 26, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 650.309  Inspection report.

    The findings and results of bridge inspections shall be recorded on 
standard forms. The data required to complete the forms and the 
functions which must be performed to compile the data are contained in 
section 3 of the AASHTO Manual.

[39 FR 29590, Aug. 16, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 650.311  Inventory.

    (a) Each State shall prepare and maintain an inventory of all bridge 
structures subject to the Standards. Under these Standards, certain 
structure inventory and appraisal data must be collected and retained 
within the various departments of the State organization for collection 
by the Federal Highway Administration as needed. A tabulation of this 
data is contained in the structure inventory and appraisal sheet 
distributed by the Federal Highway Administration as part of the 
Recording and Coding Guide for the Structure Inventory and Appraisal of 
the Nation's Bridges (Coding Guide) in January of 1979. Reporting 
procedures have been developed by the Federal Highway Administration.
    (b) Newly completed structures, modification of existing structures 
which would alter previously recorded data on the inventory forms or 
placement of load restriction signs on the approaches to or at the 
structure itself

[[Page 235]]

shall be entered in the State's inspection reports and the computer 
inventory file as promptly as practical, but no later than 90 days after 
the change in the status of the structure for bridges directly under the 
State's jurisdiction and no later than 180 days after the change in 
status of the structure for all other bridges on public roads within the 
State.

[44 FR 25435, May 1, 1979, as amended at 53 FR 32617, Aug. 26, 1988]


<R04>
     Subpart D_Highway Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program

    Source: 44 FR 15665, Mar. 15, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 650.401  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe policies and outline 
procedures for administering the Highway Bridge Replacement and 
Rehabilitation Program in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 144.


<R05>
Sec. 650.403  Definition of terms.

    As used in this regulation:
    (a) Bridge. A structure, including supports, erected over a 
depression or an obstruction, such as water, a highway, or a railway, 
having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads, 
and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more 
than 20 feet between undercopings of abutments or spring lines of 
arches, or extreme ends of the openings for multiple boxes; it may 
include multiple pipes where the clear distance between openings is less 
than half of the smaller contiguous opening.
    (b) Sufficiency rating. The numerical rating of a bridge based on 
its structural adequacy and safety, essentiality for public use, and its 
serviceability and functional obsolescence.
    (c) Rehabilitation. The major work required to restore the 
structural integrity of a bridge as well as work necessary to correct 
major safety defects.


<R05>
Sec. 650.405  Eligible projects.

    (a) General. Deficient highway bridges on all public roads may be 
eligible for replacement or rehabilitation.
    (b) Types of projects which are eligible. The following types of 
work are eligible for participation in the Highway Bridge Replacement 
and Rehabilitation Program (HBRRP), hereinafter known as the bridge 
program.
    (1) Replacement. Total replacement of a structurally deficient or 
functionally obsolete bridge with a new facility constructed in the same 
general traffic corridor. A nominal amount of approach work, sufficient 
to connect the new facility to the existing roadway or to return the 
gradeline to an attainable touchdown point in accordance with good 
design practice is also eligible. The replacement structure must meet 
the current geometric, construction and structural standards required 
for the types and volume of projected traffic on the facility over its 
design life.
    (2) Rehabilitation. The project requirements necessary to perform 
the major work required to restore the structural integrity of a bridge 
as well as work necessary to correct major safety defects are eligible 
except as noted under ineligible work. Bridges to be rehabilitated both 
on or off the F-A System shall, as a minimum, conform with the 
provisions of 23 CFR part 625, Design Standards for Federal-aid 
Highways, for the class of highway on which the bridge is a part.
    (c) Ineligible work. Except as otherwise prescribed by the 
Administrator, the costs of long approach fills, causeways, connecting 
roadways, interchanges, ramps, and other extensive earth structures, 
when constructed beyond the attainable touchdown point, are not eligible 
under the bridge program.


<R05>
Sec. 650.407  Application for bridge replacement or rehabilitation.

    (a) Agencies participate in the bridge program by conducting bridge 
inspections and submitting Structure Inventory and Appraisal (SI&A) 
sheet inspection data. Federal and local governments supply SI&A sheet 
data to the State agency for review and processing. The State is 
responsible for submitting the six computer card format or tapes 
containing all public road SI&A sheet bridge information through

[[Page 236]]

the Division Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 
for processing. These requirements are prescribed in 23 CFR 650.309 and 
650.311, the National Bridge Inspection Standards.
    (b) Inventory data may be submitted as available and shall be 
submitted at such additional times as the FHWA may request.
    (c) Inventory data on bridges that have been strengthened or 
repaired to eliminate deficiencies, or those that have been replaced or 
rehabilitated using bridge replacement and/or other funds, must be 
revised in the inventory through data submission.
    (d) The Secretary may, at the request of a State, inventory bridges, 
on and off the Federal-aid system, for historic significance.

[44 FR 15665, Mar. 15, 1979, as amended at 44 FR 72112, Dec. 13, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 650.409  Evaluation of bridge inventory.

    (a) Sufficiency rating of bridges. Upon receipt and evaluation of 
the bridge inventory, a sufficiency rating will be assigned to each 
bridge by the Secretary in accordance with the approved AASHTO \1\ 
sufficiency rating formula. The sufficiency rating will be used as a 
basis for establishing eligibility and priority for replacement or 
rehabilitation of bridges; in general the lower the rating, the higher 
the priority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ American Association of State Highway and Transporation 
Officials, Suite 225, 444 North Capitol Street, NW, Washington, DC 
20001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Selection of bridges for inclusion in State program. After 
evaluation of the inventory and assignment of sufficiency ratings, the 
Secretary will provide the State with a selection list of bridges within 
the State that are eligible for the bridge program. From that list or 
from previously furnished selection lists, the State may select bridge 
projects.


<R05>
Sec. 650.411  Procedures for bridge replacement and rehabilitation projects.

    (a) Consideration shall be given to projects which will remove from 
service highway bridges most in danger of failure.
    (b) Submission and approval of projects. (1) Bridge replacement or 
rehabilitation projects shall be submitted by the State to the Secretary 
in accordance with 23 CFR part 630, subpart A Federal-Aid Programs, 
Approval and Authorization.
    (2) Funds apportioned to a State shall be made available throughout 
each State on a fair and equitable basis.
    (c)(1) Each approved project will be designed, constructed, and 
inspected for acceptance in the same manner as other projects on the 
system on which the project is located. It shall be the responsibility 
of the State agency to properly maintain, or cause to be properly 
maintained, any project constructed under this bridge program. The State 
highway agency shall enter into a formal agreement for maintenance with 
appropriate local government officials in cases where an eligible 
project is located within and is under the legal authority of such a 
local government.
    (2) Whenever a deficient bridge is replaced or its deficiency 
alleviated by a new bridge under the bridge program, the deficient 
bridge shall either be dismantled or demolished or its use limited to 
the type and volume of traffic the structure can safely service over its 
remaining life. For example, if the only deficiency of the existing 
structure is inadequate roadway width and the combination of the new and 
existing structure can be made to meet current standards for the volume 
of traffic the facility will carry over its design life, the existing 
bridge may remain in place and be incorporated into the system.

[44 FR 15665, Mar. 15, 1979, as amended at 44 FR 72112, Dec. 13, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 650.413  Funding.

    (a) Funds authorized for carrying out the Highway Bridge Replacement 
and Rehabilitation Program are available for obligation at the beginning 
of the fiscal year for which authorized and remain available for 
expenditure for the same period as funds apportioned for projects on the 
Federal-aid primary system.

[[Page 237]]

    (b) The Federal share payable on account of any project carried out 
under 23 U.S.C. 144 shall be 80 percent of the eligible cost.
    (c) Not less than 15 percent nor more than 35 percent of the 
apportioned funds shall be expended for projects located on public 
roads, other than those on a Federal-aid system. The Secretary after 
consultation with State and local officials may, with respect to a 
State, reduce the requirement for expenditure for bridges not on a 
Federal-aid system when he determines that such State has inadequate 
needs to justify such expenditure.


<R05>
Sec. 650.415  Reports.

    The Secretary must report annually to the Congress on projects 
approved and current inventories together with recommendations for 
further improvements.

Subparts E-F [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart G_Discretionary Bridge Candidate Rating Factor

    Source: 48 FR 52296, Nov. 17, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 650.701  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to describe a rating factor used 
as part of a selection process of allocation of discretionary bridge 
funds made available to the Secretary of Transportation under 23 U.S.C. 
144.


<R05>
Sec. 650.703  Eligible projects.

    (a) Deficient highway bridges on Federal-aid highway system roads 
may be eligible for allocation of discretionary bridge funds to the same 
extent as they are for bridge funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 144, 
provided that the total project cost for a discretionary bridge 
candidate is at least $10 million or twice the amont of 23 U.S.C. 144 
funds apportioned to the State during the fiscal year for which funding 
for the candidate bridge is requested.
    (b) After November 14, 2002 only candidate bridges not previously 
selected with a computed rating factor of 100 or less and ready to begin 
construction in the fiscal year in which funds are available for 
obligation will be eligible for consideration.
    (c) Projects from States that have transferred Highway Bridge 
Replacement and Rehabilitation funds to other funding categories will 
not be eligible for funding the following fiscal year.

[48 FR 52296, Nov. 17, 1983, as amended at 67 FR 63542, Oct. 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 650.705  Application for discretionary bridge funds.

    Each year through its field offices, the FHWA will issue an annual 
call for discretionary bridge candidate submittals including updates of 
previously submitted but not selected projects. Each State is 
responsible for submitting such data as required for candidate bridges. 
Data requested will include structure number, funds needed by fiscal 
year, total project cost, current average daily truck traffic and a 
narrative describing the existing bridge, the proposed new or 
rehabilitated bridge and other relevant factors which the State believes 
may warrant special consideration.


<R05>
Sec. 650.707  Rating factor.

    (a) The following formula is to be used in the selection process for 
ranking discretionary bridge candidates.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15OC02.010


The lower the rating factor, the higher the priority for selection and 
funding.
    (b) The terms in the rating factor are defined as follows:
    (1) SR is Sufficiency Rating computed as illustrated in appendix A 
of the Recording and Coding Guide for the Structure Inventory and 
Appraisal of

[[Page 238]]

the Nation's Bridges, USDOT/FHWA (latest edition); (If SR is less than 
1.0, use SR=1.0);
    (2) ADT is Average Daily Traffic in thousands taking the most 
current value from the national bridge inventory data;
    (3) ADTT is Average Daily Truck Traffic in thousands (Pick up trucks 
and light delivery trucks not included). For load posted bridges, the 
ADTT furnished should be that which would use the bridge if traffic were 
not restricted. The ADTT should be the annual average volume, not peak 
or seasonal;
    (4) N is National Highway System Status. N=1 if not on the National 
Highway System. N=1.5 if bridge carries a National Highway System road;
    (5) The last term of the rating factor expression includes the 
State's unobligated balance of funds received under 23 U.S.C. 144 as of 
June 30 preceding the date of calculation, and the total funds received 
under 23 U.S.C. 144 for the last four fiscal years ending with the most 
recent fiscal year of the FHWA's annual call for discretionary bridge 
candidate submittals; (if unobligated HBRRP balance is less than $10 
million, use zero balance);
    (6) TPC is Total Project Cost in millions of dollars;
    (7) HBRRP is Highway Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program;
    (8) ADT' is ADT plus ADTT.
    (c) In order to balance the relative importance of candidate bridges 
with very low (less than one) sufficiency ratings and very low ADT's 
against candidate bridges with high ADT's, the minimum sufficiency 
rating used will be 1.0. If the computed sufficiency rating for a 
candidate bridge is less than 1.0, use 1.0 in the rating factor formula.
    (d) If the unobligated balance of HBRRP funds for the State is less 
than $10 million, the HBRRP modifier is 1.0. This will limit the effect 
of the modifier on those States with small apportionments or those who 
may be accumulating funds to finance a major bridge.

[48 FR 52296, Nov. 17, 1983; 48 FR 53407, Nov. 28, 1983, as amended at 
67 FR 63542, Oct. 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 650.709  Special considerations.

    (a) The selection process for new discretionary bridge projects will 
be based upon the rating factor priority ranking. However, although not 
specifically included in the rating factor formula, special 
consideration will be given to bridges that are closed to all traffic or 
that have a load restriction of less than 10 tons. Consideration will 
also be given to bridges with other unique situations, and to bridge 
candidates in States that have not previously been allocated 
discretionary bridge funds. In addition, consideration will be given to 
candidates that receive additional funds or contributions from local, 
State, county, or private sources, but not from Federal sources which 
reduce the total Federal cost or Federal share of the project. These 
funds or contributions may be used to reduce the total project cost for 
use in the rating factor formula.
    (b) The need to administer the program from a balanced national 
perspective requires that the special cases set forth in paragraph (a) 
of this section and other unique situations be considered in the 
discretionary bridge candidate evaluation process.
    (c) Priority consideration will be given to the continuation and 
completion of projects previously begun with discretionary bridge funds 
which will be ready to begin construction in the fiscal year in which 
funds are available for obligation.

[48 FR 52296, Nov. 17, 1983, as amended at 67 FR 63543, Oct. 15, 2002]


<R04>
              Subpart H_Navigational Clearances for Bridges

    Source: 52 FR 28139, July 28, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 650.801  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to establish policy and to set 
forth coordination procedures for Federal-aid highway bridges which 
require navigational clearances.


<R05>
Sec. 650.803  Policy.

    It is the policy of FHWA:
    (a) To provide clearances which meet the reasonable needs of 
navigation and

[[Page 239]]

provide for cost-effective highway operations,
    (b) To provide fixed bridges wherever practicable, and
    (c) To consider appropriate pier protection and vehicular protective 
and warning systems on bridges subject to ship collisions.


<R05>
Sec. 650.805  Bridges not requiring a USCG permit.

    (a) The FHWA has the responsibility under 23 U.S.C. 144(h) to 
determine that a USCG permit is not required for bridge construction. 
This determination shall be made at an early stage of project 
development so that any necessary coordination can be accomplished 
during environmental processing.
    (b) A USCG permit shall not be required if the FHWA determines that 
the proposed construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or 
replacement of the federally aided or assisted bridge is over waters (1) 
which are not used or are not susceptible to use in their natural 
condition or by reasonable improvement as a means to transport 
interstate or foreign commerce and (2) which are (i) not tidal, or (ii) 
if tidal, used only by recreational boating, fishing, and other small 
vessels less than 21 feet in length.
    (c) The highway agency (HA) shall assess the need for a USCG permit 
or navigation lights or signals for proposed bridges. The HA shall 
consult the appropriate District Offices of the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers if the susceptibility to improvement for navigation of the 
water of concern is unknown and shall consult the USCG if the types of 
vessels using the waterway are unknown.
    (d) For bridge crossings of waterways with navigational traffic 
where the HA believes that a USCG permit may not be required, the HA 
shall provide supporting information early in the environmental analysis 
stage of project development to enable the FHWA to make a determination 
that a USCG permit is not required and that proposed navigational 
clearances are reasonable.
    (e) Since construction in waters exempt from a USCG permit may be 
subject to other USCG authorizations, such as approval of navigation 
lights and signals and timely notice to local mariners of waterway 
changes, the USCG should be notified whenever the proposed action may 
substantially affect local navigation.


<R05>
Sec. 650.807  Bridges requiring a USCG permit.

    (a) The USCG has the responsibility (1) to determine whether a USCG 
permit is required for the improvement or construction of a bridge over 
navigable waters except for the exemption exercised by FHWA in Sec. 
650.805 and (2) to approve the bridge location, alignment and 
appropriate navigational clearances in all bridge permit applications.
    (b) A USCG permit shall be required when a bridge crosses waters 
which are: (1) tidal and used by recreational boating, fishing, and 
other small vessels 21 feet or greater in length or (2) used or 
susceptible to use in their natural condition or by reasonable 
improvement as a means to transport interstate or foreign commerce. If 
it is determined that a USCG permit is required, the project shall be 
processed in accordance with the following procedures.
    (c) The HA shall initiate coordination with the USCG at an early 
stage of project development and provide opportunity for the USCG to be 
involved throughout the environmental review process in accordance with 
23 CFR part 771. The FHWA and Coast Guard have developed internal 
guidelines which set forth coordination procedures that both agencies 
have found useful in streamlining and expediting the permit approval 
process. These guidelines include (1) USCG/FHWA Procedures for Handling 
Projects which Require a USCG Permit \1\ and (2) the USCG/FHWA

[[Page 240]]

Memorandum of Understanding on Coordinating The Preparation and 
Processing of Environmental Projects. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ This document is an internal directive in the USCG Bridge 
Administration Manual, Enclosure 1a, COMDT INST M16590.5, change 2 dated 
Dec. 1, 1983. It is available for inspection and copying from the U.S. 
Coast Guard or the Federal Highway Administration as prescribed in 49 
CFR part 7, appendices B and D.
    \2\ FHWA Notice 6640.22 dated July 17, 1981, is available for 
inspection and copying as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) The HA shall accomplish sufficient preliminary design and 
consultation during the environmental phase of project development to 
investigate bridge concepts, including the feasibility of any proposed 
movable bridges, the horizontal and vertical clearances that may be 
required, and other location considerations which may affect navigation. 
At least one fixed bridge alternative shall be included with any 
proposal for a movable bridge to provide a comparative analysis of 
engineering, social, economic and environmental benefit and impacts.
    (e) The HA shall consider hydraulic, safety, environmental and 
navigational needs along with highway costs when designing a proposed 
navigable waterway crossing.
    (f) For bridges where the risk of ship collision is significant, 
HA's shall consider, in addition to USCG requirements, the need for pier 
protection and warning systems as outlined in FHWA Technical Advisory 
5140.19, Pier Protection and Warning Systems for Bridges Subject to Ship 
Collisions, dated February 11, 1983.
    (g) Special navigational clearances shall normally not be provided 
for accommodation of floating construction equipment of any type that is 
not required for navigation channel maintenance. If the navigational 
clearances are influenced by the needs of such equipment, the USCG 
should be consulted to determine the appropriate clearances to be 
provided.
    (h) For projects which require FHWA approval of plans, 
specifications and estimates, preliminary bridge plans shall be approved 
at the appropriate level by FHWA for structural concepts, hydraulics, 
and navigational clearances prior to submission of the permit 
application.
    (i) If the HA bid plans contain alternative designs for the same 
configuration (fixed or movable), the permit application shall be 
prepared in sufficient detail so that all alternatives can be evaluated 
by the USCG. If appropriate, the USCG will issue a permit for all 
alternatives. Within 30 days after award of the construction contract, 
the USCG shall be notified by the HA of the alternate which was 
selected. The USCG procedure for evaluating permit applications which 
contain alternates is presented in its Bridge Administration Manual 
(COMDT INST M16590.5). \3\ The FHWA policy on alternates, Alternate 
Design for Bridges; Policy Statement, was published at 48 FR 21409 on 
May 12, 1983.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ United States Coast Guard internal directives are available for 
inspection and copying as prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix B.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 650.809  Movable span bridges.

    A fixed bridge shall be selected wherever practicable. If there are 
social, economic, environmental or engineering reasons which favor the 
selection of a movable bridge, a cost benefit analysis to support the 
need for the movable bridge shall he prepared as a part of the 
preliminary plans.


<R03>
PART 652_PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ACCOMMODATIONS AND PROJECTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
652.1 Purpose.
652.3 Definitions.
652.5 Policy.
652.7 Eligibility.
652.9 Federal participation.
652.11 Planning.
652.13 Design and construction criteria.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 109, 217, 315, 402(b)(1)(F); 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 49 FR 10662, Mar. 22, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 652.1  Purpose.

    To provide policies and procedures relating to the provision of 
pedestrian and bicycle accommodations on Federal-aid projects, and 
Federal participation in the cost of these accommodations and projects.


<R05>
Sec. 652.3  Definitions.

    (a) Bicycle. A vehicle having two tandem wheels, propelled solely by 
human

[[Page 241]]

power, upon which any person or persons may ride.
    (b) Bikeway. Any road, path, or way which in some manner is 
specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of 
whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles 
or are to be shared with other transportation modes.
    (c) Bicycle Path (Bike Path). A bikeway physically separated from 
motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either 
within the highway right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way.
    (d) Bicycle Lane (Bike Lane). A portion of a roadway which has been 
designated by striping, signing and pavement markings for the 
preferential or exclusive use of bicyclists.
    (e) Bicycle Route (Bike Route). A segment of a system of bikeways 
designated by the jurisdiction having authority with appropriate 
directional and informational markers, with or without a specific 
bicycle route number.
    (f) Shared Roadway. Any roadway upon which a bicycle lane is not 
designated and which may be legally used by bicycles regardless of 
whether such facility is specifically designated as a bikeway.
    (g) Pedestrian Walkway or Walkway. A continuous way designated for 
pedestrians and separated from the through lanes for motor vehicles by 
space or barrier.
    (h) Highway Construction Project. A project financed in whole or in 
part with Federal-aid or Federal funds for the construction, 
reconstruction or improvement of a highway or portions thereof, 
including bridges and tunnels.
    (i) Independent Bicycle Construction Project (Independent Bicycle 
Project). A project designation used to distinguish a bicycle facility 
constructed independently and primarily for use by bicyclists from an 
improvement included as an incidental part of a highway construction 
project.
    (j) Independent Pedestrian Walkway Construction Project (Independent 
Walkway Project). A project designation used to distinguish a walkway 
constructed independently and solely as a pedestrian walkway project 
from a pedestrian improvement included as an incidental part of a 
highway construction project.
    (k) Incidental Bicycle or Pedestrian Walkway Construction Project 
(Incidental Feature). One constructed as an incidental part of a highway 
construction project.
    (l) Nonconstruction Bicycle Project. A bicycle project not involving 
physical construction which enhances the safe use of bicycles for 
transportation purposes.
    (m) Snowmobile. A motorized vehicle solely designed to operate on 
snow or ice.


<R05>
Sec. 652.5  Policy.

    The safe accommodation of pedestrians and bicyclists should be given 
full consideration during the development of Federal-aid highway 
projects, and during the construction of such projects. The special 
needs for the elderly and the handicapped shall be considered in all 
Federal-aid projects that include pedestrian facilities. Where current 
or anticipated pedestrian and/or bicycle traffic presents a potential 
conflict with motor vehicle traffic, every effort shall be made to 
minimize the detrimental effects on all highway users who share the 
facility. On highways without full control of access where a bridge deck 
is being replaced or rehabilitated, and where bicycles are permitted to 
operate at each end, the bridge shall be reconstructed so that bicycles 
can be safely accommodated when it can be done at a reasonable cost. 
Consultation with local groups of organized bicyclists is to be 
encouraged in the development of bicycle projects.


<R05>
Sec. 652.7  Eligibility.

    (a) Independent bicycle projects, incidental bicycle projects, and 
nonconstruction bicycle projects must be principally for transportation 
rather than recreational use and must meet the project conditions for 
authorization where applicable.
    (b) The implementation of pedestrian and bicycle accommodations may 
be authorized for Federal-aid participation as either incidental 
features of highways or as independent projects where all of the 
following conditions are satisfied.

[[Page 242]]

    (1) The safety of the motorist, bicyclist, and/or pedestrian will be 
enhanced by the project.
    (2) The project is initiated or supported by the appropriate State 
highway agency(ies) and/or the Federal land management agency. Projects 
are to be located and designed pursuant to an overall plan, which 
provides due consideration for safety and contiguous routes.
    (3) A public agency has formally agreed to:
    (i) Accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of 
the facility,
    (ii) Ban all motorized vehicles other than maintenance vehicles, or 
snowmobiles where permitted by State or local regulations, from 
pedestrian walkways and bicycle paths, and
    (iii) Ban parking, except in the case of emergency, from bicycle 
lanes that are contiguous to traffic lanes.
    (4) The estimated cost of the project is consistent with the 
anticipated benefits to the community.
    (5) The project will be designed in substantial conformity with the 
latest official design criteria. (See Sec. 652.13.)

[49 FR 10662, Mar. 22, 1984; 49 FR 14729, Apr. 13, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 652.9  Federal participation.

    (a) Independent walkway projects, independent bicycle projects and 
nonconstruction bicycle projects shall be financed with 100 percent 
Federal-aid primary, secondary or urban highway funds, provided the 
total amount obligated for all such projects in any one State in any 
fiscal year does not exceed $4.5 million of Federal-aid funds or a 
lesser amount apportioned by the Federal Highway Administrator to avoid 
exceeding the annual $45 million cost limitation on these projects for 
all States in a fiscal year. The Federal Highway Administrator may, upon 
application, waive this limitation for a State for any fiscal year. This 
limitation also applies to projects funded under Sec. 652.9(d). This 
limitation does not apply to projects of the type described in Sec. 
652.9(c). The FHWA Offices of Direct Federal Programs and Engineering 
will coordinate projects of the type described in Sec. 652.9(d) to 
ensure that the annual cost limitations will not be exceeded.
    (b) Specific eligibility requirements for Federal-aid participation 
in independent and nonconstruction projects are:
    (1) An independent walkway project must be constructed on highway 
right-of-way or easement, or right-of-way acquired for this purpose. 
Independent walkway projects may be constructed separately or in 
conjunction with a Federal-aid highway construction project. Where an 
independent walkway project is located away from the Federal-aid highway 
right-of-way, it must serve pedestrians who would normally desire to use 
the Federal-aid route.
    (2) An independent bicycle project may include the acquisition of 
land needed for the facility, or such projects may be constructed on 
existing highway right-of-way or easement acquired for this purpose. 
Independent bicycle projects may include construction of bicycle lanes, 
paths, shelters, bicycle parking facilities and other roadway and bridge 
work necessary to accommodate bicyclists.
    (3) Nonconstruction bicycle projects must be related to the safe use 
of bicycles for transportation, and may include safety educational 
material and route maps for safe bicycle transportation purposes. 
Nonconstruction bicycle projects shall not include salaries for 
administration, law enforcement, maintenance and similar items required 
to operate transportation networks and programs, but may include cost of 
staff or consultants for development of specific nonconstruction 
projects.
    (c) Bicycle and pedestrian accommodations may also be constructed as 
incidental features of highway construction projects. These incidental 
features may be financed with the same type of Federal-aid funds, 
including funds of the type described in Sec. 652.9(d) (except 
Interstate construction funds) and at the same Federal share payable as 
a basic highway project. These accommodations are not subject to the 
funding limitations for independent walkway, independent bicycle and 
nonconstruction bicycle projects. In the case of the Interstate

[[Page 243]]

construction projects, Federal-aid Interstate construction funds may 
only be used to replace existing facilities that would be interrupted by 
construction of the project, or to mitigate specific environmental 
impacts. Interstate 4R funds provided by 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5)(B) may be 
used only for incidental features. As incidental features, these 
accommodations must be part of a highway improvement and must be located 
within the right-of-way of the highway, including land acquired under 23 
U.S.C. 319 (Scenic Enhancement Program).
    (d) Funds authorized for Federal lands highways (forest highways, 
public lands highways, park roads, parkways, and Indian reservation 
roads which are public roads), forest development roads and trails 
(i.e., roads or trails under the jurisdiction of the Forest Service), 
and public lands development roads and trails (i.e., roads or trails 
which the Secretary of the Interior determines are of primary importance 
for the development, protection, administration, and utilization of 
public lands and resources under his/her control), may be used for 
independent bicycle routes and independent walkway projects. These funds 
may not be used for nonconstruction bicycle projects.


<R05>
Sec. 652.11  Planning.

    Federally aided bicycle and pedestrian projects implemented within 
urbanized areas must be included in the transportation improvement 
program/annual (or biennial) element unless excluded by agreement 
between the State and the metropolitan planning organization.


<R05>
Sec. 652.13  Design and construction criteria.

    (a) The American Association of State Highway and Transportation 
Officials' ``Guide for Development of New Bicycle Facilities, 1981'' 
(AASHTO Guide) or equivalent guides developed in cooperation with State 
or local officials and acceptable to the division office of the FHWA, 
shall be used as standards for the construction and design of bicycle 
routes. Copies of the AASHTO Guide may be obtained from the American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, 444 North 
Capitol Street, NW., Suite 225, Washington, DC 20001.
    (b) Curb cuts and other provisions as may be appropriate for the 
handicapped are required on all Federal and Federal-aid projects 
involving the provision of curbs or sidewalks at all pedestrian 
crosswalks.


<R03>
PART 655_TRAFFIC OPERATIONS--Table of Contents




Subparts A-E [Reserved]

 Subpart F_Traffic Control Devices on Federal-Aid and Other Streets and 
                                Highways

655.601 Purpose.
655.602 Definitions.
655.603 Standards.
655.604 Achieving basic uniformity.
655.605 Project procedures.
655.606 Higher cost materials.
655.607 Funding.

Appendix to Subpart F--Alternate Method of Determining the Color of 
          Retroreflective Sign Materials and Pavement Marking Materials

Subpart G [Reserved]

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101(a), 104, 109(d), 114(a), 217, 315, and 
402(a); 23 CFR 1.32; and 49 CFR 1.48(b).

Subparts A-E [Reserved]


<R04>
 Subpart F_Traffic Control Devices on Federal-Aid and Other Streets and 
                                Highways

    Source: 48 FR 46776, Oct. 14, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 655.601  Purpose.

    To prescribe the policies and procedures of the Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) to obtain basic uniformity of traffic control 
devices on all streets and highways in accordance with the following 
references that are approved by the FHWA for application on Federal-aid 
projects:
    (a) Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and 
Highways (MUTCD), 2003 Edition, FHWA, dated October, 2003. This 
publication is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51

[[Page 244]]

and is on file at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol 
Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC. It is available for inspection 
and copying at FHWA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Room 3408, Washington, DC 
20590, as provided in 49 CFR part 7. The text is also available from the 
FHWA Office of Transportation Operations' Web site at: http://
mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov.
    (b) Standard Alphabets for Highway Signs, FHWA, 1966 Edition, 
Reprinted May 1972. (This publication is incorporated by reference and 
is on file at the Office of the Federal Register in Washington, DC. This 
document is available for inspection and copying as provided in 49 CFR 
part 7, appendix D).
    (c) Guide to Metric Conversion, AASHTO, 1993. This publication is 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51 and is on file at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North 
Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC. This document is 
available for inspection as provided in 49 CFR part 7. It may be 
purchased from the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials, Suite 249, 444 North Capitol Street, NW., 
Washington, DC 20001.
    (d) Traffic Engineering Metric Conversion Factors, 1993--Addendum to 
the Guide to Metric Conversion, AASHTO, October 1993. This publication 
is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 
CFR part 51 and is on file at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 
North Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC. This document is 
available for inspection as provided in 49 CFR part 7. It may be 
purchased from the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials, Suite 249, 444 North Capitol Street, NW., 
Washington, DC 20001.

[51 FR 16834, May 7, 1986, as amended at 60 FR 18521, Apr. 11, 1995; 61 
FR 29626, June 11, 1996; 62 FR 1373, Jan. 9, 1997; 63 FR 8351, Feb. 19, 
1998; 63 FR 33549, June 19, 1998; 64 FR 33753, June 24, 1999; 65 FR 13, 
Jan. 3, 2000; 65 FR 78958, Dec. 18, 2000; 67 FR 7076, Feb. 15, 2002; 68 
FR 65582, Nov. 20, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 655.602  Definitions.

    The terms used herein are defined in accordance with definitions and 
usages contained in the MUTCD and 23 U.S.C. 101(a).


<R05>
Sec. 655.603  Standards.

    (a) National MUTCD. The MUTCD approved by the Federal Highway 
Administrator is the national standard for all traffic control devices 
installed on any street, highway, or bicycle trail open to public travel 
in accordance with 23 U.S.C 109(d) and 402(a). The national MUTCD is 
specifically approved by the FHWA for application on any highway project 
in which Federal highway funds participate and on projects in federally 
administered areas where a Federal department or agency controls the 
highway or supervises the traffic operations.
    (b) State or other Federal MUTCD. (1) Where State or other Federal 
agency MUTCDs or supplements are required, they shall be in substantial 
conformance with the national MUTCD. Changes to the national MUTCD 
issued by the FHWA shall be adopted by the States or other Federal 
agencies within 2 years of issuance. The FHWA Division Administrators 
shall approve the State MUTCDs and supplements that are in substantial 
conformance with the national MUTCD.
    (2) The FHWA Associate Administrator of the Federal Lands Highway 
Program shall approve other Federal land management agencies' MUTCDs 
that are in substantial conformance with the national MUTCD. States and 
other Federal agencies are encouraged to adopt the national MUTCD as 
their official Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
    (c) Color specifications. Color determinations and specifications of 
sign and pavement marking materials shall conform to requirements of the 
FHWA Color Tolerance Charts. \2\ An alternate method of determining the 
color of retroreflective sign material is provided in the appendix.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ Available for inspection from the Office of Traffic Operations, 
Federal Highway Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Compliance--(1) Existing highways. Each State, in cooperation 
with its political subdivisions, and Federal agency shall have a program 
as required by

[[Page 245]]

23 U.S.C. 402(a), which shall include provisions for the systematic 
upgrading of substandard traffic control devices and for the 
installation of needed devices to achieve conformity with the MUTCD.
    (2) New or reconstructed highways. Federal-aid projects for the 
construction, reconstruction, resurfacing, restoration, or 
rehabilitation of streets and highways shall not be opened to the public 
for unrestricted use until all appropriate traffic control devices, 
either temporary or permanent, are installed and functioning properly. 
Both temporary and permanent devices shall conform to the MUTCD.
    (3) Construction area activities. All traffic control devices 
installed in construction areas using Federal-aid funds shall conform to 
the MUTCD. Traffic control plans for handling traffic and pedestrians in 
construction zones and for protection of workers shall conform to the 
requirements of 23 CFR part 630, subpart J, Traffic Safety in Highway 
and Street Work Zones.
    (4) MUTCD changes. The FHWA may establish target dates for achieving 
compliance with changes to specific devices in the MUTCD.
    (e) Specific information signs. Standards for specific information 
signs are contained in the MUTCD.

[48 FR 46776, Oct. 14, 1983, as amended at 51 FR 16834, May 7, 1986; 68 
FR 14139, Mar. 24, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 655.604  Achieving basic uniformity.

    (a) Programs. Programs for the orderly and systematic upgrading of 
existing traffic control devices or the installation of needed traffic 
control devices on or off the Federal-aid system should be based on 
inventories made in accordance with 23 CFR 1204.4, Highway Safety 
Program Standards. These inventories provide the information necessary 
for programming traffic control device upgrading projects.
    (b) Inventory. An inventory of all traffic control devices is 
required by Highway Safety Program Standard Number 13, Traffic 
Engineering Services (23 CFR 1204.4). Highway planning and research 
funds and highway related safety grant program funds may be used in 
statewide or systemwide studies or inventories. Also, metropolitan 
planning (PL) funds may be used in urbanized areas provided the activity 
is included in an approved unified work program.


<R05>
Sec. 655.605  Project procedures.

    (a) Federal-aid highways. Federal-aid projects involving the 
installation of traffic control devices shall follow procedures as 
established in 23 CFR part 630, subpart A, Federal-Aid Programs Approval 
and Project Authorization. Simplified and timesaving procedures are to 
be used to the extent permitted by existing policy.
    (b) Off-system highways. Certain federally funded programs are 
available for installation of traffic control devices on streets and 
highways that are not on the Federal-aid system. The procedures used in 
these programs may vary from project to project but, essentially, the 
guidelines set forth herein should be used.


<R05>
Sec. 655.606  Higher cost materials.

    The use of signing, pavement marking, and signal materials (or 
equipment) having distinctive performance characteristics, but costing 
more than other materials (or equipment) commonly used may be approved 
by the FHWA Division Administrator when the specific use proposed is 
considered to be in the public interest.


<R05>
Sec. 655.607  Funding.

    (a) Federal-aid highways. (1) Funds apportioned or allocated under 
23 U.S.C. 104(b) are eligible to participate in projects to install 
traffic control devices in accordance with the MUTCD on newly 
constructed, reconstructed, resurfaced, restored, or rehabilitated 
highways, or on existing highways when this work is classified as 
construction in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 101(a). Federal-aid highway 
funds for eligible pavement markings and traffic control signalization 
may amount to 100 percent of the construction cost. Federal-aid highway 
funds apportioned or allocated under other sections of 23 U.S.C. are 
eligible for participation in improvements conforming to the MUTCD in 
accordance with the provisions of applicable program regulations and 
directives.

[[Page 246]]

    (2) Traffic control devices are eligible, in keeping with paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section, provided that the work is classified as 
construction in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 101(a) and the State or local 
agency has a policy acceptable to the FHWA Division Administrator for 
selecting traffic control devices material or equipment based on items 
such as cost, traffic volumes, safety, and expected service life. The 
State's policy should provide for cost-effective selection of materials 
which will provide for substantial service life taking into account 
expected and necessary routine maintenance. For these purposes, 
effectiveness would normally be measured in terms of durability, service 
life and/or performance of the material. Specific projects including 
material or equipment selection shall be developed in accordance with 
this policy. Proposed work may be approved on a project-by-project basis 
when the work is (i) clearly warranted, (ii) on a Federal-aid system, 
(iii) clearly identified by site, (iv) substantial in nature, and (v) of 
sufficient magnitude at any given location to warrant Federal-aid 
participation as a construction item.
    (3) The method of accomplishing the work will be in accordance with 
23 CFR part 635, subpart A, Contract Procedures.
    (b) Off-system highways. Certain Federal-aid highway funds are 
eligible to participate in traffic control device improvement projects 
on off-system highways. In addition, Federal-aid highway funds 
apportioned or allocated in 23 U.S.C. are eligible for the installation 
of traffic control devices on any public road not on the Federal-aid 
system when the installation is directly related to a traffic 
improvement project on a Federal-aid system route.

 Appendix to Subpart F of Part 655--Alternate Method of Determining the 
 Color of Retroreflective Sign Materials and Pavement Marking Materials

    1. Although the FHWA Color Tolerance Charts depreciate the use of 
spectrophotometers or accurate tristimulus colorimeters for measuring 
the daytime color of retroreflective materials, recent testing has 
determined that 0/45 or 45/0 spectroradiometers and tristimulus 
colorimeters have proved that the measurements can be considered 
reliable and may be used.
    2. The daytime color of non-fluorescent retroreflective materials 
may be measured in accordance with ASTM Test Method E1349, ``Standard 
Test Method for Reflectance Factor and Color by Spectrophotometry Using 
Bidirectional Geometry'' or ASTM Test Method E 1347 (Replaces E97), 
``Standard Test Method for Color and Color-Difference Measurement by 
Tristimulus (Filter) Colorimetry.'' The latter test method specified 
bidirectional geometry for the measurement of retroreflective materials. 
The geometric conditions to be used in both test methods are 0/45 or 45/
0 circumferential illumination or viewing. Uniplanar geometry is not 
recommended for material types IV or higher (designated microprismatic). 
The CIE standard illuminant used in computing the colorimetric 
coordinates shall be D<INF>65</INF> and the 2 Degree Standard CIE 
observer shall be used.
    3. For fluorescent retroreflective materials ASTM E991 may be used 
to determine the chromaticity provided that the D<INF>65</INF> 
illumination meets the requirements of E 991. This practice, however, 
allows only the total luminous factor to be measured. The fluorescent 
luminous factor must be determined using bispectral fluorescent 
colorimetry. Commercial instruments are available which allow such 
determination. Some testing laboratories are also equipped to perform 
these measurements.
    4. For nighttime measurements CIE Standard Illuminant A shall be 
used in computing the colorimetric coordinates and the 2 Degree Standard 
CIE Observer shall be used.
    5. Average performance sheeting is identified as Types I and II 
sheeting and high performance sheeting is identified as Type III. Super-
high intensity sheeting is identified as Types V, VI, and VII in ASTM D 
4956.
    6. The following nine tables depict the 1931 CIE Chromaticity 
Diagram x and y coordinates for the corner points defining the 
recommended color boxes in the diagram and the daytime luminance factors 
for those colors. Lines drawn between these corner points specify the 
limits of the chromaticity allowed in the 1931 Chromaticity Diagram. 
Color coordinates of samples that lie within these lines are acceptable. 
For blue and green colors the spectrum locus is the defining limit 
between the corner points located on the spectrum locus:

[[Page 247]]



Table 1 to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Daytime Color Specification Limits for Retroreflective Material With
             CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer and 45/0 (0/45) Geometry and CIE Standard Illuminant D65.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Chromaticity Coordinates
                              ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Color                       1                    2                     3                   4
                              ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   x         y          x           y         y         x         x         y
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
White........................     0.303     0.300        0.368     0.366     0.340     0.393     0.274     0.329
Red..........................     0.648     0.351        0.735     0.265     0.629     0.281     0.565     0.346
Orange.......................     0.558     0.352        0.636     0.364     0.570     0.429     0.506     0.404
Brown........................     0.430     0.340        0.430     0.390     0.518     0.434     0.570     0.382
Yellow.......................     0.498     0.412        0.557     0.442     0.479     0.520     0.438     0.472
Green........................     0.026     0.399        0.166     0.364     0.286     0.446     0.207     0.771
Blue.........................     0.078     0.171        0.150     0.220     0.210     0.160     0.137     0.038
Light Blue...................     0.180     0.260        0.240     0.300     0.270     0.260     0.230     0.200
Purple.......................     0.300     0.064        0.320     0.200     0.550     0.300     0.600     0.202
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table 1a to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Daytime Luminance Factors (%) for Retroreflective Material With CIE
               2[deg] Standard Observer and 45/0 (0/45) Geometry and CIE Standard Illuminant D65.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Daytime Luminance Factor (Y %) by ASTM Type
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Color               Types I, II, III and VI     Types IV, VII, and VIII             Type V
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Minimum       Maximum       Minimum       Maximum       Minimum       Maximum
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
White.......................          27    ............          40    ............          15    ............
Red.........................           2.5          12             3.0          15             2.5          11
Orange......................          14            30            12            30             7.0          25
Brown.......................           4.0           9.0           1.0           6.0           1.0           9.0
Yellow......................          15            45            24            45            12            30
Green.......................           3.0           9.0           3.0          12             2.5          11
Blue........................           1.0          10             1.0          10             1.0          10
Light Blue..................          12            40            18            40             8.0          25
Purple......................           2.0          10             2.0          10             2.0          10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


  Table 2 to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Nighttime Color Specification Limits for Retroreflective Material
With CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer and Observation Angle of 0.33[deg], Entrance Angle of +5[deg] and CIE Standard
                                                  Illuminant A.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Chromaticity Coordinates
                                   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Color                        1                   2                  3                   4
                                   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       x         y         x         y         x        y         x         y
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
White.............................   0.475      0.452     0.360     0.415     0.392   0.370      0.515     0.409
Red...............................   0.650      0.348     0.620     0.348     0.712   0.2550     0.735     0.265
Orange............................   0.595      0.405     0.565     0.405     0.613   0.355      0.643     0.355
Brown.............................   0.595      0.405     0.540     0.405     0.570   0.365      0.643     0.355
Yellow............................   0.513      0.487     0.500    0.4700     0.545   0.425      0.572     0.425
Green.............................   0.007      0.570     0.200     0.500     0.322   0.590      0.193     0.782
Blue..............................   0.033      0.370     0.180     0.370     0.230   0.240      0.091     0.133
                                   ----------
Light Blue........................               Chromaticity coordinates are yet to be determined.
                                   ----------
Purple............................               Chromaticity coordinates are yet to be determined.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Materials used as High-Conspicuity, Retroreflective Traffic Signage Materials shall meet the requirements
  for Daytime Color Specification Limits, Daytime Luminance Factors and Nighttime Color Specification Limits for
  Fluorescent Retroreflective Material, as described in Tables 3, 3a, and 4, throughout the service life of the
  sign.


[[Page 248]]


 Table 3 to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Daytime Color Specification Limits for Fluorescent Retroreflective
      Material with CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer and 45/0 (0/45) Geometry and CIE Standard Illuminant D65.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Chromaticity Coordinates
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Color                        1                   2                   3                   4
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      x         y         x         y         x         y         x         y
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluorescent Orange..............     0.583     0.416     0.535     0.400     0.595     0.351     0.645     0.355
Fluorescent Yellow..............     0.479     0.520     0.446     0.483     0.512     0.421     0.557     0.442
Fluorescent Yellow-Green........     0.387     0.610     0.369      .546      .428      .496     0.460     0.540
Fluorescent Green...............     0.210     0.770     0.232     0.656     0.320     0.590     0.320     0.675
Fluorescent Pink................     0.450     0.270     0.590     0.350     0.644     0.290     0.536     0.230
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


   Table 3a to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Daytime Luminance Factors (%) for Fluorescent Retroreflective
      Material With CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer and 45/0 (0/45) Geometry and CIE Standard Illuminant D65.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                   Luminance Factor Limits (Y)
                                     Color                                      --------------------------------
                                                                                    Min        Max        YF*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluorescent Orange.............................................................         25       None         15
Fluorescent Yellow.............................................................         45       None         20
Fluorescent Yellow-Green.......................................................         60       None         20
Fluorescent Green..............................................................         20         30         12
Fluorescent Pink...............................................................         25       None         15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Fluorescence luminance factors (YF) are typical values, and are provided for quality assurance purposes only.
  YF shall not be used as a measure of performance during service.


Table 4 to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Nighttime Color Specification Limits for Fluorescent Retroreflective
Material With CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer and Observation Angle of 0.33[deg], Entrance Angle of +5[deg] and CIE
                                             Standard Illuminant A.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Chromaticity Coordinates
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Color                        1                   2                   3                   4
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      x         y         x         y         x         y         x         y
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluorescent Orange..............     0.625     0.375     0.589     0.376     0.636     0.330     0.669     0.331
Fluorescent Yellow..............     0.554     0.445     0.526     0.437     0.569     0.394     0.610     0.390
Fluorescent Yellow-Green........     0.480     0.520     0.473     0.490     0.523     0.440     0.550     0.449
Fluorescent Green...............     0.007     0.570     0.200     0.500     0.322     0.590     0.193     0.782
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


   Table 5 to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Daytime Color Specification Limits for Retroreflective Pavement
  Marking Material With CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer and 45/0 (0/45) Geometry and CIE Standard Illuminant D65.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Chromaticity Coordinates
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Color                        1                   2                   3                   4
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      x         y         x         y         x         y         x         y
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
White...........................     0.355     0.355     0.305     0.305     0.285     0.325     0.335     0.375
Yellow..........................     0.560     0.440     0.490     0.510     0.420     0.440     0.460     0.400
Red.............................     0.480     0.300     0.690     0.315     0.620     0.380     0.480     0.360
Blue............................     0.105     0.100     0.220     0.180     0.200     0.260     0.060     0.220
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


   Table 5a to Part 655, Subpart F--Daytime Luminance Factors (%) for
   Retroreflective Pavement Marking Material With CIE 2[deg] Standard
   Observer and 45/0 (0/45) Geometry and CIE Standard Illuminant D65.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Luminance Factor (Y%)
                    Color                    ---------------------------
                                                 Minimum       Maximum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
White.......................................            35
Yellow......................................            25

[[Page 249]]

 
Red.........................................             6            15
Blue........................................             5            14
------------------------------------------------------------------------


  Table 6 to Appendix to Part 655, Subpart F--Nightime Color Specification Limits for Retroreflective Pavement
      Marking Material With CIE 2[deg] Standard Observer, Observation Angle of 1.05[deg], Entrance Angle of
                                   +88.76[deg] and CIE Standard Illuminant A.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Chromaticity Coordinates
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Color                        1                   2                   3                   4
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      x         y         x         y         x         y         x         y
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
White...........................     0.480     0.410     0.430     0.380     0.405     0.405     0.455     0.435
Yellow..........................     0.575     0.425     0.508     0.415     0.473     0.453     0.510    0.490
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Luminance factors for retroreflective pavement marking materials are for materials as they are intended to
  be used. For paint products, that means inclusion of glass beads and/or other retroreflective components.


[67 FR 49572, July 31, 2002, as amended at 67 FR 70163, Nov. 21, 2002; 
68 FR 65582, 65583, Nov. 20, 2003]

Subpart G [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 656_CARPOOL AND VANPOOL PROJECTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
656.1 Purpose.
656.3 Policy.
656.5 Eligibility.
656.7 Determination of an exception.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 146 and 315; sec. 126 of the Surface 
Transportation Assistance Act of 1978, Pub. L. 95-599, 92 Stat. 2689; 49 
CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 47 FR 43024, Sept. 30, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 656.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe policies and general 
procedures for administering a program of ridesharing projects using 
Federal-aid primary, secondary, and urban system funds.


<R05>
Sec. 656.3  Policy.

    Section 126(d) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1978 
declares that special effort should be made to promote commuter modes of 
transportation which conserve energy, reduce pollution, and reduce 
traffic congestion.


<R05>
Sec. 656.5  Eligibility.

    (a) Projects which promote ridesharing programs need not be located 
on but must serve a Federal-aid system to be eligible for Federal-aid 
primary, secondary, or urban system funds depending on the system 
served. The Federal share payable will be in accordance with the 
provisions of 23 U.S.C. 120. Except for paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section, for all purposes of this regulation the term carpool includes 
vanpool.
    (b) Projects shall not be approved under this regulation if they 
will have an adverse effect on any mass transportation system.
    (c) The following types of projects and work are considered eligible 
under this program:
    (1) Systems, whether manual or computerized, for locating potential 
participants in carpools and informing them of the oppportunities for 
participation. Eligible costs for such systems may include costs of use 
or rental of computer hardware, costs of software, and installation 
costs (including both labor and other related items).
    (2) Specialized procedures to provide carpooling opportunities to 
elderly or handicapped persons.
    (3) The costs of acquiring vanpool vehicles and actual financial 
losses that

[[Page 250]]

occur when the operation of any vanpool is aborted before the scheduled 
termination date for the reason, concurred in by the State, that its 
continuation is no longer productive. The cost of acquiring a vanpool 
vehicle is eligible under the following conditions:
    (i) The vanpool vehicle is a four-wheeled vehicle manufactured for 
use on public highways for transportation of 7-15 passengers (no 
passenger cars which do not meet the 7--15 criteria and no buses); and
    (ii) Provision is made for repayment of the acquisition cost to the 
project within the passenger-service life of the vehicle. Repayment may 
be accomplished through the charging of a reasonable user fee based on 
an estimated number of riders per vehicle and the cost of reasonable 
vehicle depreciation, operation, and maintenance. Repayment is not 
required under the following conditions:
    (A) When vehicles are purchased as demonstrator vans for use as a 
marketing device. Vehicles procured for this purpose should be used to 
promote the vanpool concept among employees, employers, and other groups 
by allowing potential riders and sponsors to examine commuter vans; or
    (B) When vehicles are purchased for use on a trial commuting basis 
to enable people to experience vanpooling first hand. The trial period 
must be limited to a maximum of 2 months. That part of the user fee 
normally collected to cover the capital or ownership cost of the van 
would be eligible for reimbursement as a promotional cost during the 
limited trial period. As with established vanpool service, all vehicle 
operating costs must be borne by the user(s) during the trial period.
    (4) Work necessary to designate existing highway lanes as 
preferential carpool lanes or bus and carpool lanes. Eligible work may 
include preliminary engineering to determine traffic flow and design 
criteria, signing, pavement markings, traffic control devices, and minor 
physical modifications to permit the use of designated lanes as 
preferential carpool lanes or bus and carpool lanes. Such improvements 
on any public road may be approved if such projects facilitate more 
efficient use of any Federal-aid highway. Eligible costs may also 
include costs of initial inspection or monitoring of use, including 
special equipment, to ensure that the high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes 
designation is effective and that the project is fully developed and 
operating properly. While no fixed time limit is being arbitrarily 
prescribed for the inspection and monitoring period, it is intended that 
this activity be conducted as soon as possible to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the project and does not extend indefinitely nor become 
a part of routine facility operations.
    (5) Signing of and modifications to existing facilities to provide 
preferential parking for carpools inside or outside the central business 
district. Eligible costs may include trail blazers, on-site signs 
designating highway interchange areas or other existing publicly or 
privately owned facilities as preferential parking for carpool 
participants, and initial or renewal costs for leasing parking space or 
acquisition or easements or restrictions, as, for example, at shopping 
centers and public or private parking facilities. The lease or 
acquisition cost may be computed on the demonstrated reduction in the 
overall number of vehicles using the designated portion of a commercial 
facility, but not on a reduction of the per-vehicle user charge for 
parking.
    (6) Construction of carpool parking facilities outside the central 
business district. Eligible costs may include acquisition of land and 
normal construction activities, including installation of lighting and 
fencing, trail blazers, on-site signing, and passenger shelters. Such 
facilities need not be located in conjunction with any existing or 
planned mass transportation service, but should be designed so that the 
facility could accommodate mass transportation in the event such service 
may be developed. Except for the requirement of the availability of 
mass/public transportation facilities, fringe parking construction under 
this section shall be subject to the provisions of 23 CFR part 810.106.
    (7) Reasonable public information and promotion expenses, including 
personnel costs, incurred in connection with any of the other eligible 
items mentioned herein.

[[Page 251]]


<R05>
Sec. 656.7  Determination of an exception.

    (a) The FHWA has determined under provisions of 23 U.S.C. 146(b) 
that an exceptional situation exists in regard to the funding of 
carpools so as to allow the State to contribute as its share of the non-
Federal match essential project-related work and services performed by 
local agencies and private organizations when approved and authorized in 
accordance with regular Federal-aid procedures. The cost of such work 
must be properly valued, supportable and verifiable in order for 
inclusion as an eligible project cost. Examples of such contributed work 
and services include: public service announcements, computer services, 
and project-related staff time for administration by employees of public 
and private organizations.
    (b) This determination is based on: (1) The nature of carpool 
projects to provide a variety of services to the public; (2) the fact 
that carpool projects are labor intensive and require professional and 
specialized technical skills; (3) the extensive use of joint public and 
private endeavors; and (4) the fact that project costs involve the 
acquisition of capital equipment as opposed to construction of fixed 
items.
    (c) This exception is limited to carpool projects and therefore is 
not applicable to other Federal-aid projects. The exception does not 
affect or replace the standard Federal-aid funding procedures or real 
property acquisition procedures and requirements, part 712, The 
Acquisition Function.


<R03>
PART 657_CERTIFICATION OF SIZE AND WEIGHT ENFORCEMENT--Table of Contents




Sec.
657.1 Purpose.
657.3 Definition.
657.5 Policy.
657.7 Objective.
657.9 Formulation of a plan for enforcement.
657.11 Evaluation of operations.
657.13 Certification requirement.
657.15 Certification content.
657.17 Certification submittal.
657.19 Effect of failure to certify or to enforce State laws adequately.
657.21 Procedure for reduction of funds.

Appendix to Part 657--Guidelines To Be Used in Developing Enforcement 
          Plans and Certification Evaluation

    Authority: Sec. 123, Pub. L. 95-599, 92 Stat. 2689; 23 U.S.C. 127, 
141, and 315; 49 U.S.C. 31111, 31113, and 31114; sec. 1023, Pub. L. 102-
240, 105 Stat. 1914; and 49 CFR 1.48(b)(19), (b)(23), (c)(1), and 
(c)(19).

    Source: 45 FR 52368, Aug. 7, 1980, as amended at 62 FR 62261, Nov. 
21, 1997, unless otherwise noted.
    Note: The recordkeeping requirements contained in this part have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control 
number 2125-0034.


<R05>
Sec. 657.1  Purpose.

    To prescribe requirements for administering a program of vehicle 
size and weight enforcement on Federal-aid (FA) highways, including the 
required annual certification by the State.


<R05>
Sec. 657.3  Definition.

    Enforcing or enforcement means all actions by the State to obtain 
compliance with size and weight requirements by all vehicles operating 
on the FA Interstate, primary, urban, and secondary systems.


<R05>
Sec. 657.5  Policy.

    Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) policy is that each State 
enforce vehicle size and weight laws to assure that violations are 
discouraged and that vehicles traversing the highway system do not 
exceed the limits specified by law. These size and weight limits are 
based upon design specifications and safety considerations, and 
enforcement shall be developed and maintained both to prevent premature 
deterioration of the highway pavement and structures and to provide a 
safe driving environment.


<R05>
Sec. 657.7  Objective.

    The objective of this regulation is the development and operation by 
each State of an enforcement process which identifies vehicles of 
excessive size and weight and provides a systematic approach to 
eliminate violations and thus improve conditions.

[[Page 252]]


<R05>
Sec. 657.9  Formulation of a plan for enforcement.

    (a) Each State shall develop a plan for the maintenance of an 
effective enforcement process. The plan shall describe the procedures, 
resources, and facilities which the State intends to devote to the 
enforcement of its vehicle size and weight laws. Each State plan must be 
accepted by the FHWA and will then serve as a basis by which the annual 
certification of enforcement will be judged for adequacy.
    (b) The plan shall discuss the following subjects:
    (1) Facilities and resources. (i) No program shall be approved which 
does not utilize a combination of at least two of the following listed 
devices to deter evasion of size and weight measurement in sufficient 
quantity to cover the FA system: fixed platform scales; portable wheel 
weigher scales; semiportable or ramp scales; WIM equipment.
    (ii) Staff assigned to the program, identified by specific agency. 
Where more than one State agency has weight enforcement responsibility, 
the lead agency should be indicated.
    (2) Practices and procedures. (i) Proposed plan of operation, 
including geographical coverage and hours of operation in general terms.
    (ii) Policy and practices with respect to overweight violators, 
including off-loading requirements for divisible loads. In those States 
in which off-loading is mandatory by law, an administrative variance 
from the legal requirement shall be fully explained. In those States in 
which off-loading is permissive administrative guidelines shall be 
included.
    (iii) Policy and practices with respect to penalties, including 
those for repeated violations. Administrative directives, booklets or 
other written criteria shall be made part of the plan submission.
    (iv) Policy and practices with respect to special permits for 
overweight. Administrative directives, booklets or other written 
criteria shall be made part of the plan submission.
    (3) Updating. Modification and/or additions to the plan based on 
experience and new developments in the enforcement program. It is 
recognized that the plan is not static and that changes may be required 
to meet changing needs.


<R05>
Sec. 657.11  Evaluation of operations.

    (a) The State shall submit its enforcement plan or annual update to 
the Office of Motor Carriers in the FHWA division office by July 1 of 
each year. However, if a State's legislative or budgetary cycle is not 
consonant with that date, the FHWA and the State may jointly select an 
alternate date. In any event, a State must have an approved plan in 
effect by October 1 of each year. Failure of a State to submit or update 
a plan will result in the State being unable to certify in accordance 
with Sec. 657.13 for the period to be covered by the plan.
    (b) The Office of Motor Carriers in the FHWA division office shall 
review the State's operation under the accepted plan on a continuing 
basis and shall prepare an evaluation report annually. The State will be 
advised of the results of the evaluation and of any needed changes 
either in the plan itself or in its implementation. Copies of the 
evaluation report and subsequent modifications resulting from the 
evaluation shall be forwarded through the Regional Director of Motor 
Carriers to the Washington, D.C., Headquarters office.

[59 FR 30418, June 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 657.13  Certification requirement.

    Each State shall certify to the Federal Highway Administrator, 
before January 1 of each year, that it is enforcing all State laws 
respecting maximum vehicle size and weight permitted on what, prior to 
October 1, 1991, were the Federal-aid Primary, Secondary, and Urban 
Systems, including the Interstate System, in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 
127. The States must also certify that they are enforcing and complying 
with the ISTEA freeze on the use of LCV's and other multi-unit vehicles. 
The certification shall be supported by information on activities and 
results achieved during the preceding 12-month period ending on 
September 30 of each year.

[59 FR 30418, June 13, 1994]

[[Page 253]]


<R05>
Sec. 657.15  Certification content.

    The certification shall consist of the following elements and each 
element shall be addressed even though the response is negative:
    (a) A statement by the Governor of the State, or an official 
designated by the Governor, that the State's vehicle weight laws and 
regulations governing use of the Interstate System conform to 23 U.S.C. 
127.
    (b) A statement by the Governor of the State, or an official 
designated by the Governor, that all State size and weight limits are 
being enforced on the Interstate System and those routes which prior to 
October 1, 1991, were designated as part of the Federal-aid Primary, 
Urban, and Secondary Systems, and that the State is enforcing and 
complying with the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 127(d) and 49 U.S.C. 31112 
Urbanized areas not subject to State jurisdiction shall be identified. 
The statement shall include an analysis of enforcement efforts in such 
areas.
    (c) Except for Alaska and Puerto Rico, the certifying statements 
required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall be worded as 
follows (the statements for Alaska and Puerto Rico do not have to 
reference 23 U.S.C. 127(d) in (c)(2), or include paragraph (c)(3) of 
this section):

    I, (name of certifying official), (position title), of the State of 
-------------- do hereby certify:

    (1) That all State laws and regulations governing vehicle size and 
weight are being enforced on those highways which, prior to October 1, 
1991, were designated as part of the Federal-aid Primary, Federal-aid 
Secondary, or Federal-aid Urban Systems;
    (2) That the State is enforcing the freeze provisions of the 
Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (23 U.S.C. 
127(d) and 49 U.S.C. 31112); and
    (3) That all State laws governing vehicle weight on the Interstate 
System are consistent with 23 U.S.C. 127 (a) and (b).
    (d) If this statement is made by an official other than the 
Governor, a copy of the document designating the official, signed by the 
Governor, shall also be included in the certification made under this 
part.
    (e) A copy of any State law or regulation pertaining to vehicle 
sizes and weights adopted since the State's last certification and an 
analysis of the changes made. Those laws and regulations pertaining to 
special permits and penalties shall be specifically identified and 
analyzed in accordance with section 123 of the Surface Transportation 
Assistance Act of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-599).
    (f) A report of State size and weight enforcement efforts during the 
period covered by the certification which addresses the following:
    (1) Actual operations as compared with those forecast by the plan 
submitted earlier, with particular attention to changes in or deviations 
from the operations proposed.
    (2) Impacts of the process as actually applied, in terms of changes 
in the number of oversize and/or overweight vehicles.
    (3) Measures of activity--(i) Vehicles weighed. Separate totals 
shall be reported for the annual number of vehicles weighed on fixed 
scales, on semiportable scales, on portable scales, and on WIM when used 
for enforcement.
    (ii) Penalties. Penalties reported shall include the number of 
citations or civil assessments issued for violations of each of the 
following: Axle, gross and bridge formula weight limits. The number of 
vehicles whose loads are either shifted or offloaded must also be 
reported.
    (iii) Permits. The number of permits issued for overweight loads 
shall be reported. The reported numbers shall specify permits for 
divisible and nondivisible loads and whether issued on a trip or annual 
basis. Permits issued for excess height, length, or width need not be 
reported except where issued for the overwidth movement of a divisible 
load.

[59 FR 30418, June 13, 1994, as amended at 62 FR 10181, Mar. 5, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 657.17  Certification submittal.

    (a) The Governor, or an official designated by the Governor, shall 
submit the certification to the Office of Motor

[[Page 254]]

Carriers in the FHWA division office prior to January 1 of each year.
    (b) The Office of Motor Carriers in the FHWA division office shall 
forward the original certification to the Associate Administrator for 
Motor Carriers and one copy to the Office of Chief Counsel. Copies of 
appropriate evaluations and/or comments shall accompany any transmittal.

[59 FR 30418, June 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 657.19  Effect of failure to certify or to enforce State laws 
adequately.

    Beginning January 1, 1981, if a State fails to certify as required 
by this regulation or if the Secretary determines that a State is not 
adequately enforcing all State laws respecting maximum vehicle sizes and 
weights on FA highways notwithstanding the State's certification, the FA 
highway funds apportioned to the State for the next fiscal year shall be 
reduced by an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount which would 
otherwise be apportioned to the State under 23 U.S.C. 104, and/or by the 
amount required pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 127.


<R05>
Sec. 657.21  Procedure for reduction of funds.

    (a) If it appears to the Federal Highway Administrator that a State 
has not submitted a certification conforming to the requirements of this 
regulation, or that the State is not adequately enforcing State laws 
respecting maximum vehicle size and weight, including laws applicable to 
vehicles using the Interstate System with weights or widths in excess of 
those provided under 23 U.S.C. 127, the Federal Highway Administrator 
shall make in writing a proposed determination of nonconformity, and 
shall notify the Governor of the State of the proposed determination by 
certified mail. The notice shall state the reasons for the proposed 
determination and inform the State that it may, within 30 days from the 
date of the notice, request a hearing to show cause why it should not be 
found in nonconformity. If the State informs the Administrator before 
the end of this 30-day period that it wishes to attempt to resolve the 
matter informally, the Administrator may extend the time for requesting 
a hearing. In the event of a request for informal resolution, the State 
and the Administrator (or designee) shall promptly schedule a meeting to 
resolve the matter.
    (b) In all instances where the State proceeds on the basis of 
informal resolution, a transcript of the conference will be made and 
furnished to the State by the FHWA.
    (1) The State may offer any information which it considers helpful 
to a resolution of the matter, and the scope of review at the conference 
will include, but not be limited to, legislative actions, including 
those proposed to remedy deficiencies, budgetary considerations, 
judicial actions, and proposals for specific actions which will be 
implemented to bring the State into compliance.
    (2) The information produced at the conference may constitute an 
explanation and offer of settlement and the Administrator will make a 
determination on the basis of the certification, record of the 
conference, and other information submitted by the State. The 
Administrator's final decision together with a copy of the transcript of 
the conference will be furnished to the State.
    (3) If the Administrator does not accept an offer of settlement made 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the State retains the 
right to request a hearing on the record pursuant to paragraph (d) of 
this section, except in the case of a violation of section 127.
    (c) If the State does not request a hearing in a timely fashion as 
provided in paragraph (a) of this section, the Federal Highway 
Administrator shall forward the proposed determination of nonconformity 
to the Secretary. Upon approval of the proposed determination by the 
Secretary, the fund reduction specified by Sec. 657.19 shall be 
effected.
    (d) If the State requests a hearing, the Secretary shall 
expeditiously convene a hearing on the record, which shall be conducted 
according to the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 
U.S.C. 555 et seq. Based on the record of the proceeding, the Secretary 
shall determine whether the State is in nonconformity with this 
regulation. If the Secretary determines that the State is in 
nonconformity, the

[[Page 255]]

fund reduction specified by section 567.19 shall be effected.
    (e) The Secretary may reserve 10 percent of a State's apportionment 
of funds under 23 U.S.C. 104 pending a final administrative 
determination under this regulation to prevent the apportionment to the 
State of funds which would be affected by a determination of 
nonconformity.
    (f) Funds withheld pursuant to a final administrative determination 
under this regulation shall be reapportioned to all other eligible 
States one year from the date of this determination, unless before this 
time the Secretary determines, on the basis of information submitted by 
the State and the FHWA, that the State has come into conformity with 
this regulation. If the Secretary determines that the State has come 
into conformity, the withheld funds shall be released to the State.
    (g) The reapportionment of funds under paragraph (e) of this section 
shall be stayed during the pendency of any judicial review of the 
Secretary's final administrative determination of nonconformity.

 Appendix to Part 657--Guidelines To Be Used in Developing Enforcement 
                   Plans and Certification Evaluation

                       A. Facilities and Equipment

    1. Permanent Scales
    a. Number
    b. Location (a map appropriately coded is suggested)
    c. Public-private (if any)
    2. Weigh-in-motion (WIM)
    a. Number
    b. Location (notation on above map is suggested)
    3. Semi-portable scales
    a. Type and number
    b. If used in sets, the number comprising a set
    4. Portable Scales
    a. Type and number
    b. If used in sets, the number comprising a set

                              B. Resources

    1. Agencies involved (i.e., highway agency, State police, motor 
vehicle department, etc.)
    2. Personnel--numbers from respective agencies assigned to weight 
enforcement
    3. Funding
    a. Facilities
    b. Personnel

                              C. Practices

    1. Proposed schedule of operation of fixed scale locations in 
general terms
    2. Proposed schedule of deployment of portable scale equipment in 
general terms
    3. Proposed schedule of deployment of semi-portable equipment in 
general terms
    4. Strategy for prevention of bypassing of fixed weighing facility 
location
    5. Proposed action for implementation of off-loading, if applicable

                                D. Goals

    1. Short term--the year beginning
October 1 following submission of a vehicle size and weight enforcement 
plan
    2. Medium term--2-4 years after submission of the enforcement plan
    3. Long term--5 years beyond the submission of the enforcement plan
    4. Provision for annual review and update of vehicle size and weight 
enforcement plan

                              E. Evaluation

    The evaluation of an existing plan, in comparison to goals for 
strengthening the enforcement program, is a difficult task, especially 
since there is very limited experience nationwide.
    The FHWA plans to approach this objective through a continued 
cooperative effort with State and other enforcement agencies by 
gathering useful information and experience on elements of enforcement 
practices that produce positive results.
    It is not considered practicable at this time to establish objective 
minimums, such as the number of vehicles to be weighed by each State, as 
a requirement for satisfactory compliance. However, the States will want 
to know as many specifics as possible about what measuring tools will be 
used to evaluate their annual certifications for adequacy.
    The above discussion goes to the heart of the question concerning 
numerical criteria. The assumption that a certain number of weighings 
will provide a maximum or even satisfactory deterrent is not 
supportable. The enforcement of vehicle size and weight laws requires 
that vehicles be weighed but it does not logically follow that the more 
vehicles weighed, the more effective the enforcement program, especially 
if the vehicles are weighed at a limited number of fixed locations. A 
``numbers game'' does not necessarily provide a deterrent to deliberate 
overloading. Consistent, vigorous enforcement activities, the certainty 
of apprehension and of penalty, the adequacy of the penalty, even the 
publicity given these factors, may be greater deterrents than the number 
of weighings alone.
    In recognizing that all States are unique in character, there are 
some similarities between certain States and useful perspectives

[[Page 256]]

may be obtained by relating their program elements. Some comparative 
factors are:
    1. Truck registration (excluding pickups and panels)
    2. Population
    3. Average Daily Traffic (ADT) for trucks on FA highways
    4. To total mileage of Federal-aid highways
    5. Geographic location of the State
    6. Annual truck miles traveled in State
    7. Number of truck terminals (over 6 doors)
    8. Vehicle miles of intrastate truck traffic
    Quantities relating to the above items can become factors that in 
the aggregate are descriptive of a State's characteristics and can 
identify States that are similar from a trucking operation viewpoint. 
This is especially applicable for States within the same area.
    After States with similar truck traffic operations have been 
identified in a regional area, another important variable must be 
considered: the type of weighing equipment that has been or is proposed 
for predominant use in the States. When data become available on the 
number of trucks weighed by each type of scale (fixed, portable, semi-
portable, etc.) some indicators will be developed to relate one State's 
effort to those of other States. The measures of activity that are a 
part of each certification submitted will provide a basis for the 
development of more precise numerical criteria by which an enforcement 
plan and its activities can be judged for adequacy.
    Previous certifications have provided information from which the 
following gross scale capabilities have been derived.

                      Potential Weighing Capacities

    1. Permanent scales 60 veh/hr.
    2. Weigh-in-motion scales 100 veh/hr.
    3. Semi-portable scales 25 veh/hr.
    4. Portable scales 3 veh/hr.
    To meet the mandates of Federal and other laws regarding truck size 
and weight enforcement, the FHWA desires to become a resource for all 
States in achieving a successful exchange of useful information. Some 
States are more advanced in their enforcement activities. Some have 
special experience with portable, semi-portable, fixed, or weighing-in-
motion devices. Others have operated permanent scales in combination 
with concentrated safety inspection programs. The FHWA is interested in 
information on individual State experiences in these specialized areas 
as part of initial plan submissions. If such information has recently 
been furnished to the Washington Headquarters, an appropriate cross 
reference should be included on the submission.
    It is the policy of the FHWA to avoid red tape, and information 
volunteered by the States will be of assistance in meeting many needs. 
The ultimate goal in developing information through the evaluation 
process is to assemble criteria for a model enforcement program.


<R03>
PART 658_TRUCK SIZE AND WEIGHT, ROUTE DESIGNATIONS_LENGTH, WIDTH AND 
WEIGHT LIMITATIONS--Table of Contents




Sec.
658.1 Purpose.
658.3 Policy statement.
658.5 Definitions.
658.7 Applicability.
658.9 National Network criteria.
658.11 Additions, deletions, exceptions, and restrictions.
658.13 Length.
658.15 Width.
658.16 Exclusions from length and width determinations.
658.17 Weight.
658.19 Reasonable access.
658.21 Identification of National Network.
658.23 LCV freeze; cargo-carrying unit freeze.

Appendix A to Part 658--National Network--Federally-Designated Routes
Appendix B to Part 658--Grandfathered Semitrailer Lengths
Appendix C to Part 658--Trucks Over 80,000 Pounds on the Interstate 
          System and Trucks Over STAA Lengths on the National Network
Appendix D to Part 658--Devices That Are Excluded From Measurement of 
          the Length or Width of a Commercial Motor Vehicle

    Authority:  23 U.S.C. 127 and 315; 49 U.S.C. 31111, 31112, and 
31114; 49 CFR 1.48(b)(19) and (c)(19).

    Source: 49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 658.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to identify a National Network of 
highways available to vehicles authorized by provisions of the Surface 
Transportation Assistance Act of 1982 (STAA) as amended, and to 
prescribe national policies that govern truck and bus size and weight.

[59 FR 30419, June 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 658.3  Policy statement.

    The Federal Highway Administration's (FHWA) policy is to provide a 
safe and efficient National Network of

[[Page 257]]

highways that can safely and efficiently accommodate the large vehicles 
authorized by the STAA. This network includes the Interstate System plus 
other qualifying Federal-aid Primary System Highways.


<R05>
Sec. 658.5  Definitions.

    Automobile transporters. Any vehicle combination designed and used 
specifically for the transport of assembled highway vehicles, including 
truck camper units.
    Beverage semitrailer. A van-type, drop-frame semitrailer designed 
and used specifically for the transport and delivery of bottled or 
canned beverages (i.e., liquids for drinking, including water) which has 
side-only access for loading and unloading this commodity. Semitrailer 
has the same meaning as in 49 CFR 390.5.
    Boat transporters. Any vehicle combination designed and used 
specifically to transport assembled boats and boat hulls. Boats may be 
partially disassembled to facilitate transporting.
    Bridge gross weight formula. The standard specifying the 
relationship between axle (or groups of axles) spacing and the gross 
weight that (those) axle(s) may carry expressed by the formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.011

where W=overall gross weight on any group of two or more consecutive 
axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L=distance in feet between the extreme 
of any group of two or more consecutive axles, and N=number of axles in 
the group under consideration.

    Cargo-carrying unit. As used in this part, cargo-carrying unit means 
any portion of a commercial motor vehicle (CMV) combination (other than 
a truck tractor) used for the carrying of cargo, including a trailer, 
semitrailer, or the cargo-carrying section of a single-unit truck. The 
length of the cargo carrying units of a CMV with two or more such units 
is measured from the front of the first unit to the rear of the last 
[including the hitch(es) between the units].
    Commercial motor vehicle. For purposes of this regulation a motor 
vehicle designed or regularly used for carrying freight, merchandise, or 
more than ten passengers, whether loaded or empty, including buses, but 
not including vehicles used for vanpools.
    Dromedary unit. A box, deck, or plate mounted behind the cab and 
forward of the fifth wheel on the frame of the power unit of a truck 
tractor-semitrailer combination.
    Federal-aid Primary System. The Federal-aid Highway System of rural 
arterials and their extensions into or through urban areas in existence 
on June 1, 1991, as described in 23 U.S.C. 103(b) in effect at that 
time.
    Fullmount. A fullmount is a smaller vehicle mounted completely on 
the frame of either the first or last vehicle in a saddlemount 
combination.
    Interstate System. The National System of Interstate and Defense 
Highways described in sections 103(e) and 139(a) of Title 23, U.S.C. For 
the purpose of this regulation this system includes toll roads 
designated as Interstate.
    Length exclusive devices. Devices excluded from the measurement of 
vehicle length. Such devices shall not be designed or used to carry 
cargo.
    Longer combination vehicle (LCV). As used in this part, longer 
combination vehicle means any combination of a truck tractor and two or 
more trailers or semitrailers which operates on the Interstate System at 
a gross vehicle weight greater than 80,000 pounds.
    Maxi-cube vehicle. A maxi-cube vehicle is a combination vehicle 
consisting of a power unit and a trailing unit, both of which are 
designed to carry cargo. The power unit is a nonarticulated truck with 
one or more drive axles that carries either a detachable or a 
permanently attached cargo box. The trailing unit is a trailer or 
semitrailer with a cargo box so designed that the power unit may be 
loaded and unloaded through the trailing unit. Neither cargo box shall 
exceed 34 feet in length, excluding drawbar or hitching device; the 
distance from the front of the first to the rear of the second cargo box 
shall not exceed 60 feet, including the space between the cargo boxes; 
and the overall length of the combination vehicle shall not exceed 65 
feet, including the space between the cargo boxes.

[[Page 258]]

    Motor carrier of passengers. As used in this part, a motor carrier 
of passengers is a common, contract, or private carrier using a bus to 
provide commercial transportation of passengers. Bus has the same 
meaning as in 49 CFR 390.5.
    National Network (NN). The composite of the individual network of 
highways from each State on which vehicles authorized by the provisions 
of the STAA are allowed to operate. The network in each State includes 
the Interstate System, exclusive of those portions excepted under Sec. 
658.11(f) or deleted under Sec. 658.11(d), and those portions of the 
Federal-aid Primary System in existence on June 1, 1991, set out by the 
FHWA in appendix A to this part.
    Nondivisible load or vehicle.
    (1) As used in this part, nondivisible means any load or vehicle 
exceeding applicable length or weight limits which, if separated into 
smaller loads or vehicles, would:
    (i) Compromise the intended use of the vehicle, i.e., make it unable 
to perform the function for which it was intended;
    (ii) Destroy the value of the load or vehicle, i.e., make it 
unusable for its intended purpose; or
    (iii) Require more than 8 workhours to dismantle using appropriate 
equipment. The applicant for a nondivisible load permit has the burden 
of proof as to the number of workhours required to dismantle the load.
    (2) A State may treat emergency response vehicles, casks designed 
for the transport of spent nuclear materials, and military vehicles 
transporting marked military equipment or materiel as nondivisible 
vehicles or loads.
    Saddlemount combination. A saddlemount combination is a combination 
of vehicles in which a truck or truck tractor tows one or more trucks or 
truck tractors, each connected by a saddle to the frame or fifth wheel 
of the vehicle in front of it. The saddle is a mechanism that connects 
the front axle of the towed vehicle to the frame or fifth wheel of the 
vehicle in front and functions like a fifth wheel kingpin connection. 
When two vehicles are towed in this manner the combination is called a 
double saddlemount combination. When three vehicles are towed in this 
manner, the combination is called a triple saddlemount combination.
    Single axle weight. The total weight transmitted to the road by all 
wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel transverse 
vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of the 
vehicle. The Federal single axle weight limit on the Interstate System 
is 20,000 pounds.
    Special mobile equipment. Every self-propelled vehicle not designed 
or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and 
incidentally operated or moved over the highways, including military 
equipment, farm equipment, implements of husbandry, road construction or 
maintenance machinery, and emergency apparatus which includes fire and 
police emergency equipment. This list is partial and not exclusive of 
such other vehicles as may fall within the general terms of this 
definition.
    Stinger-steered combination. A truck tractor semitrailer wherein the 
fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the 
rear-most axle of the power unit.
    Tandem axle weight. The total weight transmitted to the road by two 
or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel 
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches and not more than 
96 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. The 
Federal tandem axle weight limit on the Interstate System is 34,000 
pounds.
    Terminal. The term terminal as used in this regulation means, at a 
minimum, any location where:
    Freight either originates, terminates, or is handled in the 
transportation process; or
    Commercial motor carriers maintain operating facilities.
    Tractor or Truck tractor. The noncargo carrying power unit that 
operates in combination with a semitrailer or trailer, except that a 
truck tractor and semitrailer engaged in the transportation of 
automobiles may transport motor vehicles on part of the power unit, and 
a truck tractor equipped with a dromedary unit operating in combination 
with a semitrailer transporting Class 1 explosives and/or any munitions 
related security material as

[[Page 259]]

specified by the U.S. Department of Defense in compliance with 49 CFR 
177.835 may use the dromedary unit to carry a portion of the cargo.
    Truck-tractor semitrailer-semitrailer. In a truck-tractor 
semitrailer-semitrailer combination vehicle, the two trailing units are 
connected with a ``B-train'' assembly. The B-train assembly is a rigid 
frame extension attached to the rear frame of a first semitrailer which 
allows for a fifth wheel connection point for the second semitrailer. 
This combination has one less articulation point than the conventional 
``A dolly'' connected truck-tractor semitrailer-trailer combination.
    Truck-trailer boat transporter. A boat transporter combination 
consisting of a straight truck towing a trailer using typically a ball 
and socket connection. The trailer axle(s) is located substantially at 
the trailer center of gravity (rather than the rear of the trailer) but 
so as to maintain a downward force on the trailer tongue.
    Width exclusive devices. Devices excluded from the measurement of 
vehicle width. Such devices shall not be designed or used to carry 
cargo.

[49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, as amended at 53 FR 2597, Jan. 29, 1988; 53 
FR 12148, Apr. 13, 1988; 53 FR 25485, July 7, 1988; 53 FR 48636, Dec. 2, 
1988; 55 FR 22762, June 1, 1990; 55 FR 32399, Aug. 9, 1990; 59 FR 30419, 
June 13, 1994; 63 FR 70652, Dec. 22, 1998; 64 FR 48959, Sept. 9, 1999; 
67 FR 15109, Mar. 29, 2002; 68 FR 37968, June 26, 2003]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 11996, Mar. 12, 2004, Sec. 658.5 was 
amended by revising the term ``Commercial motor vehicle'', effective 
Apr. 12, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set 
forth as follows:

Sec. 658.5  Definitions.

                                * * * * *

    Commercial motor vehicle. For purposes of this regulation, a motor 
vehicle designed or regularly used to carry freight, merchandise, or 
more than ten passengers, whether loaded or empty, including buses, but 
not including vehicles used for vanpools, or vehicles built and operated 
as recreational vehicles.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 658.7  Applicability.

    Except as limited in Sec. 658.17(a) the provisions of this part are 
applicable to the National Network and reasonable access thereto. 
However, nothing in this regulation shall be construed to prevent any 
State from applying any weight and size limits to other highways, except 
when such limits would deny reasonable access to the National Network.


<R05>
Sec. 658.9  National Network criteria.

    (a) The National Network listed in the appendix to this part is 
available for use by commerical motor vehicles of the dimensions and 
configurations described in Sec. Sec. 658.13 and 658.15.
    (b) For those States with detailed lists of individual routes in the 
appendix, the routes have been designated on the basis of their general 
adherence to the following criteria.
    (1) The route is a geometrically typical component of the Federal-
Aid Primary System, serving to link principal cities and densely 
developed portions of the States.
    (2) The route is a high volume route utilized extensively by large 
vehicles for interstate commerce.
    (3) The route does not have any restrictions precluding use by 
conventional combination vehicles.
    (4) The route has adequate geometrics to support safe operations, 
considering sight distance, severity and length of grades, pavement 
width, horizontal curvature, shoulder width, bridge clearances and load 
limits, traffic volumes and vehicle mix, and intersection geometry.
    (5) The route consists of lanes designed to be a width of 12 feet or 
more or is otherwise consistent with highway safety.
    (6) The route does not have any unusual characteristics causing 
current or anticipated safety problems.
    (c) For those States where State law provides that STAA authorized 
vehicles may use all or most of the Federal-Aid Primary system, the 
National Network is no more restrictive than such law. The appendix 
contains a narrative summary of the National Network in those States.

[49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, as amended at 53 FR 12148, Apr. 13, 1988]

[[Page 260]]


<R05>
Sec. 658.11  Additions, deletions, exceptions, and restrictions.

    To ensure that the National Network remains substantially intact, 
FHWA retains the authority to rule upon all requested additions to and 
deletions from the National Network as well as requests for the 
imposition of certain restrictions. FHWA approval or disapproval will 
constitute the final decision of the U.S. Department of Transportation.
    (a) Additions. (1) Requests for additions to the National Network, 
including justification, shall have the endorsement of the Governor or 
the Governor's authorized representative, and be submitted in writing to 
the appropriate FHWA Division Office. Proposals for addition of routes 
to the National Network shall be accompanied by an analysis of 
suitability based on the criteria in Sec. 658.9.
    (2) Proposals for additions that meet the criteria of Sec. 658.9 
and have the endorsement of the Governor or the Governor's authorized 
representative will be published in the Federal Register for public 
comment as a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM), and if found 
acceptable, as a final rule.
    (b) Deletions--Federal-aid primary--other than interstate. Changed 
conditions or additional information may require the deletion of a 
designated route or a portion thereof. The deletion of any route or 
route segment shall require FHWA approval. Requests for deletion of 
routes from the National Network, including the reason(s) for the 
deletion, shall be submitted in writing to the appropriate FHWA Division 
Office. These requests shall be assessed on the basis of the criteria of 
Sec. 658.9. FHWA proposed deletions will be published in the Federal 
Register as a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM).
    (c) Requests for deletion--Federal-aid primary--other than 
interstate. Requests for deletion should include the following 
information, where appropriate:
    (1) Did the route segment prior to designation carry combination 
vehicles or 102-inch buses?
    (2) Were truck restrictions in effect on the segment on January 6, 
1983? If so, what types of restrictions?
    (3) What is the safety record of the segment, including current or 
anticipated safety problems? Specifically, is the route experiencing 
above normal accident rates and/or accident severities? Does analysis of 
the accident problem indicate that the addition of larger trucks have 
aggravated existing accident problems?
    (4) What are the geometric, structural or traffic operations 
features that might preclude safe, efficient operation? Specifically 
describe lane widths, sight distance, severity and length of grades, 
horizontal curvature, shoulder width, narrow bridges, bridge clearances 
and load limits, traffic volumes and vehicle mix, intersection 
geometrics and vulnerability of roadside hardware.
    (5) Is there a reasonable alternate route available?
    (6) Are there operational restrictions that might be implemented in 
lieu of deletion?
    (d) Deletions and use restrictions--Federal-aid interstate. (1) The 
deletion of, or imposition of use restrictions on, any specific segment 
of the Interstate Highway System on the National Network, except as 
otherwise provided in this part, must be approved by the FHWA. Such 
action will be initiated on the FHWA's own initiative or on the request 
of the Governor or the Governor's authorized representative of the State 
in which the Interstate segment is located. Requests from the Governor 
or the Governor's authorized representative shall be submitted along 
with justification for the deletion or restriction, in writing, to the 
appropriate FHWA Division Office for transmittal to Washington 
Headquarters.
    (2) The justification accompanying a request shall be based on the 
following:
    (i) Analysis of evidence of safety problems supporting the deletion 
or restriction as identified in Sec. 658.11(c).
    (ii) Analysis of the impact on interstate commerce.
    (iii) Analysis and recommendation of any alternative routes that can 
safely accommodate commercial motor vehicles of the dimensions and 
configurations described in Sec. Sec. 658.13 and 658.15 and serve the 
area in which such segment is located.

[[Page 261]]

    (iv) Evidence of consultation with the local governments in which 
the segment is located as well as the Governor or the Governor's 
authorized representative of any adjacent State that might be directly 
affected by such a deletion or restriction.
    (3) Actions to ban all commercial vehicles on portions of the 
Interstate System not excepted under Sec. 658.11(f) are considered 
deletions subject to the requirements of subsection (d) of this section.
    (4) Reasonable restrictions on the use of Interstate routes on the 
National Network by STAA-authorized vehicles related to specific travel 
lanes of multi-lane facilities, construction zones, adverse weather 
conditions or structural or clearance deficiencies are not subject to 
the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section.
    (5) Proposed deletions or restrictions will be published in the 
Federal Register as an NPRM, except in the case of an emergency deletion 
as prescribed in Sec. 658.11(e). The FHWA will consider the factors set 
out in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and the comments of interested 
parties. Any approval of deletion or restriction will be published as a 
final rule. A deletion of or restriction on a segment for reasons 
ascribable to dimensions of commercial motor vehicles described in 
either Sec. 658.13 or Sec. 658.15 shall result in a deletion or 
restriction for the purposes of both Sec. Sec. 658.13 and 658.15.
    (e) Emergency deletions. FHWA has the authority to delete any route 
from the National Network, on an emergency basis, for safety 
considerations. Emergency deletions are not considered final, and will 
be published in the Federal Register for notice and comment.
    (f) Exceptions. Those portions of the Interstate System which were 
open to traffic and on which all commercial motor vehicles were banned 
on January 6, 1983, are not included in the National Network.
    (g) Restrictions--Federal-aid primary--other than interstate. (1) 
Reasonable restrictions on the use of non-Interstate Federal-aid Primary 
routes on the National Network by STAA-authorized vehicles may be 
imposed during certain peak hours of travel or on specific travel lanes 
of multi-lane facilities. Restrictions related to construction zones, 
seasonal operation, adverse weather conditions or structural or 
clearance deficiencies may be imposed.
    (2) All restrictions on the use of the National Network based on 
hours of use by vehicles authorized by the STAA require prior FHWA 
approval. Requests for such restrictions on the National Network shall 
be submitted in writing to the appropriate FHWA Division Office. 
Approval of requests for restrictions will be contingent on the ability 
to justify significant negative impact on safety, the environment and/or 
operational efficiency.

[49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, as amended at 53 FR 12148, Apr. 13, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 658.13  Length.

    (a) The length provisions of the STAA apply only to the following 
types of vehicle combinations:
    (1) Truck tractor-semitrailer
    (2) Truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer.

The length provisions apply only when these combinations are in use on 
the National Network or in transit between these highways and terminals 
or service locations pursuant to Sec. 658.19.
    (b) The length provisions referred to in paragraph (a) of this 
section include the following:
    (1) No State shall impose a length limitation of less than 48 feet 
on a semitrailer operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer combination.
    (2) No State shall impose a length limitation of less than 28 feet 
on any semitrailer or trailer operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer-
trailer combination.
    (3) No State shall impose an overall length limitation on commercial 
vehicles operating in truck tractor-semitrailer or truck tractor-
semitrailer-trailer combinations.
    (4) No State shall prohibit commercial motor vehicles operating in 
truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations.
    (5) No State shall prohibit the operation of semitrailers or 
trailers which are 28\1/2\ feet long when operating in a truck tractor-
semitrailer-trailer combination if such a trailer or semitrailer was in 
actual and lawful operation on December 1, 1982, and such combination

[[Page 262]]

had an overall length not exceeding 65 feet.
    (c) State maximum length limits for semitrailers operating in a 
truck tractor-semitrailer combination and semitrailers and trailers 
operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combination are subject 
to the following:
    (1) No State shall prohibit the use of trailers or semitrailers of 
such dimensions as those that were in actual and lawful use in such 
State on December 1, 1982, as set out in appendix B of this part.
    (2) If on December 1, 1982, State length limitations on a 
semitrailer were described in terms of the distance from the kingpin to 
rearmost axle, or end of semitrailer, the operation of any semitrailer 
that complies with that limitation must be allowed.
    (d) No State shall impose a limit of less than 45 feet on the length 
of any bus on the NN.
    (e) Specialized equipment--(1) Automobile transporters. (i) 
Automobile transporters are considered to be specialized equipment. As 
provided in Sec. 658.5, automobile transporters may carry vehicles on 
the power unit behind the cab and on an over-cab rack. No State shall 
impose an overall length limitation of less than 65 feet on traditional 
automobile transporters (5th wheel located on tractor frame over rear 
axle(s)), including ``low boys,'' or less than 75 feet on stinger-
steered automobile transporters. Paragraph (c) requires the States to 
allow operation of vehicles with the dimensions that were legal in the 
State on December 1, 1982.
    (ii) All length provisions regarding automobile transporters are 
exclusive of front and rear cargo overhang. No State shall impose a 
front overhang limitation of less than 3 feet or a rear overhang 
limitation of less than 4 feet. Extendable ramps or ``flippers'' on 
automobile transporters that are used to achieve the allowable 3-foot 
front and 4-foot rear cargo overhangs are excluded from the measurement 
of vehicle length, but must be retracted when not supporting vehicles.
    (iii) Drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and 
driveaway saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations 
are considered to be specialized equipment. No State shall impose an 
overall length limit of less than 75 feet on such combinations. This 
provision applies to saddlemount combinations with up to three 
saddlemounted vehicles. Such combinations may include one fullmount. 
Saddlemount combinations must also comply with the applicable safety 
regulations at 49 CFR 393.71.
    (2) Boat transporters. (i) Boat transporters are considered to be 
specialized equipment. As provided for automobile transporters in Sec. 
658.5, boat transporters may carry boats on the power unit so long as 
the length and width restrictions of the vehicles and load are not 
exceeded. No State shall impose an overall length limitation of less 
than 65 feet on traditional boat transporters (fifth wheel located on 
tractor frame over rear axle(s), including ``low boys,'' or less than 75 
feet on stinger-steered boat transporters. In addition, no State shall 
impose an overall length limitation of less than 65 feet on truck-
trailer boat transporters. Paragraph (c) of this section requires the 
States to allow operation of vehicles with the dimensions that were 
legal in the State on December 1, 1982.
    (ii) All length provisions regarding boat transporters are exclusive 
of front and rear overhang. Further, no State shall impose a front 
overhang limitation of less than three (3) feet nor a rearmost overhang 
limitation of less than four (4) feet.
    (3) Truck-tractor semitrailer-semitrailer. (i) Truck-tractor 
semitrailer-semitrailer combination vehicles are considered to be 
specialized equipment. No State shall impose a length limitation of less 
than 28 feet on any semitrailer or 28\1/2\ feet if the semitrailer was 
in legal operation on December 1, 1982, operating in a truck-tractor 
semitrailer-semitrailer combination. No State shall impose an overall 
length limitation on a truck-tractor semitrailer-semitrailer combination 
when each semitrailer length is 28 feet, or 28\1/2\ feet if 
grandfathered.
    (ii) The B-train assembly is excluded from the measurement of 
trailer length when used between the first and second trailer of a 
truck-tractor semitrailer-semitrailer combination vehicle. However, when 
there is no semitrailer

[[Page 263]]

mounted to the B-train assembly, it will be included in the length 
measurement of the semitrailer, the length limitation in this case being 
48 feet, or longer if grandfathered.
    (4) Maxi-cube vehicle. No State shall impose a length limit on a 
maxi-cube vehicle, as defined in Sec. 658.5 of this part, of less than 
34 feet on either cargo box, excluding drawbar or hitching device; 60 
feet on the distance from the front of the first to the rear of the 
second cargo box, including the space between the cargo boxes; or 65 
feet on the overall length of the combination, including the space 
between the cargo boxes. The measurement for compliance with the 60- and 
65-foot distance shall include the actual distance between cargo boxes, 
measured along the centerline of the drawbar or hitching device. For 
maxi-cubes with an adjustable length drawbar or hitching device, the 60- 
and 65-foot distances shall be measured with a drawbar spacing of not 
more than 27 inches. The drawbar may be temporarily extended beyond that 
distance to maneuver or load the vehicle.
    (5) Beverage semitrailer. (i) A beverage semitrailer is specialized 
equipment if it has an upper coupler plate that extends beyond the front 
of the semitrailer, but not beyond its swing radius, as measured from 
the center line of the kingpin to a front corner of the semitrailer, 
which cannot be used for carrying cargo other than the structure of the 
semitrailer, and with the center line of the kingpin not more than 28 
feet from the rear of the semitrailer (exclusive of rear-mounted devices 
not measured in determining semitrailer length). No State shall impose 
an overall length limit on such vehicles when operating in a truck 
tractor-beverage semitrailer or truck tractor-beverage semitrailer-
beverage trailer combination on the NN.
    (ii) The beverage trailer referred to in paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this 
section means a beverage semitrailer and converter dolly. Converter 
dolly has the same meaning as in 49 CFR 393.5.
    (iii) Truck tractor-beverage semitrailer combinations shall have the 
same access to points of loading and unloading as 28-foot semitrailers 
(28.5-foot where allowed by Sec. 658.13) in 23 CFR 658.19.
    (6) Munitions carriers using dromedary equipment. A truck tractor 
equipped with a dromedary unit operating in combination with a 
semitrailer is considered to be specialized equipment, providing the 
combination is transporting Class 1 explosives and/or any munitions 
related security material as specified by the U.S. Department of Defense 
in compliance with 49 CFR 177.835. No State shall impose an overall 
length limitation of less than 75 feet on the combination while in 
operation.
    (f) A truck tractor containing a dromedary box, deck, or plate in 
legal operation on December 1, 1982, shall be permitted to continue to 
operate, notwithstanding its cargo carrying capacity, throughout its 
useful life. Proof of such legal operation on December 1, 1982, shall 
rest upon the operator of the equipment.
    (g) No State shall impose a limitation of less than 46 feet on the 
distance from the kingpin to the center of the rear axle on trailers or 
semitrailers used exclusively or primarily to transport vehicles in 
connection with motorsports competition events.

[49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, as amended at 53 FR 2597, 2599, Jan. 29, 
1988; 53 FR 25485, July 7, 1988; 53 FR 48636, Dec. 2, 1988; 55 FR 4998, 
Feb. 13, 1990; 55 FR 32399, Aug. 9, 1990; 59 FR 30419, June 13, 1994; 62 
FR 10181, Mar. 5, 1997; 63 FR 70653, Dec. 22, 1998; 67 FR 15109, Mar. 
29, 2002; 68 FR 37968, June 26, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 658.15  Width.

    (a) No State shall impose a width limitation of more or less than 
102 inches, or its approximate metric equivalent, 2.6 meters (102.36 
inches) on a vehicle operating on the National Network, except for the 
State of Hawaii, which is allowed to keep the State's 108-inch width 
maximum by virtue of section 416(a) of the STAA.
    (b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section do not apply to 
special mobile equipment as defined in Sec. 658.5.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or any other 
provision of

[[Page 264]]

law, a State may grant special use permits to motor vehicles, including 
manufactured housing, that exceed 102 inches in width.

[49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, as amended at 59 FR 30419, June 13, 1994; 67 
FR 15110, Mar. 29, 2002]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 11996, Mar. 12, 2004, Sec. 658.15 was 
amended by revising paragraph (c), effective Apr. 12, 2004. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 658.15  Width.

                                * * * * *

    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or any other 
provision of law, the following are applicable:
    (1) A State may grant special use permits to motor vehicles, 
including manufactured housing, that exceed 102 inches in width; and
    (2) A State may allow recreational vehicles with safety and/or non-
cargo carrying appurtenances extending beyond 3 inches from the side of 
the vehicle to operate without a special use over-width permit.


<R05>
Sec. 658.16  Exclusions from length and width determinations.

    (a) Vehicle components not excluded by law or regulation shall be 
included in the measurement of the length and width of commercial motor 
vehicles.
    (b) The following shall be excluded from either the measured length 
or width of commercial motor vehicles, as applicable:
    (1) Rear view mirrors, turn signal lamps, handholds for cab entry/
egress, splash and spray suppressant devices, load induced tire bulge;
    (2) All non-property-carrying devices, or components thereof--
    (i) At the front of a semitrailer or trailer, or
    (ii) That do not extend more than 3 inches beyond each side or the 
rear of the vehicle, or
    (iii) That do not extend more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the 
vehicle and are needed for loading or unloading, or
    (vi) Listed in appendix D to this part;
    (3) Resilient bumpers that do not extend more than 6 inches beyond 
the front or rear of the vehicle;
    (4) Aerodynamic devices that extend a maximum of 5 feet beyond the 
rear of the vehicle, provided such devices have neither the strength, 
rigidity nor mass to damage a vehicle, or injure a passenger in a 
vehicle, that strikes a trailer so equipped from the rear, and provided 
also that they do not obscure tail lamps, turn signals, marker lamps, 
identification lamps, or any other required safety devices, such as 
hazardous materials placards or conspicuity markings; and
    (5) A fixed step up to 3 inches deep at the front of an existing 
automobile transporter until April 29, 2005. It will be the 
responsibility of the operator of the unit to prove that the step 
existed prior to April 29, 2002. Such proof can be in the form of a work 
order for equipment modification, a receipt for purchase and 
installation of the piece, or any similar type of documentation. 
However, after April 29, 2005, the step shall no longer be excluded from 
a vehicle's length.
    (c) Each exclusion allowance is specific and may not be combined 
with other excluded devices.
    (d) Measurements are to be made from a point on one side or end of a 
commercial motor vehicle to the same point on the opposite side or end 
of the vehicle.

[67 FR 15110, Mar. 29, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 658.17  Weight.

    (a) The provisions of the section are applicable to the National 
System of Interstate and Defense Highways and reasonable access thereto.
    (b) The maximum gross vehicle weight shall be 80,000 pounds except 
where lower gross vehicle weight is dictated by the bridge formula.
    (c) The maximum gross weight upon any one axle, including any one 
axle of a group of axles, or a vehicle is 20,000 pounds.
    (d) The maximum gross weight on tandem axles is 34,000 pounds.
    (e) No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be moved or operated 
on any Interstate highway when the gross weight on two or more 
consecutive axles exceeds the limitations prescribed by the following 
formula, referred to as the Bridge Gross Weight Formula:

[[Page 265]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.012


except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load 
of 34,000 pounds each if the overall distance between the first and last 
axle is 36 feet or more. In no case shall the total gross weight of a 
vehicle exceed 80,000 pounds.
    (f) Except as provided herein, States may not enforce on the 
Interstate System vehicle weight limits of less than 20,000 pounds on a 
single axle, 34,000 pounds on a tandem axle, or the weights derived from 
the Bridge Formula, up to a maximum of 80,000 pounds, including all 
enforcement tolerances. States may not limit tire loads to less than 500 
pounds per inch of tire or tread width, except that such limits may not 
be applied to tires on the steering axle. States may not limit steering 
axle weights to less than 20,000 pounds or the axle rating established 
by the manufacturer, whichever is lower.
    (g) The weights in paragraphs (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section 
shall be inclusive of all tolerances, enforcement or otherwise, with the 
exception of a scale allowance factor when using portable scales (wheel-
load weighers). The current accuracy of such scales is generally within 
2 or 3 percent of actual weight, but in no case shall an allowance in 
excess of 5 percent be applied. Penalty or fine schedules which impose 
no fine up to a specified threshold, i.e., 1,000 pounds, will be 
considered as tolerance provisions not authorized by 23 U.S.C. 127.
    (h) States may issue special permits without regard to the axle, 
gross, or Federal Bridge Formula requirements for nondivisible vehicles 
or loads.
    (i) The provisions of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section 
shall not apply to single-, or tandem-axle weights, or gross weights 
legally authorized under State law on July 1, 1956. The group of axles 
requirement established in this section shall not apply to vehicles 
legally grandfathered under State groups of axles tables or formulas on 
January 4, 1975. Grandfathered weight limits are vested on the date 
specified by Congress and remain available to a State even if it chooses 
to adopt a lower weight limit for a time.
    (j) The provisions of paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section 
shall not apply to the operation on Interstate Route 68 in Allegany and 
Garrett Counties, Maryland, of any specialized vehicle equipped with a 
steering axle and a tridem axle and used for hauling coal, logs, and 
pulpwood if such vehicle is of a type of vehicle as was operating in 
such counties on U.S. Routes 40 or 48 for such purposes on August 1, 
1991.
    (k) Any vehicle which is regularly and exclusively used as an 
intrastate public agency transit passenger bus is excluded from the axle 
weight limits in paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section until 
October 1, 2003.
    (l) The provisions of paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section 
shall not apply to the operation, on the 104 mile portion of I-39 
between I-90/94 near Portage, Wisconsin, and Wisconsin State Route 29 
south of Wausau, Wisconsin, of any vehicle that could legally operate on 
this highway section before November 28, 1995.
    (m) The provisions of paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section 
shall not apply to the operation, on I-99 between Bedford and Bald 
Eagle, Pennsylvania, of any vehicle that could legally operate on this 
highway section before December 29, 1995.

[49 FR 23315, June 5, 1984, as amended at 59 FR 30420, June 13, 1994; 60 
FR 15214, Mar. 22, 1995; 62 FR 10181, Mar. 5, 1997; 63 FR 70653, Dec. 
22, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 658.19  Reasonable access.

    (a) No State may enact or enforce any law denying reasonable access 
to vehicles with dimensions authorized by the STAA between the NN and 
terminals and facilities for food, fuel, repairs, and rest. In addition, 
no State may enact or enforce any law denying reasonable access between 
the NN and points of loading and unloading to household goods carriers, 
motor carriers of passengers, and any truck tractor-semitrailer 
combination in which the semitrailer has a length not to exceed 28 feet 
(28.5 feet where allowed pursuant to Sec. 658.13(b)(5) of this part) 
and which generally operates as part of

[[Page 266]]

a vehicle combination described in Sec. Sec. 658.13(b)(5) and 658.15(a) 
of this part.
    (b) All States shall make available to commercial motor vehicle 
operators information regarding their reasonable access provisions to 
and from the National Network.
    (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing any 
State or local government from imposing any reasonable restriction, 
based on safety considerations, on access to points of loading and 
unloading by any truck tractor-semitrailer combination in which the 
semitrailer has a length not to exceed 28\1/2\ feet and which generally 
operates as part of a vehicle combination described in Sec. Sec. 
658.13(b)(5) and 658.15(a).
    (d) No State may enact or enforce any law denying access within 1 
road-mile from the National Network using the most reasonable and 
practicable route available except for specific safety reasons on 
individual routes.
    (e) Approval of access for specific vehicles on any individual route 
applies to all vehicles of the same type regardless of ownership. 
Distinctions between vehicle types shall be based only on significant, 
substantial differences in their operating characteristics.
    (f) Blanket restrictions on 102-inch wide vehicles may not be 
imposed.
    (g) Vehicle dimension limits shall not be more restrictive than 
Federal requirements.
    (h) States shall ensure compliance with the requirements of this 
section for roads under the jurisdiction of local units of government.
    (i)(1) Except in those States in which State law authorizes the 
operation of STAA-dimensioned vehicles on all public roads and highways, 
all States shall have an access review process that provides for the 
review of requests for access from the National Network.
    (2) State access review processes shall provide for:
    (i) One or more of the following:
    (A) An analysis of the proposed access routes using observations or 
other data obtained from the operation of test vehicles over the routes;
    (B) An analysis of the proposed access routes by application of 
vehicle templates to plans of the routes;
    (C) A general provision for allowing access, without requiring a 
request, for commercial motor vehicles with semitrailers with a kingpin 
distance of 41 feet or less (measured from the kingpin to the center of 
the rear axle, if single, or the center of a group of rear axles). State 
safety analyses may be conducted on individual routes if warranted; and
    (ii) All of the following:
    (A) The denial of access to terminals and services only on the basis 
of safety and engineering analysis of the access route.
    (B) The automatic approval of an access request if not acted upon 
within 90 days of receipt by the State. This provision shall become 
effective no later than 12 months following the effective date of this 
rule unless an extension is requested by the State and approved by FHWA.
    (C) The denial of access for any 102-inch wide vehicles only on the 
basis of the characteristics of specific routes, in particular 
significant deficiencies in lane width.
    (j)(1) Each State shall submit its access provisions to FHWA for 
approval within 6 months after June 1, 1990. In those States in which 
State law authorizes the operation of STAA-dimensioned vehicles on all 
public roads and highways, no submission or approval under this 
paragraph is required. If, in the future, such a State changes its 
authorizing legislation and restricts the operation of STAA-dimensioned 
vehicles, then compliance with these provisions will be necessary.
    (2) The FHWA will review the access provisions as submitted by each 
State subject to the provisions in paragraph (j)(1) and approve those 
that are in compliance with the requirements of this section. The FHWA 
may, at a State's request, approve State provisions that differ from the 
requirements of this section if FHWA determines that they provide 
reasonable access for STAA-dimensioned vehicles and do not impose an 
unreasonable burden on motor freight carriers, shippers and receivers 
and service facility operators.
    (3) Any State that does not have FHWA approved access provisions in 
effect within 1 year after June 1, 1990 shall follow the requirements 
and the

[[Page 267]]

criteria set forth in this section and section 658.5 and 658.19 for 
determining access for STAA-dimensioned vehicles to terminals and 
services. The FHWA may approve a State's request for a time extension if 
it is received by FHWA at least 1 month before the end of the 1 year 
period.

[53 FR 12149, Apr. 13, 1988, as amended at 55 FR 22763, June 1, 1990; 59 
FR 30420, June 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 658.21  Identification of National Network.

    (a) To identify the National Network, a State may sign the routes or 
provide maps of lists of highways describing the National Network.
    (b) Exceptional local conditions on the National Network shall be 
signed. All signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control 
Devices. Exceptional conditions shall include but not be limited to:
    (1) Operational restrictions designed to maximize the efficiency of 
the total traffic flow, such as time of day prohibitions, or lane use 
controls.
    (2) Geometric and structural restrictions, such as vertical 
clearances, posted weight limits on bridges, or restrictions caused by 
construction operations.
    (3) Detours from urban Interstate routes to bypass of 
circumferential routes for commercial motor vehicles not destined for 
the urban area to be bypassed.


<R05>
Sec. 658.23  LCV freeze; cargo-carrying unit freeze.

    (a)(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section and except for 
tow trucks with vehicles in tow, a State may allow the operation of 
LCV's on the Interstate System only as listed in appendix C to this 
part.
    (2) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a State may not 
allow the operation on the NN of any CMV combination with two or more 
cargo-carrying units (not including the truck tractor) whose cargo-
carrying units exceed:
    (i) The maximum combination trailer, semitrailer, or other type of 
length limitation authorized by State law or regulation of that State on 
or before June 1, 1991; or
    (ii) The length of the cargo-carrying units of those CMV 
combinations, by specific configuration, in actual, lawful operation on 
a regular or periodic basis (including continuing seasonal operation) in 
that State on or before June 1, 1991, as listed in appendix C to this 
part.
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the following 
CMV combinations with two or more cargo-carrying units may operate on 
the NN.
    (1) Truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer and truck tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combinations with a maximum length of the individual cargo 
units of 28.5 feet or less.
    (2) Vehicles described in Sec. 658.13(e) and (g).
    (3) Truck-trailer and truck-semitrailer combinations with an overall 
length of 65 feet or less.
    (4) Maxi-cubes.
    (5) Tow trucks with vehicles in tow.
    (c) For specific safety purposes and road construction, a State may 
make minor adjustments of a temporary and emergency nature to route 
designations and vehicle operating restrictions applicable to 
combinations subject to 23 U.S.C. 127(d) and 49 U.S.C. 31112 and in 
effect on June 1, 1991 (July 6, 1991, for Alaska). Adjustments which 
last 30 days or less may be made without notifying the FHWA. Minor 
adjustments which exceed 30 days require approval of the FHWA. When such 
adjustments are needed, a State must submit to the Division Office of 
Motor Carriers, by the end of the 30th day, a written description of the 
emergency, the date on which it began, and the date on which it is 
expected to conclude. If the adjustment involves route designations, the 
State shall describe the new route on which vehicles otherwise subject 
to the freeze imposed by 23 U.S.C. 127(d) and 49 U.S.C. 31112 are 
allowed to operate. To the extent possible, the geometric and pavement 
design characteristics of the alternate route should be equivalent to 
those of the highway section which is temporarily unavailable. Approval 
or disapproval by Office of Motor Carriers officials of adjustments 
involving route designations shall be coordinated with the Division 
Administrator. If the adjustment involves vehicle operating 
restrictions, the State

[[Page 268]]

shall list the restrictions that have been removed or modified. Approval 
or disapproval of the adjustment by the Division Office of Motor 
Carriers shall take place only after consultation with the Regional 
Office of Motor Carriers. If the adjustment is approved, a copy of the 
approved submission shall be forwarded through the Regional Office of 
Motor Carriers, to the Associate Administrator for Motor Carriers at 
Headquarters, who will publish the notice of adjustment, with an 
expiration date, in the Federal Register. Requests for extensions of 
time beyond the originally established conclusion date shall be subject 
to the same approval and publication process as the original request. If 
upon consultation with the Regional Office of Motor Carriers, a decision 
is reached that minor adjustments made by a State are not legitimately 
attributable to road or bridge construction or safety, the Division 
Office of Motor Carriers will so inform the State, and the original 
conditions of the freeze must be reimposed immediately. Failure to do so 
may subject the State to a penalty pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 141.
    (d) A State may issue a permit authorizing a CMV to transport an 
overlength nondivisible load on two or more cargo-carrying units on the 
NN without regard to the restrictions in Sec. 658.23(a)(2).
    (e) States further restricting or prohibiting the operation of 
vehicles subject to 23 U.S.C. 127(d) and 49 U.S.C. 31112 after June 1, 
1991, shall notify the FHWA Division Office of Motor Carriers within 30 
days after the restriction is effective. The Division Office of Motor 
Carriers shall forward the information through the Regional Office of 
Motor Carriers to the Associate Administrator for Motor Carriers at 
Headquarters. The FHWA will publish the restriction in the Federal 
Register as an amendment to appendix C to this part. Failure to provide 
such notification may subject the State to a penalty pursuant to 23 
U.S.C. 141.
    (f) The Federal Highway Administrator, on his or her own motion or 
upon a request by any person (including a State), shall review the 
information set forth in appendix C to this part. If the Administrator 
determines there is cause to believe that a mistake was made in the 
accuracy of the information contained in appendix C to this part, the 
Administrator shall commence a proceeding to determine whether the 
information published should be corrected. If the Administrator 
determines that there is a mistake in the accuracy of the information 
contained in appendix C to this part, the Administrator shall publish in 
the Federal Register the appropriate corrections to reflect that 
determination.

[59 FR 30420, June 13, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 15214, Mar. 22, 1995; 
62 FR 10181, Mar. 5, 1997]

  Appendix A to Part 658--National Network--Federally-Designated Routes

 [The federally-designated routes on the National Network consist of the
Interstate System, except as noted, and the following additional Federal-
                          aid Primary highways]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Route                    From                       To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Alabama
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 43................  I-65 N. of Mobile.......  Sunflower.
US 43................  AL 5 near Russellville..  TN State Line.
US 72................  MS State Line...........  CR 33 Hollywood.
US 72 Alt............  US 72 Tuscumbia.........  US 72/231/431
                                                  Huntsville.
US 78................  End of 4-lane W. of AL 5  I-59 Birmingham.
                        Jasper.
US 80................  AL 14 W. Int. Selma.....  US 82 Montgomery.
US 82................  Coker W. of I-59........  Eoline W. of AL 5.
US 82................  AL 206 Prattville.......  US 231 N. Int.
                                                  Montgomery.
US 84................  AL 92 E. of Daleville     End of 4-lane E. of
                        (via AL 210 Dothan        Dothan.
                        Cir.).
US 98................  I-10 Daphne.............  End of 4-lane near
                                                  Fairhope.
US 231...............  FL State Line (via AL     End of 4-lane N. of
                        210 Dothan Circle.).      Wetumpka.
US 231...............  Arab....................  TN State Line.
US 280...............  US 31 Mountain Brook....  AL 22 Alexander City.
US 280...............  I-85 Opelika............  GA State Line Phenix
                                                  City.
US 431...............  AL 210 Dothan...........  AL 173 Headland.
US 431...............  I-20 Anniston...........  AL 79 N. Int. Columbus
                                                  City (via I-59--AL 77
                                                  Gadsden).
US 431...............  CR 8 New Hope...........  TN State Line.
AL 21................  US 31 Atmore............  I-65 N. of Atmore.
AL 21................  US 431 Anniston.........  Jacksonville.
AL 67................  I-65 Priceville.........  US 72 Alt. W. of
                                                  Decatur.
AL 79................  I-59 Birmingham.........  Pinson.
AL 152...............  US 231 N. Int.            I-65 N. Int.
                        Montgomery.               Montgomery.
AL 210...............  Dothan Circle (Beltway).
AL 248...............  US 84 Enterprise........  Ft. Rucker.
AL 249...............  Ft. Rucker..............  US 231.
----------------------

[[Page 269]]

 
                                 Alaska
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AK 1.................  Potter Weigh Station      AK 3 Palmer.
                        Anchorage.
AK 2.................  AK 3 Fairbanks..........  Milepost 1412 Delta
                                                  Junction.
AK 3.................  AK 1 Palmer.............  AK 2 Fairbanks.
 
 Note: Routes added to the Interstate System under 23 U.S.C. 139(c) are
              included only to the extent designated above.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Arizona
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 60................  I-10 Brenda.............  I-17 Phoenix.
US 60................  AZ 87 Mesa..............  AZ 70 Globe.
US 60................  AZ 260 E. Int. Show Low.  NM State Line.
US 64................  US 160 Teec Nos Pos.....  NM State Line.
US 70................  US 60 Globe.............  NM State Line.
US 80................  AZ 92 Bisbee............  NM State Line.
US 89................  I-10 Tucson.............  US 60 Florence
                                                  Junction.
US 89................  AZ 69 Prescott..........  I-40 Ash Fork.
US 89................  I-40 Flagstaff..........  UT State Line.
US 95................  Mexican Border..........  I-8 Yuma.
US 160...............  US 89 Tuba City.........  NM State Line.
US 163...............  US 160 Kayenta..........  UT State Line.
US 666...............  I-10 Bowie..............  US 70 Safford.
US 666...............  US 60 Springerville.....  I-40 Sanders.
US 666...............  Mexican Border..........  US 80 Douglas.
AZ 69................  US 89 Prescott..........  I-17 Cordes Junction.
AZ 77................  US 60 Show Low..........  I-40 Holbrook.
AZ 84................  I-10 Picacho............  AZ 87 E. of Eloy.
AZ 85................  I-8 Gila Bend (via I-8B)  I-10 Buckeye (via AZ 85
                                                  Spur).
AZ 87................  AZ 84 E. of Eloy........  AZ 387 W. of Coolidge.
AZ 87................  AZ 587 Chandler.........  US 60 Mesa.
AZ 90................  I-10 Benson.............  AZ 92 Sierra Vista.
AZ 169...............  AZ 69 Dewey.............  I-17 S. of Camp Verde.
AZ 189...............  Mexican Border..........  I-19 Nogales.
AZ 287...............  AZ 87 Coolidge..........  US 89 Florence.
AZ 360...............  I-10 Phoenix............  AZ 87 Mesa.
AZ 387...............  I-10 Exit 185...........  AZ 87 W. of Coolidge.
AZ 587 (Old AZ 93)...  I-10 Exit 175...........  AZ 87 Chandler.
----------------------
                                Arkansas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               California
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-80 Bus. Loop (US 50- I-80 W. Sacramento......  I-80 near Watt Ave.,
 CA 51).                                          Sacramento.
US 6.................  US 395 Bishop...........  NV State Line.
US 50................  I-80 W. of Sacramento...  Sly Park Rd. Pollock
                                                  Pines.
US 95................  I-40 near Needles.......  NV State Line.
US 101...............  I-5 Los Angeles.........  I-80 San Francisco.
US 395...............  I-15 S. of Victorville..  NV State Line.
CA 2.................  I-5.....................  I-210 Los Angeles.
CA 10 (San Bern.       US 101..................  I-5 Los Angeles.
 Fwy.).
CA 14................  I-5 near San Fernando...  US 395 Ridgecrest.
CA 15................  I-5.....................  I-805 San Diego.
CA 22................  I-405 Seal Beach........  CA 55 Orange.
CA 24................  I-580 Oakland...........  I-680 Walnut Creek.
CA 52................  I-5.....................  I-805 San Diego.
CA 55................  I-405 Costa Mesa........  CA 91 Anaheim.
CA 57................  I-5 Santa Ana...........  I-210 Pomona.
CA 58................  CA 99 Bakersfield.......  I-15 Barstow.
CA 60................  I-10 Los Angeles........  I-10 Beaumont.
CA 71................  I-210...................  CA 60 Pomona.
CA 78................  I-5 Carlsbad............  I-15 Escondido.
CA 85................  I-280 near San Jose.....  CA 101 Mountain View.
CA 91................  I-110 Los Angeles.......  I-215/CA 60 Riverside.
CA 92................  I-280 San Mateo.........  I-880 Hayward.
CA 94................  I-5.....................  CA 125 San Diego.
CA 99................  I-5 Wheeler Ridge.......  I-80 Bus. Loop/US 50
                                                  Sacramento.
CA 110...............  I-10....................  US 101 Los Angeles.
CA 118...............  I-405 Los Angeles.......  I-210 San Fernando.
CA 125...............  CA 94...................  I-8 La Mesa.
CA 133...............  I-405...................  I-5 near El Toro.
CA 134...............  US 101 Los Angeles......  I-210 Pasadena.
CA 163...............  I-8.....................  I-15 San Diego.
CA 170...............  US 101..................  I-5 Los Angeles.
CA 198...............  I-5 Coalinga............  CA 99 Visalia.
CA 215...............  I-15 N. of Temecula.....  CA 60 Riverside.
CA 905 (Old CA 117)..  I-5.....................  I-805 San Diego.
 
  Note: I-580 Oakland--All vehicles over 4\1/2\ tons (except passenger
   buses and stages) are prohibited on MacArthur Freeway between Grand
 Avenue and the north city limits of San Leandro. (Excepted under 23 CFR
                               658.11(f)).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Colorado
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Connecticut
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT 2.................  Columbus Blvd. Hartford.  I-395 Norwich.
CT 8.................  I-95 Bridgeport.........  US 44 Winsted.
CT 9.................  I-95 Old Saybrook.......  I-91 Cromwell.
CT 20................  CT 401 Bradley Intl.      I-91 Windsor.
                        Airport, Windsor Locks.
CT 401...............  CT 20 Windsor Locks.....  Bradley Intl. Airport
                                                  Access Rd., Windsor
                                                  Lks.
----------------------
                                Delaware
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 13................  MD State Line...........  I-495 S. Int.
                                                  Wilmington.
US 40................  MD State Line...........  I-295/US 13 Wilmington.
US 113...............  MD State Line...........  US 13 Dover.
US 301...............  MD State Line...........  I-295/US 13 Wilmington.
----------------------

[[Page 270]]

 
                          District of Columbia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anacostia Fwy/Ken.     I-295...................  MD State Line Cheverly
 Ave.                                             MD
 
Note: I-66--There is a 24 hour total truck ban on the Theodore Roosevelt
 Memorial Bridge and its approaches. (Excepted under 23 CFR 658.11(f).)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Florida
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 27................  FL Turnpike Ext.........  FL 84 Andytown.
US 27................  South Bay...............  I-75 Ocala.
US 301...............  SR 24 Waldo.............  I-10.
FL 24................  SR 331 Gainesville......  US 301 Waldo.
FL 85................  FL 397 Valparaiso.......  I-10 near Crestview.
FL 202...............  I-95 Jacksonville.......  FL A-1-A.
FL 263...............  US 90 W. of Tallahassee.  I-10.
FL 331...............  I-75 S. of Gainesville..  FL 24.
FL 397...............  Entrance Eglin AFB......  FL 85 Valparaiso.
FL 528-FL 407........  I-4 Orlando.............  Cape Canaveral.
20th St. Expwy.......  1-95 Jacksonville.......  Adams St. near Matthews
                                                  Bridge.
FL Turnpike..........  S. End of Homestead       I-75 Wildwood.
                        Extension.
----------------------
 
                                 Georgia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 19................  FL State Line...........  US 82 Albany.
US 23/GA 365.........  I-985 near Gainesville..  US 441 near Cornelia.
US 25................  I-16....................  N. of Statesboro.
US 27................  GA 53 Rome..............  US 278 Cedartown.
US 27................  FL State Line...........  GA 38 Bainbridge.
US 27 Alternate GA 85  I-185 Columbus..........  Ellerslie.
US 29................  US 78 W. Interchange....  US 129/441 E.
                                                  Interchange Athens.
US 41................  I-75 W. of Morrow.......  Near Barnesville.
US 41................  GA 5 Connector..........  County Road 633
                                                  Emerson.
US 76................  I-75 Dalton.............  US 411 Chatsworth.
US 78-US 29..........  GA 138 Monroe...........  US 29 W. Interchange
                                                  Athens.
US 78/GA 410.........  Valleybrook Rd.           GA 10 Stone Mountain.
                        Scottsdale.
US 78/GA 10..........  Stone Mountain Freeway..  Monroe Bypass.
US 80/GA 22..........  AL State Line...........  GA 85 Columbus.
US 82/GA 520.........  Dawson..................  I-95 Exit 6 Brunswick.
US 84/GA 38..........  Alabama State Line......  I-75.
US 84/GA 38..........  GA 520 Waycross.........  GA 32 Patterson.
US 129...............  I-16....................  Gray.
US 129...............  GA 247 Connector Warner   I-75 Macon.
                        Robins.
US 129/GA 11.........  I-85....................  I-985.
US 280/GA 520........  Alabama State Line......  Dawson.
US 319/GA 35.........  US 19/GA 300 Thomasville  US 82/GA 520 Tifton.
US 411-US 41.........  US 27 Rome..............  I-75 near Emerson.
US 441/GA 31.........  US 82/GA 520 Pearson....  GA 135 Douglas.
US 441/GA 24.........  I-20....................  GA 22 Milledgeville.
US 441/GA 15.........  Athens Bypass...........  I-85.
GA 2.................  US 27 Fort Oglethorpe...  I-75.
GA 5 Connector.......  I-75....................  US 41.
GA 6.................  I-20....................  GA 6 Bypass near
                                                  Dallas.
GA 6 Bypass..........  E. of Dallas............  W. of Dallas.
GA 10 Loop...........  E. and S. Bypass in       .......................
                        Athens.
GA 14 Spur...........  US 29/Welcome All Road..  I-85/285 S. Interchange
                                                  Atlanta.
GA 21................  I-95 Monteith...........  GA 204 Savannah.
GA 25................  GA 520..................  GA 25 Spur.
GA 25 Spur...........  US 17 N. of Brunswick...  I-95 Exit 8.
GA 53................  Rome....................  I-75 Calhoun.
GA 61................  I-20....................  GA 166 near Carrollton.
GA 85................  Fayetteville............  I-75.
GA 138...............  I-20 Conyers............  US 78 Monroe.
GA 166...............  GA 61...................  End of 4-lane section
                                                  of W. GA 1 Carrollton.
GA 247C..............  I-75....................  GA 247 Warner Robins.
GA 300...............  US 82 Albany............  I-75 near Cordele.
GA 316...............  I-85....................  US 29.
GA 400...............  I-285 near Atlanta......  GA 60.
GA 515...............  I-575...................  Blairsville.
GA 520...............  I-95....................  GA 25.
 
Note: Atlanta area--Interstate highways within the I-285 beltway are not
     available to through trucks with more than 6 wheels because of
                              construction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Hawaii
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HI 61................  HI 98 (Vineyard           Kawainui Bridge Kailua.
                        Boulevard).
HI 63................  HI 92 (Nimitz Hwy.).....  HI 83 (Kahekili Hwy.).
HI 64................  Sand Island Park........  HI 92 (Nimitz Hwy.).
HI 72................  61 Kailua/Waimanalo       Ainakoa.
                        Junction.
HI 78................  H-1 Middle St...........  HI 99 (Kamehameha Hwy.)
                                                  Aiea.
HI 83................  HI 99 Weed Junction.....  HI 61 (Kalanianaole
                                                  Hwy).
HI 92................  Pearl Harbor/Main Gate..  Kalakaua Avenue.
HI 93................  Beginning of H-1........  Makaha Bridge.
HI 95................  H-1.....................  Barbers Point Harbor.
HI 99................  Pearl Harbor Int........  HI 83 Weed Junction.
----------------------
                                  Idaho
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-15B................  I-15/US 26 S. of Idaho    US 26 N. Int. Idaho
                        Falls.                    Falls.
US 2.................  Dover...................  US 95 Sandpoint.
US 2.................  US 95 Bonners Ferry.....  MT State Line.
US 20/26.............  OR State Line...........  I-84 W. Caldwell Int.
                                                  Caldwell
US 20................  I-84 Mountain Home......  MT State Line.
US 26................  I-84 Bliss..............  I-15 Blackfoot.
US 30................  US 95 Fruitland.........  ID 72 New Plymouth.
US 30................  I-15 McCammon...........  WY State Line.
US 89................  UT State Line...........  US 30 Montpelier.
US 91................  UT State Line...........  I-15 Virginia.

[[Page 271]]

 
US 93................  NV State Line...........  Arco.
US 95................  OR State Line S. of       OR State Line Weiser
                        Marsing.                  (via US 95 Spur).
US 95................  Grangeville.............  Moscow.
US 95................  I-90 Coeur D'Alene......  US 2 Bonners Ferry.
ID 16................  ID 44 Star..............  Emmett.
ID 28................  ID 33 Mud Lake..........  US 93 Salmon.
ID 33................  ID 28 Mud Lake..........  US 20 Rexburg
ID 44................  I-84 Caldwe1l...........  ID 55 Eagle.
ID 51................  NV State Line...........  I-84 Mountain Home.
ID 53................  WA State Line...........  US 95 Garwood.
ID 55................  US 95 Marsing...........  I-84 Nampa.
ID 55................  US 20/26 S. of Eagle....  ID 44 Eagle.
ID 75................  US 93 Shoshone..........  Ketchum.
ID 87................  US 20 N. of Macks Inn...  MT State Line.
----------------------
                                Illinois
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 20................  US 20 BR W. of Rockford.  I-39 Rockford.
US 36................  IL 100 NW. of Winchester  I-55 Springfield.
US 50................  US 50 BR E. of            IN State Line.
                        Lawrenceville.
US 51................  US 51 BR S. of Decatur..  I-72 Decatur.
US 67................  IL 92 Rock Island.......  IA State Line.
IL 6.................  I-74/474 Peoria.........  IL 88 N. of Peoria.
IL 53................  Army Trail Rd. Addison..  IL 68 Arlington
                                                  Heights.
IL 92................  I-280 Rock Island.......  US 67 Rock Island.
IL 336...............  IL 57 Fall Creek........  US 24 NE. of Quincy.
IL 394...............  IL 1 Goodenow...........  I-80/94/294 S. Holland.
IL Toll Hwys.........  All Routes..............
----------------------
                                 Indiana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA- dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Iowa
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Note: Iowa State law allows STAA-dimensioned vehicles to operate on all
highways in the State. The routes shown below were incorporated into the
                         NN by the FHWA in 1984.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 6.................  NE State Line...........  I-80 Council Bluffs.
US 6.................  IA 48 Lewis.............  I-80 N. of Wilton.
US 6.................  IA 130 Davenport........  I-74.
US 18................  WCL Rock Valley.........  WI State Line.
US 20................  I-29 Sioux City.........  IL State Line.
US 30................  Missouri River Bridge     IL State Line Clinton.
                        (NE).
US 34................  Missouri River Bridge     IL State Line
                        (NE).                     Burlington.
US 52................  US 61 Dubuque...........  IA 386 N. Int.
                                                  Sageville.
US 52................  IA 3 Luxemburg..........  US 18 E. Int.
US 52................  ECL Calmar..............  Burr Oak.
US 59................  IA 2 Shenandoah.........  IA 184.
US 59................  IA 92 Carson............  US 6 N. Int.
US 59................  IA 83 Avoca.............  US 30 Denison.
US 59................  US 20 Holstein..........  IA 3.
US 59................  IA 10 E. Int. W. of       US 18 Sanborn.
                        Sutherland.
US 61................  Des Moines River Bridge   WI State Line.
                        (MO) Keokuk.
US 63................  MO State Line...........  IA 146 New Sharon.
US 63................  I-80 Malcom.............  NCL Chester.
US 65................  US 34 N. Int. Lucas.....  IA 117/330.
US 65................  US 30 Colo..............  Sheffield.
US 65................  SCL Mason City..........  IA 105 Northwood.
US 67................  IL State Line Davenport.  4.64 Miles N. of
                                                  Clinton.
US 69................  SCL Lamoni..............  I-35.
US 69................  US 6/65 Des Moines......  IA 105 Lake Mills.
US 71................  MO State Line...........  IA 196 Ulmer.
US 71................  US 20 Early.............  MN State Line.
US 75................  I-29 N. Int. Sioux City.  IA 9 E. Int.
US 77................  NE State Line...........  I-29 Sioux City.
US 136...............  Des Moines River Bridge   Mississippi River
                        (MO).                     Bridge Keokuk.
US 151...............  I-80 E. of Williamsburg.  US 61 S. Int.
US 169...............  SCL Arispe..............  IA 92 Winterset.
US 169...............  SCL Desoto..............  I-80.
US 169...............  US 6 Adel...............  IA 141 Perry.
US 169...............  US 30 Beaver............  IA 3.
US 169...............  US 18 Algona............  IA 9 W. Int. Swea City.
US 218...............  US 136 Keokuk...........  IA 92 Ainsworth.
US 218...............  IA 22 Riverside.........  IA 227.
IA 1.................  IA 16 N. Int............  IA 78 W. Int. Richland.
IA 1.................  IA 92 N. Int............  IA 22 Kalona.
IA 1.................  US 6/218 N. Int. Iowa     I-80 Iowa City.
                        City.
IA 1.................  SCL Martelle............  US 151.
IA 2.................  NE State Line...........  IA 25 W. of Mt. Ayr.
IA 2.................  Decatur Co. Line........  Mississippi River
                                                  Bridge (IL) Ft.
                                                  Madison.
IA 3.................  SD State Line...........  IA 12 N. Int. Akron.
IA 3.................  US 75 Le Mars...........  IA 7.
IA 3.................  IA 17 E. Int. Goldfield.  IA 13 W. Int.
IA 4.................  IA 3 Pocahontas.........  US 18 E. Int.
IA 4.................  SCL Wallingford.........  IA 9 Estherville.
IA 5.................  IA 2 Centerville........  I-35.
IA 7.................  IA 3....................  US 71 N. Int. Storm
                                                  Lake.
IA 7.................  Barnum..................  US 20 Fort Dodge.
IA 8.................  US 63 Traer.............  US 218.
IA 9.................  IA 60...................  IA 26 Lansing.
IA 10................  US 59 E. Int............  ECL Sutherland.
IA 12................  US 20...................  NCL Sioux City.
IA 13................  US 30 Bertram...........  US 52.
IA 14................  IA 92/5.................  NCL Newton.
IA 14................  US 30 Marshalltown......  US 20 S. Int.
IA 15................  US 18 Whittemore........  IA 9 W. Int.
IA 16................  NCL Eldon...............  IA 1 N. Int.
IA 16................  Denmark.................  US 61 Wever.
IA 17................  IA 141 Granger..........  IA 3 E. Int.
IA 21................  SCL What Cheer..........  IA 412 Waterloo.
IA 22................  WCL Wellman.............  IA 70 W. Int.
IA 23................  US 63 Ottumwa...........  IA 137 Eddyville.
IA 25................  IA 2....................  IA 92 Greenfield.
IA 25................  IA 925 W. Int...........  IA 44 Guthrie Center.
IA 26................  IA 9 Lansing............  New Albin.
IA 28................  IA 92...................  US 6 Des Moines.
IA 31................  SCL Correctionville.....  US 59.
IA 37................  WCL Earling.............  US 59.
IA 38................  US 61 Muscatine.........  I-80.
IA 38................  SCL Tipton..............  US 30 E. Int.

[[Page 272]]

 
IA 39................  US 59 Denison...........  Deloit.
IA 44................  US 71 Hamlin............  IA 141.
IA 46................  IA 5....................  IA 163 Des Moines.
IA 48................  US 59 Shenandoah........  NCL Essex.
IA 48................  US 34 Red Oak...........  US 6.
IA 49................  SCL Lenox...............  US 34.
IA 51................  US 18 Postville.........  IA 9.
IA 55................  Seymour.................  IA 2.
IA 60................  US 75 Lemars............  MN State Line.
IA 62................  US 61 Maquoketa.........  US 52 Bellevue.
IA 64................  US 151 Anamosa..........  US 61.
IA 70................  Columbus City...........  IA 22 W. Int.
IA 77................  IA 92...................  Keota.
IA 78................  IA 149..................  IA 249 Winfield.
IA 78................  WCL Morning Sun.........  US 61.
IA 83................  S. of Walnut............  US 6 Atlantic.
IA 85................  US 63 Montezuma.........  IA 21.
IA 86................  US 71...................  IA 9 Montgomery.
IA 92................  NE State Line...........  IA 48 Griswold.
IA 92................  WCL Fontanelle..........  IA 1 N. Int.
IA 92................  IA 1 S. Int.............  Cotter.
IA 93................  WCL Sumner..............  IA 150 Fayette.
IA 94................  I-380 Cedar Rapids......  Palo.
IA 96................  Gladbrook...............  US 63 Traer.
IA 99................  Toolesboro..............  US 61 Wapello.
IA 100...............  IA 151 Cedar Rapids.....  I-380.
IA 103...............  US 218..................  US 61 Fort Madison.
IA 105...............  US 69 Lake Mills........  US 218 St. Ansgar.
IA 107...............  SCL Thornton............  US 18 Clear Lake.
IA 110...............  US 20...................  IA 7 Storm Lake.
IA 111...............  US 18 Britt.............  Woden.
IA 117...............  IA 163 Prairie City.....  US 65.
IA 127...............  IA 183 S. Int...........  US 30 Logan.
IA 130...............  US 61/67 Davenport......  I-80.
IA 133...............  US 30...................  Nevada.
IA 136...............  ECL Delmar..............  WCL Lost Nation.
IA 136...............  SCL Worthington.........  US 52/IA 3 Luxemburg.
IA 137...............  IA 5 Albia..............  IA 23.
IA 141...............  I-29....................  US 30/59 Denison.
IA 141...............  WCL Manning.............  US 169.
IA 141...............  IA 210 Woodward.........  I-35 Urbandale.
IA 144...............  IA 141 Perry............  US 30 Grand Junction.
IA 145...............  I-29....................  ECL Thurman.
IA 146...............  US 63 New Sharon........  Dunbar.
IA 148...............  IA 2 Bedford............  US 34.
IA 148...............  IA 951 Carbon...........  I-80.
IA 149...............  US 63...................  IA 78 Martinsburg.
IA 149...............  SCL Williamsburg........  I-80.
IA 150...............  US 218 Vinton...........  IA 283.
IA 150...............  US 20...................  US 18 West Union.
IA 150 (Old).........  I-380 Center Point......  IA 150.
IA 157...............  US 63...................  Lime Springs.
IA 160...............  US 69/IA 415............  I-35 Ankeny.
IA 163...............  US 65 Des Moines........  IA 92 Oskaloosa.
IA 173...............  IA 83 Atlantic..........  I-80.
IA 175...............  NE State Line...........  ECL Onawa.
IA 175...............  US 71 S. Int............  ECL Lake City.
IA 175...............  Gowrie..................  ECL Dayton.
IA 175...............  WCL Stratford...........  ECL Radcliffe.
IA 175...............  US 65 N. Int............  US 63 Voorhies.
IA 181...............  Melcher-Dallas..........  IA 5/92.
IA 183...............  IA 127 N. Int...........  NCL Pisgah.
IA 184...............  WCL Randolph............  US 59.
IA 192...............  I-29/80.................  I-29 Council Bluffs.
IA 196...............  US 71...................  US 20 Sac City.
IA 210...............  IA 141..................  NCL Woodward.
IA 210...............  IA 17 N. Int............  ECL Slater.
IA 215...............  Union...................  IA 175 Eldora.
IA 221...............  I-35....................  Roland.
IA 227...............  US 218..................  Stacyville.
IA 244...............  I-80....................  IA 191 Neola.
IA 249...............  IA 78...................  Winfield.
IA 272...............  Elma....................  US 63.
IA 273...............  WCL Drakesville.........  US 63.
IA 276...............  US 71...................  IA 327 Orleans.
IA 279...............  US 30...................  Atkins.
IA 281...............  WCL Fairbank............  IA 150.
IA 283...............  Brandon.................  IA 150.
IA 287...............  US 30...................  Newhall.
IA 300...............  Modale..................  I-29.
IA 316...............  IA 5 Pleasantville......  NCL Runnells.
IA 330...............  US 65...................  US 30 Marshalltown.
IA 363...............  IA 101..................  Urbana.
IA 401...............  US 6....................  Johnston.
IA 405...............  Lone Tree...............  IA 22.
IA 406...............  US 34...................  US 61 Burlington.
IA 415...............  US 6 Des Moines.........  IA 160.
IA 927...............  IA 38 Wilton............  1-280 Davenport.
IA 928...............  US 20/IA 17.............  US 20 Williams.
IA 930...............  US 30...................  Ames.
IA 939...............  IA 150 Independence.....  IA 187.
IA 964...............  IA 5/92.................  IA 975/14 Knoxville.
IA 967...............  US 20...................  Farley.
IA 975...............  IA 5/92.................  IA 964/14 Knoxville.
University Ave.......  US 20 SW. of Cedar Falls  US 218 Cedar Falls.
----------------------
                                 Kansas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Kentucky
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-471 Connector......  US 27 Highland Heights..  I-275/471 Interchange.
US 23................  Virginia State Line.....  US 119 near Jenkins.
US 23................  US 119 N. of Pikeville..  S. end U.S. Grant
                                                  Bridge South
                                                  Portsmouth.
US 23 Spur...........  US 60 Ashland (via 13th   Ohio State Line.
                        St. Bridge).
US 25/421............  Int. US 25/US 421 S. of   KY 876 Richmond.
                        Richmond.
US 25/421............  KY 418 (via KY 4).......  Nandino Blvd.,
                                                  Lexington.
US 25E...............  Virginia State Line.....  I-75 Exit 29 N. of
                                                  Corbin.
US 27................  Tennessee State Line      Ohio State Line.
                        (via KY 4 Lexington).
US 31W...............  Tennessee State Line....  KY 255 Park City.
US 31W...............  Byp US 31W N. of          I-264 Exit 8
                        Elizabethtown.            Louisville.
US 31W Byp...........  Western Kentucky Parkway  US 31W N. of
                        Exit 136.                 Elizabethtown.
US 41................  Pennyrile Parkway         Indiana State Line.
                        Henderson.
US 41................  Tennessee State Line....  Pennyrile Parkway near
                                                  SCL Hopkinsville.
US 45................  Jackson Purchase Parkway  US 60 Paducah.
                        N. of Mayfield.
US 60................  US 45 Paducah...........  Int. US 60/62 Paducah.

[[Page 273]]

 
US 60................  US 60 Byp W. of           KY 69 Hawesville.
                        Owensboro.
US 60................  KY 144 Garrett..........  US 31W S. of Muldraugh.
US 60................  Int. US 421/KY 676        I-75 Exit 110
                        Frankfort (via KY 4       Lexington.
                        Lexington).
US 60................  KY 180 Cannonsburg......  US 23 Ashland.
US 60 Byp............  US 60 W. of Owensboro...  US 60 E. of Owensboro.
US 62................  I-24 Exit 7 Paducah (via  US 68.
                        US 60 Paducah).
US 62/68.............  Washington..............  Ohio State Line.
US 68................  US 62...................  I-24 Exit 16.
US 68................  I-24 Exit 65 E. of Cadiz  Green River Parkway
                        (via US 41                Exit 5 Bowling Green.
                        Hopkinsville).
US 68................  US 27 Paris (via Paris    Int. US 62/68
                        Byp).                     Washington.
US 119...............  KY 15 E. of Whitesburg..  US 23 near Jenkins.
US 119...............  US 25E S. of Pineville..  US 421 Harlan.
US 119...............  US 23 N. of Pikeville...  KY 1441.
US 127...............  KY 22 Owenton...........  KY 35 Bromley.
US 127...............  US 127 Byp N. of          US 60 Frankfort (via
                        Danville (via US 68       Lawrenceburg Byp.).
                        Harrosdburg).
US 127 Byp...........  US 127 S. of Danville...  US 127 N. of Danville.
US 127 Byp...........  US 127 S. of              US 127 N. of
                        Lawrenceburg.             Lawrenceburg.
US 150...............  US 62 Bardstown (via US   US 27 N. of Stanford.
                        68 Perryville, the
                        Danville Byp, and the
                        Stanford Byp).
US 150 Byp...........  US 127 S. of Danville...  US 150 E. of Danville.
US 150 Byp...........  US 150 N. of Stanford...  US 27 N. of Stanford.
US 231...............  US 60 Byp Owensboro.....  Indiana State Line.
US 421...............  0.1 mile S. of Harlan     US 119.
                        Appalachian Regional
                        Hospital.
US 421...............  Int. US 60/460 Frankfort  US 127 Wilkinson Blvd./
                                                  Owenton Rd.
                                                  Interchange Frankfort.
US 431...............  US 60 Byp Owensboro.....  US 60 (4th St.)
                                                  Owensboro.
US 460...............  I-64 Exit 110 N. of Mt.   KY 686 Mt. Sterling.
                        Sterling.
US 460...............  E. end Mountain Pkwy.     US 23 W. of
                        Extension.                Paintsville.
US 641...............  Tennessee State Line....  KY 348 Benton.
KY 4.................  US 27 S. Lexington......  Entire Circle of
                                                  Lexington.
KY 11................  KY 3170 Lewisburg.......  US 62/68 Maysville.
KY 15................  US 119 Whitesburg (via    KY 15 Spur/KY 191
                        KY 7 Isom).               Campton.
KY 15 Spur...........  KY 15/191 Campton.......  Mountain Parkway Exit
                                                  43.
KY 21................  I-75 Exit 76 W. of Berea  US 25 Berea.
KY 35................  US 127 Bromley..........  I-71 Exit 57.
KY 55................  Cumberland Parkway Exit   US 150 Springfield.
                        49 Columbia.
KY 61................  Peytonsburg.............  KY 90 Burkesville
KY 69................  US 60 Hawesville........  Indiana State Line.
KY 70/90.............  I-65 Exit 53............  US 31E Glasgow.
KY 79................  KY 1051 Brandenburg.....  Indiana State Line.
KY 80................  KY 80 Byp. E. of          US 25 N. of London.
                        Somerset.
KY 80................  KY 15 N. of Hazard......  US 23 Watergap.
KY 80/US 421.........  S. ramps Daniel Boone     2nd Street Manchester.
                        Parkway Exit 20.
KY 80 Byp............  US 27 Somerset..........  KY 80 E. of Somerset.
KY 90................  KY 61 Burkesville.......  US 27 Burnside.
KY 114...............  US 460 E. of              US 23/460 S. of
                        Salyersville.             Prestonburg.
KY 118...............  Int. US 421/KY 80 Hyden.  Daniel Boone Parkway
                                                  Exit 44.
KY 144...............  KY 448..................  US 60 Garrett.
KY 151...............  US 127 N. of              I-64 Exit 48.
                        Lawrenceburg.
KY 180...............  I-64 Exit 185...........  Int. US 60/KY 180
                                                  Cannonsburg.
KY 192...............  I-75 Exit 38............  Daniel Boone Parkway E.
                                                  of London.
KY 259...............  Western Kentucky Parkway  US 62 Leitchfield.
                        Exit 107.
KY 418...............  US 25/421 Lexington.....  I-75 Exit 104.
KY 446...............  US 31W Bowling Green....  I-65 Exit 28.
KY 448...............  KY 144..................  KY 1051 Brandenburg.
KY 555...............  US 150 Springfield......  Bluegrass Parkway Exit
                                                  42.
KY 676...............  US 127 Frankfort........  US 60/421 Frankfort.
KY 686...............  US 460 Mt. Sterling.....  KY 11 S. of Mt.
                                                  Sterling.
KY 876...............  I-75 Exit 87 Richmond...  KY 52.
KY 922...............  KY 4 Lexington..........  I-64/75 Exit 115.
KY 1051..............  KY 448 S. of Brandenburg  KY 79.
KY 1682..............  US 68 W. of Hopkinsville  Pennyrile Parkway Exit
                                                  12 NCL Hopkinsville.
KY 1958..............  KY 627 S. of Winchester.  I-64 Exit 94
                                                  Winchester.
Audubon Parkway......  Pennyrile Parkway Exit    US 60 Byp Owensboro.
                        77 Henderson.
Blue Grass Parkway...  I-65 Exit 93 E. of        US 60 E. of Versailles.
                        Elizabethtown.
Cumberland Parkway...  I-65 Exit 43 N. of Hays.  US 27 Somerset.
Daniel Boone Parkway.  US 25 N. of London......  KY 15 N. of Hazard.
Green River Parkway..  I-65 Exit 20 S.E. of      US 60 Byp Owensboro.
                        Bowling Green.
Jackson Purchase       Tennessee State Line....  I-24 Exit 25 E. of
 Parkway.                                         Calvert City.
Mountain Parkway and   I-64 Exit 98 E. of        US 460 Salyersville.
 Mountain Parkway       Winchester.
 Extension.
Pennyrile Parkway....  US 41 Alt. Hopkinsville.  US 41 Henderson.

[[Page 274]]

 
Western Kentucky       I-24 Exit 42 S. of        I-65 Exit 91 S. of
 Parkway.               Eddyville.                Elizabethtown.
   Note: US 23 crosses the Ohio River between South Portsmouth, KY and
  Portsmouth, OH via the U.S. Grant Bridge. Although the state line is
  near the Ohio shoreline, putting most of the bridge in Kentucky, the
    terminal point for US 23 is listed as the south end of the bridge
            because the bridge is maintained by the Ohio DOT.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Louisiana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Maine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 1.................  I-95 Brunswick..........  Old US 1 (Vicinity of
                                                  Congress St.) Bath.
Scarboro Connector...  I-295 South Portland....  US 1 Scarborough.
South Portland Spur..  I-95 South Portland.....  US 1 South Portland.
----------------------
                                Maryland
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 13................  VA State Line...........  DE State Line.
US 15................  US 40/340 Frederick.....  MD 26 Frederick.
US 40................  US 15/340 Frederick.....  I-70/270 Frederick.
US 48................  WV State Line...........  I-70 Hancock.
US 50................  MD 201/Kenilworth Ave.    US 13 Salisbury.
                        Cheverly.
US 301...............  VA State Line...........  DE State Line.
US 340...............  MD 67 Weverton..........  US 15/40 Frederick.
MD 3.................  US 50/301 Bowie.........  I-695/MD 695 Glen
                                                  Burnie.
MD 4.................  I-95 Forestville........  US 301 Upper Marlboro.
MD 10................  MD 648 Glen Burnie......  MD 695 Glen Burnie.
MD 100...............  MD 3....................  MD 607 Jacobsville.
MD 201 (Kenilw. Ave.)  D.C. Line...............  US 50 Cheverly.
MD 295...............  I-695 Linthicum.........  I-95 Baltimore.
MD 695...............  I-695/MD 3 Glen Burnie..  I-95/695 Kenwood.
MD 702...............  Old Eastern Avenue......  MD 695 Essex.
 
 Note: I-895 Baltimore--Widths over 96 inches and tandem trailers may be
    prohibited on the Harbor Tunnel Thruway because of construction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Massachusetts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 3.................  I-95 Burlington.........  NH State Line.
MA 2.................  I-190 Leominister.......  I-495 Littleton.
MA 24................  I-195 Fall River........  I-93 Randolph.
MA 140...............  I-195 New Bedford.......  MA 24 Taunton.
 
   Note: I-93 Boston--Restrictions may be applied, when necessary, to
portions of I-93 affected by reconstruction of the Central Artery (I-93)
           and construction of the Third Harbor Tunnel (I-90).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-75 Conn............  US 24BR Pontiac.........  I-75.
US 2.................  WI State Line Ironwood..  WI State Line S. of
                                                  Crystal Falls.
US 2.................  WI State Line Iron        I-75 St. Ignace.
                        Mountain.
US 8.................  US 2 Norway.............  WI State Line.
US 10................  Ludington...............  I-75 Bay City.
US 12................  IN State Line...........  I-94 W. Jct. Ypsilanti.
US 23................  OH State Line...........  I-75 Mackinaw City.
US 24................  OH State Line...........  MI 15 Waterford.
US 24BR..............  US 24 S. of Pontiac.....  MI 1 Pontiac.
US 27................  IN State Line...........  I-75 S. of Grayling.
US 31................  IN State Line...........  I-75 Mackinaw City.
US 33................  IN State Line...........  US 12 Niles.
US 41................  WI State Line...........  Houghton.
US 45................  WI State Line...........  MI 26 Rockland.
US 127...............  OH State Line...........  I-69/US 27 N. of
                                                  Lansing.
US 131...............  IN State Line...........  US 31 Petoskey.
US 141...............  WI State Line S. of       US 41/MI 28.
                        Crystal Falls.
US 223...............  US 23...................  US 12/127 Somerset.
MI 10................  I-375 Detroit...........  Orchard Lake Road.
MI 13................  I-69 Lennon.............  I-75 Saginaw (via MI
                                                  81).
MI 13................  I-75 Kawkawlin (via I-75  US 23 Standish.
                        Conn.).
MI 14................  I-94 Ann Arbor..........  I-96/275 Plymouth.
MI 15................  US 24 Clarkston.........  MI 25 Bay City.
MI 18................  US 10...................  MI 61 Gladwin.
MI 20................  US 31 New Era...........  MI 37 White Cloud.
MI 20................  US 27 Mt. Pleasant......  US 10 Midland.
MI 21................  I-96 near Grand Rapids..  I-69 Flint.
MI 24................  I-75 Auburn Hills (via I- I-69 Lapeer.
                        75 Conn.).
MI 24................  MI 46...................  MI 81 Caro.
MI 26................  US 45 Rockland..........  MI 38.
MI 27................  I-75....................  US 23 Cheboygan.
MI 28................  US 2 Wakefield..........  I-75.
MI 32................  Hillman.................  Alpena.
MI 33................  Mio.....................  Fairview.
MI 35................  US 2/41 Escanaba........  US 2/41 Gladstone.
MI 36................  US 127 Mason............  Dansville.
MI 37................  MI 55...................  US 31/MI 72 Traverse
                                                  City.
MI 37................  I-96 Grand Rapids.......  MI 46 Kent City.
MI 38................  US 45 Ontonagon.........  US 41 Baraga.
MI 39................  I-75 Lincoln Park.......  MI 10 Southfield.
MI 40................  MI 89 Allegan...........  US 31BR/I-196BL
                                                  Holland.
MI 43................  MI 37 Hastings..........  US 127 Lansing.
MI 46................  US 131 Howard City......  MI 25 Port Sanilac.
MI 47................  I-675 Saginaw (via MI     US 10.
                        58).
MI 50................  MI 43/66 Woodbury.......  MI 99 Eaton Rapids.
MI 50................  US 127 S. Jct...........  I-75 Monroe.
MI 51................  US 12 Niles.............  I-94.
MI 52................  OH State Line...........  US 12 Clinton.
MI 52................  I-96 Webberville........  MI 46 W. of Saginaw.
MI 53................  MI 3 Detroit............  MI 25 Port Austin.
MI 55................  US 31 Manistee..........  I-75.
MI 55................  MI 65...................  US 23 Tawas City.
MI 57................  US 131 N. of Rockford...  US 27.
MI 57................  MI 52 Chesaning.........  I-75 Clio.
MI 59................  US 24 BR Pontiac........  I-94.
MI 60................  MI 62 Cassopolis........  I-69/US 27.
MI 61................  MI 115..................  US 27 Harrison.
MI 61................  MI 18 Gladwin...........  US 23 Standish.
MI 63................  US 31 Scottdale.........  I-196.
MI 65................  US 23 Omer..............  MI 55.

[[Page 275]]

 
MI 65................  MI 72 Curran............  MI 32.
MI 65................  Posen...................  US 23 N. of Posen.
MI 66................  IN State Line...........  US 12 Sturgis.
MI 66................  Battle Creek............  MI 78.
MI 66................  MI 43/50 Woodbury.......  MI 46 Edmore.
MI 67................  US 41 Trenary...........  MI 94 Chatham.
MI 68................  US 31/131 Petoskey......  US 23 Rogers City.
MI 69................  US 2/141 Crystal Falls..  MI 95 Sagola.
MI 72................  US 31/MI 37 Traverse      US 23 Harrisville.
                        City.
MI 77................  US 2....................  MI 28 Seney.
MI 78................  MI 66...................  I-69 Olivet.
MI 81................  MI 24 Caro..............  MI 53.
MI 82................  MI 37 S. Jct. Newago....  US 131.
MI 83................  Frankenmuth.............  I-75.
MI 84................  I-75....................  MI 25 Bay City.
MI 89................  MI 40 Allegan...........  US 131.
MI 94................  US 41...................  MI 28 Munising.
MI 95................  US 2 Iron Mountain......  US 41/MI 28.
MI 104...............  US 31 Grand Haven.......  I-96.
MI 115...............  US 27...................  MI 22 Frankfort.
MI 117...............  US 2 Engadine...........  MI 28.
MI 123...............  I-75 N. of St. Ignace...  MI 28.
MI 142...............  MI 25 Bay Port..........  MI 53.
MI 205...............  IN State Line...........  US 12 W. of Union.
----------------------
                                Minnesota
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 2.................  ND State Line E. Grand    I-35 Duluth.
                        Forks.
US 10................  CH 11 E. of Moorhead....  I-694 Arden Hills.
US 12................  US 59 Holloway..........  I-94 Minneapolis.
US 14................  US 75 Lake Benton.......  US 52 Rochester.
US 52................  I-90 S. of Rochester....  MN 110 Inver Grove Hts.
US 53................  I-35/535 Duluth.........  US 169 S. Int.
                                                  Virginia.
US 59................  I-90 Worthington........  MN 30 S. Int. Slayton.
US 59................  MN 7 Appleton...........  US 12 Holloway.
US 59................  I-94 N. Int. Fergus       MN 175 Lake Bronson.
                        Falls.
US 61................  WI State Line...........  MN 60 Wabasha.
US 61................  MN 55 Hastings..........  I-94 St. Paul.
US 61................  I-35 Duluth.............  CH 2 Two Harbors.
US 63................  I-90 Rochester..........  US 52 Rochester.
US 63................  MN 58 Red Wing..........  WI State Line.
US 71................  IA State Line...........  MN 34 Park Rapids.
US 75................  I-90....................  US 2 Crookston.
US 75................  MN 175 Hallock..........  Canadian Border.
US 169...............  I-90 Blue Earth.........  US 212 Chanhassen.
US 169...............  I-94 Brooklyn Park......  MN 23 Milaca.
US 169...............  US 2 Grand Rapids.......  US 53 S. Int. Virginia.
US 212...............  SD State Line...........  MN 62 Edina.
US 218...............  I-90 Austin.............  US 14 Owatonna.
MN 1.................  ND State Line...........  US 59/MN 32 Thief River
                                                  Falls.
MN 3.................  MN 110 Inver Grove Hts..  I-94 St. Paul.
MN 5.................  MN 22 Gaylord...........  US 212.
MN 7.................  US 75 near Odessa.......  MN 100 St. Louis Park.
MN 9.................  US 12 Benson............  US 59 Morris.
MN 11................  MN 32 Greenbush.........  MN 72 Baudette.
MN 13................  I-90....................  MN 14 Waseca.
MN 15................  I-90 Fairmont...........  MN 60.
MN 15................  US 14 New Ulm...........  MN 19 Winthrop.
MN 19................  US 59 Marshall..........  MN 22 Gaylord.
MN 22................  MN 109 Wells............  US 14/MN 60 Mankato.
MN 22................  US 212 Glencoe..........  US 12 Litchfield.
MN 23................  US 75 Pipestone.........  I-35 near Hinckley.
MN 24................  I-94 Clearwater.........  US 10 Clear Lake.
MN 25................  I-94 Monticello.........  US 10 Big Lake.
MN 27................  MN 29 Alexandria........  MN 127 Osakis.
MN 27................  US 71 N. Int. Long        US 10 Little Falls.
                        Prairie.
MN 28................  SD State Line Browns      I-94/US 71 Sauk Centre.
                        Valley.
MN 29................  I-94 Alexandria.........  MN 27 Alexandria.
MN 30................  US 75 Pipestone.........  US 59 S. Int. Slayton.
MN 32................  US 59/MN 1 Thief River    MN 11 Greenbush.
                        Falls.
MN 33................  I-35 Cloguet............  US 53 Independence.
MN 34................  US 71 Park Rapids.......  MN 371 Walker.
MN 36................  I-35W Roseville.........  MN 95 Oak Park Hts.
MN 43................  I-90 Wilson.............  US 61 Winona.
MN 55................  MN 28 Glenwood..........  7th St. N., W. Int.
                                                  Minneapolis.
MN 55................  I-94 E. Int. Minneapolis  MN 3 Inver Grove Hts.
MN 60................  IA State Line Bigelow...  US 14/169 Mankato.
MN 62................  US 212 Edina............  MN 100 Edina.
MN 65................  I-694 Fridley...........  MN 23 Mora.
MN 68................  US 75 Canby.............  MN 19 Marshall.
MN 101...............  I-94 Rogers.............  US 10 Elk River.
MN 109...............  I-90 Alden..............  MN 22 Wells.
MN 175...............  US 75 Hallock...........  US 59.
MN 210...............  ND State Line             US 59 W. Int. Fergus
                        Breckenridge.             Falls.
MN 210...............  US 10 Motley............  I-35 Carlton.
MN 371...............  US 10 Little Falls......  US 2 Cass Lake.
 
NOTE: I-35E St. Paul--The parkway segment of I-35E from 7th Street to I-
   94 is not available to trucks because of reduced design standards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Mississippi
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Missouri
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 24................  I-435 Kansas City.......  US 65 Waverly.
US 24................  US 36 E. Jct. W. of       IL State Line.
                        Hannibal.
US 36................  KS State Line St. Joseph  IL State Line Hannibal.
US 40................  I-70 Wentzville.........  I-270 W. of St. Louis.
US 50................  I-470 Exit 7 Kansas City  I-44 Exit 247 Union.
US 54................  US 54BR Lake Ozark......  IL State Line.
US 59................  KS State Line...........  I-229 St. Joseph.
US 60................  OK State Line...........  US 71 Neosho.
US 60................  MO 37 Monett............  US 63 Cabool.
US 60................  2 Mi. E. of E. Jct. MO    I-55/57 Sikeston.
                        21 Ellsinore.
US 61................  I-70 Wentzville.........  IA State Line.
US 63................  AR State Line Thayer....  IA State Line.
US 65................  AR State Line Ridgedale.  IA State Line.
US 67................  AR State Line...........  I-55 Exit 174 Crystal
                                                  City.

[[Page 276]]

 
US 67................  MO 367 N. of St. Louis..  IL State Line.
US 71................  AR State Line...........  I-435/470 Kansas City.
US 71................  I-29 Exit 53 N. of St.    US 136 Maryville.
                        Joseph.
US 71 Alt............  I-44 E. of Joplin.......  US 71 Carthage.
US 136...............  NE State Line...........  I-29 Exit 110 Rock
                                                  Port.
US 166...............  KS State Line...........  I-44 SW. of Joplin.
US 169...............  I-29 Kansas City........  MO 152 Kansas City.
US 412...............  AR State Line...........  I-55 Exit 19 Hayti.
MO 5.................  AR State Line...........  US 60 Mansfield.
MO 7.................  US 71 Harrisonville.....  MO 13 Clinton.
MO 13................  I-44 Springfield........  US 24 Lexington.
MO 25................  US 412 near Kennett.....  US 60 Dexter.
MO 37................  MO 76 Cassville.........  US 60 Monett.
MO 47................  US 50 Union.............  MO 100 Washington.
MO 84................  AR State Line...........  US 412 near Kennett.
MO 100...............  MO 47 Washington........  I-44 SE. of Washington.
MO 171...............  KS State Line/KS 57.....  US 71 Webb City.
MO 367...............  I-270 N. of St. Louis...  US 67 N. of St. Louis.
----------------------
                                 Montana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Nebraska
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Nevada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              New Hampshire
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
US 3.................  MA State Line...........  NH 101A Nashua.
US 4/Spaulding Tpk...  I-95 Portsmouth.........  Exit 6 E. of Durham.
----------------------
                               New Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
US 130...............  US 322 Bridgeport.......  I-295 Logan Township.
US 130...............  I-295/NJ 44 West          I-295 West Deptford.
                        Deptford.
US 322...............  PA State Line...........  US 130 Bridgeport.
NJ 42................  Atlantic City Expwy.      I-295 Bellmawr.
                        Turnersville.
NJ 81................  I-95 Elizabeth..........  US 1/9 Newark Intl.
                                                  Airport.
NJ 440...............  I-287/I-95 Edison.......  NY State Line
                                                  Outerbridge Crossing.
----------------------
  Note: I-95--The following two sections of the New Jersey Turnpike are
     available to STAA-dimensioned vehicles. They were added to the
  Interstate System on March 3, 1983, but are not signed as Interstate.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PA Tpk. Connector....  PA State Line...........  Exit 6 Mansfield.
NJ Tpk...............  Exit 6 Mansfield........  Exit 10 Edison.
----------------------
                               New Mexico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 56................  I-25 Springer...........  OK State Line.
US 60................  AZ State Line...........  I-25 Socorro.
US 62................  US 285 Carlsbad.........  TX State Line.
US 64................  AZ State Line...........  US 550 Farmington.
US 70................  AZ State Line...........  I-10 Lordsburg.
US 70................  I-10 Las Cruces.........  US 54 Tularosa.
US 70................  US 285 Roswell..........  US 84 Clovis.
US 80................  AZ State Line...........  I-10 Road Forks.
US 84................  TX State Line Clovis....  CO State Line.
US 87................  US 56 Clayton...........  TX State Line.
US 160...............  AZ State Line (Four       CO State Line.
                        Corners).
US 285...............  TX State Line S. of       CO State Line.
                        Carlsbad.
US 550...............  US 64 Farmington........  CO State Line.
US 666...............  I-40 Gallup.............  CO State Line.
----------------------
                                New York
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 15................  Presho Int..............  NY 17 Corning.
US 20................  NY 75 Mt. Vernon........  Howard Rd. Mt. Vernon.
US 219...............  NY 39 Springville.......  I-90 S. of Exit 55.
NY 5.................  NY 174 Camillus.........  NY 695 Fairmont.
NY 5.................  ECL Schenectady.........  I-87 Colonie.
NY 5.................  NY 179 Woodlawn Beach...  NY 75 Mt. Vernon.
NY 7.................  Schenectady/Albany Co.    I-87 Colonie.
                        Line.
NY 8.................  CR 9/Main St. Sauquoit..  I-790 Utica.
NY 12................  I-790 Utica.............  Putnam Road Trenton.
NY 17................  Exit 24 Allegany........  I-87 Exit 16 Harriman.
NY 17................  NJ State Line...........  I-87 Exit 15 Suffern.
NY 33................  Michigan Ave. Buffalo...  Greater Buffalo Intl.
                                                  Airport.
NY 49................  NY 365 Rome.............  NY 291 near Oriskany.
NY 104...............  Maplewood Dr. Rochester.  Monroe/Wayne Co. Line.
NY 179...............  NY 5 Woodlawn Beach.....  I-90 Exit 56 Windom.
NY 198...............  I-190 Exit N11..........  NY 33 Buffalo.
NY 254...............  I-87 Glens Falls........  0.3 Miles E. of US 9.
NY 365...............  I-90 Exit 33............  NY 49 Rome.
NY 390...............  I-390/490 Rochester.....  NY 18 North Greece.
NY 400...............  I-90 Exit 54............  NY 16 South Wales.
NY 481...............  I-81 North Syracuse.....  NY 3 Fulton.
NY 590...............  I-490/590 Rochester.....  NY 104 Irondequoit.
NY 690...............  I-90/690 Lakeland.......  NY 370 Baldwinsville.
NY 695...............  NY 5 Fairmont...........  I-690 Solvay.
Berkshire Conn. (NY    I-87 Exit 21A S. of       I-90 Exit B1.
 912M).                 Albany.

[[Page 277]]

 
Inner Loop (NY 940T).  I-490 W. Int. Rochester.  I-490 E. Int.
                                                  Rochester.
Walden Avenue (NY      I-90 Exit 52............  NY 277 Cheektowaga.
 952Q).
----------------------
                             North Carolina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-40 Conn............  US 19/23/74 Clyde.......  I-40 W. of Clyde.
I-95 BR..............  I-95 S. of Fayetteville.  I-95 N. of
                                                  Fayetteville.
US 1.................  US 74 Rockingham........  I-85 near Henderson.
US 15................  US 401 Laurinburg.......  US 1 Aberdeen.
US 15................  US 1 Northview..........  US 64 Pittsboro.
US 17................  SC State Line...........  US 74/76 W. of
                                                  Wilmington.
US 17................  SR 1409 E. of Wilmington  VA State Line.
US 19/US 23..........  I-240 Asheville.........  N. Int. Mars Hill.
US 23................  US 441 Franklin.........  US 74 Dillsboro.
US 25................  SC State Line...........  I-26 East Flat Rock.
US 25/US 70..........  US 19/23 Weaverville....  US 25/70 Bypass
                                                  Marshall.
US 29................  US 52 Lexington.........  VA State Line.
US 52................  NC 24/27 Albemarle......  VA State Line.
US 64................  I-40 Morganton..........  US 321 Lenoir.
US 64................  US 29 Lexington.........  US 15 Pittsboro.
US 64................  US 1/70/401 Raleigh.....  US 17 Williamston.
US 70................  I-77 Statesville........  I-85 Salisbury (via US
                                                  601).
US 70................  I-85 Durham.............  US 70A W. of
                                                  Smithfield.
US 70A...............  US 70 W. of Smithfield..  US 70 Princeton.
US 70................  US 70A Princeton........  Beaufort.
US 74................  TN State Line...........  I-40 Conn. Clyde.
US 74................  US 221 Rutherfordton....  I-85 Kings Mountain.
US 74 (See Note        I-277 Charlotte.........  US 17 W. Int.
 Below).                                          Wilmington.
US 74................  I-26 EXIT 36............  US 74 ALT: near Forest
                                                  City.
US 76................  US 17/74 W. Int.          SR 1409 E. of
                        Wilmington.               Wilmington.
US 158...............  I-40 Winston-Salem......  US 29 Reidsville.
US 158...............  I-85 Henderson..........  US 258 Murfreesboro.
US 220...............  US 74 Rockingham........  VA State Line.
US 221...............  US 74 Rutherfordton.....  I-40 Glenwood.
US 258...............  NC 24 N. Int. Richlands.  US 64 Tarboro.
US 258...............  US 158 Murfreesboro.....  VA State Line.
US 264...............  US 64 Zebulon...........  US 17 Washington.
US 301...............  I-95 Kenly..............  NC 4 Battleboro.
US 321...............  SC State Line...........  I-85 Gastonia.
US 321...............  I-40 Hickory............  NC 18/90 Lenoir.
US 401...............  SC State Line...........  I-40 Raleigh.
US 421...............  Carolina Beach..........  I-95 Dunn.
US 421...............  US 1 Sanford............  US 64 Siler City.
US 421...............  I-40 Winston-Salem......  Wilkesboro.
US 521...............  SC State Line...........  I-77 Charlotte.
US 601...............  SC State Line...........  US 74 Monroe.
NC 4.................  I-95 Gold Rock..........  US 301 Battleboro.
NC 11................  US 70 Kinston...........  US 264 Greenville.
NC 24................  US 74 Charlotte.........  US 52 Albemarle.
NC 24................  NC 87 Spout Springs.....  I-95 Fayetteville.
NC 24................  US 421 Clinton..........  US 70 Mansfield.
NC 49................  I-85 Charlotte..........  US 64 Asheboro.
NC 87................  NC 24/27 Spout Springs..  US 1 Sanford.
SR 1409..............  US 76 E. of Wilmington..  US 17.
SR 1728..............  I-40 W. of Raleigh......  US 1/Wade Ave. Raleigh.
SR 1959-SR 2028......  US 70 Bethesda..........  I-40 S. of Durham.
 
  Note: US 74 Charlotte--STAA-dimensioned vehicles are subject to State
    restrictions on US 74 in Charlotte because of narrow lane widths.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              North Dakota
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 2.................  MT State Line...........  MN State Line Grand
                                                  Forks.
US 10................  I-94 W. Fargo...........  MN State Line.
US 12................  MT State Line Marmarth..  SD State Line.
US 52................  I-94 Jamestown..........  Canadian Border.
US 81................  I-29 Manvel.............  I-29 Joliette.
US 83................  SD State Line...........  Canadian Border
                                                  Westhope.
US 85................  SD State Line...........  Canadian Border
                                                  Fortuna.
US 281...............  SD State Line Ellendale.  Canadian Border.
ND 1.................  ND 11 Ludden............  ND 13 S. Jct.
ND 5.................  MT State Line...........  US 85 Fortuna.
ND 11................  US 281 Ellendale........  ND 1 Ludden.
ND 13................  ND 1 S. Jct.............  MN State Line.
ND 32................  West Junction of ND       1-94.
                        Highway 13.
ND 68................  MT State Line...........  US 85 Alexander.
ND 200...............  MT State Line...........  US 85 Alexander.
----------------------
                                  Ohio
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Oklahoma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Oregon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 20................  OR 34 W. Int. Philomath.  ECL Sweet Home.
US 20................  OR 126 Sisters..........  ID State Line Nyssa.
US 26................  US 101 Cannon Beach       OR 126 Prineville.
                        Junction.
US 30................  US 101 Astoria..........  I-405 Portland.
US 30 BR.............  OR 201 Ontario..........  ID State Line.
US 95................  NV State Line...........  ID State Line.
US 95 Spur...........  OR 201..................  ID State Line Weiser,
                                                  ID.
US 97................  CA State Line...........  WA State Line.
US 101...............  SCL Port Orford.........  OR 126 Florence.
US 101...............  US 20 Newport...........  OR 18 Otis.
US 101...............  OR 6 Tillamook..........  WA State Line.
US 197...............  I-84 The Dalles.........  WA State Line.
US 199...............  CA State Line...........  OR 99 Grants Pass.
US 395...............  CA State Line...........  US 26 John Day.
US 395...............  I-84 Stanfield..........  US 730 near Umatilla.
US 730...............  I-84 Boardman...........  WA State Line.

[[Page 278]]

 
OR 6.................  US 101 Tillamook........  US 26 Near Banks.
OR 8.................  OR 47 Forest Grove......  OR 217 Beaverton.
OR 11................  I-84 Pendelton..........  WA State Line.
OR 18................  US 101 Otis.............  OR 99W Dayton.
OR 19................  OR 206 Condon...........  I-84 Arlington.
OR 22................  OR 18 near Willamina....  US 20 Santiam Junction.
OR 31................  US 97 La Pine...........  US 395 Valley Falls.
OR 34................  OR 99W Corvallis........  US 20 Lebanon.
OR 35................  US 26 Government Camp...  I-84 Hood River.
OR 38................  US 101 Reedsport........  I-5 Anlauf.
OR 39................  CA State Line...........  OR 140 E. of Klamath
                                                  Falls.
OR 42................  US 101 Coos Bay.........  OR 42S Coquille.
OR 47................  OR 8 Forest Grove.......  US 26 N. of Banks.
OR 58................  I-5 Eugene..............  US 97 near Chemult.
OR 62................  Medford.................  OR 140 White City.
OR 78................  Burns...................  US 95 Burns Junction.
OR 99................  I-5 E. of Rogue River...  I-5 Grants Pass.
OR 99................  I-5 Eugene..............  OR 99W/E Junction City.
OR 99E...............  OR 99/99W Junction City.  I-5 Albany.
OR 99E...............  I-5 Salem...............  I-5 Portland.
OR 99W...............  OR 99/99E Junction City.  I-5 Portland.
OR 126...............  US 101 Florence.........  US 26 Prineville.
OR 138...............  OR 38 Elkton............  I-5 near Sutherlin.
OR 140...............  OR 62 White City........  OR 39 E. of Klamath
                                                  Falls.
OR 201...............  US 26 Cairo.............  US 95 Spur near Weiser,
                                                  ID.
OR 207...............  US 730 Cold Springs Jct.  OR 74 S. Int. Heppner.
OR 212...............  OR 224 E. Int. near Rock  US 26 near Boring.
                        Ck. Corner.
OR 214...............  I-5 Woodburn............  OR 213 Silverton.
OR 217...............  US 26 Beaverton.........  I-5 Tigard.
OR 223...............  Kings Valley Hwy. in      OR 99W Rickreall.
                        Dallas.
OR 224...............  OR 99E Milwaukie........  OR 212 E. Int. near
                                                  Rock Ck. Corner
----------------------
                              Pennsylvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 1.................  US 13 Morrisville.......  NJ State Line.
US 6.................  Conneaut Lake Borough...  End of 4-lane Bypass
                                                  NE. of Meadville.
US 11................  Turnpike Int. 16........  US 15 Harrisburg.
US 13................  US 1 Morrisville........  Turnpike Int. 29.
US 15................  Turnpike Int. 17........  US 11 Harrisburg Expwy.
US 15................  PA 642 West Milton......  White Deer Int.
US 15................  I-180/US 220              End of lim. acc.
                        Williamsport.             Williamsport.
US 20................  PA 89 North East........  I-90 Int. 12.
US 22................  WV State Line...........  I-79 Int. 15 Carnegie.
US 22................  I-78 Fogelsville........  NJ State Line.
US 30................  End of lim. acc. W. of    End of lim. acc. E. of
                        Greensburg.               Greensburg.
US 30................  PA 462 W. of York.......  PA 462 E. of Lancaster.
US 119...............  End of lim. acc. S. of    US 30 Greensburg.
                        Uniontown.
US 202...............  DE State Line...........  I-76 Int. 26 King of
                                                  Prussia.
US 209...............  PA 33 Snydersville......  I-80 Stroudsburg.
US 219...............  PA 601 N. of Somerset...  US 422 W. Int.
US 219...............  South Bradford Int......  NY State Line.
US 220...............  Turnpike Int. 11........  King.
US 220...............  End of lim. acc. Linden.  I-180/US 15
                                                  Williamsport.
US 220...............  PA 199 S. of Athens.....  NY State Line NY 17.
US 222...............  US 422 N. Int. Reading..  PA 61 S. of Tuckerton.
US 222...............  US 30 Lancaster.........  Turnpike Int. 21.
US 322...............  NJ State Line (Comm.      I-95 Chester.
                        Barry Br.).
US 322...............  I-83/283................  US 422/PA 39 Hershey.
US 422...............  US 322/PA 39 Hershey....  Hockersville Rd.
                                                  Hershey.
US 422...............  US 422 Bus. Reiffton....  US 422 Bus. Wyomissing.
PA 3.................  US 202..................  Garrett Rd. Upper
                                                  Darby.
PA 9.................  Turnpike Int. 25........  I-81 Int. 58 N. of
                                                  Scranton.
PA 28................  PA 8....................  Creighton.
PA 33................  US 22 Easton............  I-80.
PA 42................  I-80 Int. 34............  US 11 Bloomsburg.
PA 51................  US 119 Uniontown........  Monongahela Riv.
                                                  Elizabeth.
PA 54................  I-80 Int. 33............  US 11 Danville.
PA 60................  PA 51 Beaver Falls......  US 22.
PA 60-US 422.........  I-80 Int. 1.............  1 Mile E. of PA 65 New
                                                  Castle.
PA 61................  US 222 S. of Tuckerton..  I-78 Int. 9.
PA 93................  I-81 Int. 41............  PA 924 Hazelton.
PA 114...............  US 11 Hogestown.........  I-81 Int. 18.
PA 132...............  I-95 Cornwells Heights..  Turnpike Int. 28 (via
                                                  US 1 Connection).
PA 283...............  I-283 Int. 2............  US 30 Lancaster.
PA 924...............  I-81 Int. 40............  PA 93 Hazelton.
Airport Access (SR     PA 283..................  Harrisburg
 3032).                                           International Airport.
Harrisburg Exp. (Sr    US 11/15................  I-83 Int. 20.
 2022).
Reading Outer Loop     PA 183 Leinbachs........  US 222.
 (SR 3055).
----------------------
                               Puerto Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PR 1.................  PR 2 Ponce..............  PR 52 Ponce.
PR 2.................  PR 22 San Juan..........  PR 1 Ponce.
PR 3.................  N. Ent. Roosevelt Roads   PR 26 Carolina.
                        Naval Sta..
PR 18................  PR 52 San Juan..........  PR 22 San Juan.
PR 22................  PR 26 San Juan..........  PR 165 Toa Baja.
 
PR 26................  PR 22 San Juan..........  PR 3 Carolina.
PR 30................  PR 52 Caguas............  PR 3 Humacao.
PR 52................  PR 1 Ponce..............  PR 18 San Juan.
PR 165...............  PR 22 Toa Baja..........  PR 2 Toa Baja.
 
 Note: Routes added to the Interstate System under 23 U.S.C. 139(c) are
              included only to the extent designated above.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Rhode Island
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RI 10................  RI 195 Providence.......  I-95 Cranston.

[[Page 279]]

 
RI 37................  I-295 Cranston..........  I-95 near Lincoln Park.
RI 146...............  I-95 Providence.........  I-295 N. of Lime Rock.
RI 195...............  I-295 Johnston..........  RI 10 Providence.
----------------------
                             South Carolina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 15/401............  NC State Line...........  US 52 Society Hill.
US 17................  I-95 Pocotaligo.........  US 21 Gardens Corner.
US 17................  I-26 Charleston.........  NC State Line.
US 21................  US 17 Gardens Corner....  SC 170 Beaufort.
US 25................  NC State Line...........  US 78 North Augusta
                                                  (via Greenwood
                                                  Bypass).
US 52................  US 15/401 Society Hill..  End of 4-ln. div. N. of
                                                  urban limits of
                                                  Kingstree.
US 52................  US 17 A1t. S. Int.        I-26 Exit 208 N.
                        Moncks Corner.            Charleston connector.
US 76................  US 52 Florence..........  SC 576 Marion.
US 76................  SC 277 Columbia.........  I-126 Columbia.
US 78................  GA State Line...........  I-95 St. George.
US 78................  I-26 Exit 205 N.          US 52 N. Charleston.
                        Charleston.
US 123...............  Bibb St. Westminister...  US 25 Greenville.
US 21/178 Bypass.....  US 601 Orangeburg.......  Orangeburg.
US276................  I-385 Simpsonville......  I-85 Greenville.
US 301...............  US 321 Ulmer............  I-95 Santee.
US 321...............  I-26 S. of Columbia.....  I-95 Hardeeville.
US 378...............  SC 262 Columbia.........  US 501 Conway.
US 501...............  SC 576 Marion...........  US 17 Myrtle Beach.
US 601...............  NC State Line...........  SC 151 Pageland.
US 601...............  I-26 Jamison............  US 21/178 Bypass
                                                  Orangeburg.
SC 72................  US 25 Byp. Greenwood....  I-77 Exit 61 (via SC 72
                                                  Byp.-US 21 BR-US 21
                                                  Rock Hill).
SC 121...............  SC 72 Whitmire..........  US 25 Trenton.
SC 151...............  US 601 Pageland.........  US 52 Darlington.
SC 2 77..............  I-77 Columbia...........  US 76 Columbia.
SC 576...............  US 76 Marion............  US 501 Marion.
----------------------
                               South Dakota
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Tennessee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 25E...............  I-81....................  VA State Line
                                                  Cumberland Gap.
US 27................  End of I-124 Chattanooga  US 127 Chattanooga.
US 27................  TN 153 Chattanooga......  KY State Line Winfield.
US 43................  AL State Line St. Joseph  US 64 Lawrenceburg.
US 45................  MS State Line...........  US 45 Bypass S. Int.
                                                  Jackson.
US 45 Bypass-US 45W..  US 45 S. Int. Jackson...  US 51 Union City.
US 51................  TN 300 Memphis..........  KY State Line Jackson
                                                  Purchase Pkwy.
US 64................  I-40 E. Int. Memphis....  I-24 Monteagle.
US 70 Alt............  US 79 Atwood............  TN 22 Huntingdon.
US 70................  TN 22 Huntingdon........  TN 96 Dickson.
US 70................  TN 155 Nashville........  US 127 Crossville.
US 70S...............  TN 102 Smyrna...........  US 70/TN 111 Sparta.
US 72................  AL State Line...........  I-24 Kimball.
US 74................  I-75 Cleveland..........  NC State Line IsabelIa.
US 79................  I-40 Memphis............  KY State Line US 41
                                                  Guthrie.
US 127...............  US 27 Chattanooga.......  TN 27 W. Int.
US 127...............  TN 28 Dunlap............  KY State Line Static.
US 231...............  AL State Line S. of       KY State Line N. of
                        Fayetteville.             Westmoreland.
US 412...............  I-40 Jackson............  US 51 Dyersburg.
US 641...............  I-40 near Natchez Trace   KY State Line N. of
                        State Park.               Paris.
TN 96................  US 70 Dickson...........  I-40 E. of Dickson.
TN 153...............  I-75 Chattanooga........  US 27 Chattanooga.
TN 155...............  I-40 Nashville..........  I-65 N. of Nashville.
TN 300...............  I-40 Memphis............  US 51 Memphis.
----------------------
                                  Texas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Utah
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Vermont
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 4.................  NY State Line...........  ECL Rutland.
US 7.................  End of 4-lane divided     US 4 N. Int. Rutland.
                        hwy. Wallingford.
VT 9.................  I-91 Int. 3 N. of         NH State Line.
                        Brattleboro.
----------------------
                                Virginia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 11................  I-81 Exit 195...........  0.16 Mi. N. of VA 645
                                                  Rockbridge Co.
US 11................  VA 220 Alt. N. Int......  2.15 Mi. S. of VA 220
                                                  Alt. N. Int.
                                                  Cloverdale.
US 11................  VA 100 Dublin...........  VA 643 S. of Dublin.
US 11................  1.52 Mi. N. of VA 75....  US 19 N. Int. Abington.
US 13................  MD State Line...........  I-64 Exit 282 Norfolk.
US 17................  US 29 Opal..............  VA 2/US 17 BR New Post.
US 17................  VA 134 York County......  I-64 Exit 258 Newport
                                                  News.
US 17................  BR/SCL Fredericksburg...  US 17 New Post VA 2.
US 19................  I-81 Exit 14 (via VA      US 460 N. Int./VA 720
                        140) Abington.            Bluefield.
US 23................  TN State Line...........  US 58 Alt. Big Stone
                                                  Gap.
US 23................  0.33 Mi. N. of US 23 BR   KY State Line.
                        Norton.
US 25E...............  TN State Line...........  KY State Line.
US 29................  NC State Line...........  I-66 Exit 43
                                                  Gainesville.

[[Page 280]]

 
US 33................  N. Carlton Street         US 340 Elkton.
                        Harrisonburg.
US 33................  I-295 Exit 49...........  0.96 Mi. W. of I-295
                                                  Hanover County.
US 50................  VA 259 Gore.............  VA 37 Frederick County.
US 50................  Apple Blossom Loop Road   I-81 Exit 313
                        Winchester.               Winchester.
US 58................  VA 721 W. of              US 220 BR N. Int.
                        Martinsville.             Martinsville.
US 58................  S. Fairy Street           WCL Emporia.
                        Martinsville.
US 58................  0.6 Mi. E. of ECL         VA 35 S. Int.
                        Emporia.                  Courtland.
US 58................  US 58 BR E. of Courtland  US 13/I-264 Bowers
                                                  Hill.
US 58 Alt............  US 23 Norton............  US 19 Hansonville.
US 58 Alt............  0.4 Mi. W. of US 11.....  I-81 Exit 17 Abington.
US 58 BR.............  VA 35 Courtland.........  US 58 E. of Courtland.
US 58................  W. Int. VA 337 Claremont  US 460/St. Paul's Blvd.
                        St. Norfolk.              Norfolk.
US 60................  0.03 Mi. West of VA 887   US 522 Powhatan.
                        Chesterfield County.
US 220...............  NC State Line...........  I-581 Roanoke.
US 220...............  I-81 Exit 150...........  SCL Fincastle.
US 220 BR............  US 220 S. Int...........  0.16 Mi. N. of VA 825
                                                  S. of Martinsville.
US 220 BR............  US 58 N. Int.             US 220 N. Int. Bassett
                        Martinsville.             Forks.
US 250...............  US 340 E. Int.            VA 254 Waynesboro.
                        Waynesboro.
US 250...............  I-81 Exit 222...........  VA 261 Statler Blvd.
                                                  Staunton.
US 258...............  NC State Line...........  US 58 Franklin.
US 258...............  VA 10 Benns Church......  VA 143 Jefferson Ave.
                                                  Newport News.
US 301...............  VA 1250 S. of I-295.....  I-295 Exit 41 Hanover
                                                  County.
US 301...............  US 301 BR N. Int.         MD State Line.
                        Bowling Green.
US 340/522...........  I-66 Exit 6 Front Royal.  2.85 Mi. N. of I-66.
US 340...............  VA 7 Berryville.........  WV State Line.
US 360...............  US 58 South Boston......  VA 150 Chesterfield
                                                  County.
US 360...............  I-64 Exit 192 Richmond..  VA 617 Village.
US 460...............  VA 67 W. Int. Raven.....  US 19 Claypool Hill.
US 460...............  VA 720 Bluefield........  WV State Line at
                                                  Bluefield.
US 460...............  WV State Line at Glen     I-81 Exit 118
                        Lyn.                      Christiansburg.
US 460...............  I-581 Roanoke...........  0.08 Mi. E. of VA 1512
                                                  Lynchburg.
US 460...............  US 29 Lynchburg.........  1 Mi. W. of VA 24
                                                  Appomattox County.
US 460...............  0.64 Mi. E. of VA 707     I-85 Exit 61
                        Appomattox County.        Petersburg.
US 460...............  I-95 Exit 50 Petersburg.  US 58 Suffolk.
US 501...............  VA 360 S. Int. Halifax..  US 58 South Boston.
US 522...............  0.6 Mi. S. of US 50.....  US 50 Frederick County.
US 522...............  VA 37 Frederick County..  1.07 Mi. N. of VA 705
                                                  Cross Junction.
VA 3.................  US 1 Fredericksburg.....  VA 20 Wilderness.
VA 7.................  I-81 Exit 315 Winchester  0.68 Mi. W. of WCL
                                                  Round Hill.
VA 10................  US 58 Suffolk...........  VA 666 Smithfield.
VA 10................  ECL Hopewell............  0.37 Mi. W. of W. Int.
                                                  VA 156 Hopewell.
VA 10................  US 1 Chesterfield County  VA 827 W. of Hopewell.
VA 20................  I-64 Exit 121...........  Carlton Rd.
                                                  Charlottesville.
VA 30................  I-95 Exit 98 Doswell....  US 1.
VA 33................  I-64 Exit 220...........  VA 30 E. Int. West
                                                  Point.
VA 36................  I-95 Exit 52 Petersburg.  VA 156 Hopewell.
VA 37................  I-81 Exit 310 S. of       I-81 Exit 317 (via US
                        Winchester.               11) N. of Winchester.
VA 42................  VA 257 S. Int.            VA 290 Dayton.
                        Bridgewater.
VA 57................  VA 753 Bassett..........  US 220 Bassett Forks.
VA 86................  US 29 Danville..........  NC State Line.
VA 100...............  I-81 Exit 98............  US 11 Dublin.
VA 105...............  US 60 Newport News......  I-64 Exit 250.
VA 114...............  US 460 Christians- burg.  0.09 Mi. E. of VA 750
                                                  Montgomery County.
VA 156...............  VA 10 W. Int. Hopewell..  VA 36 Hopewell.
VA 199...............  US 60 Williamsburg......  I-64 Exit 242.
VA 207...............  I-95 Exit 104...........  0.2 Mi. S. of VA 619
                                                  Milford.
VA 220 Alt...........  US 11 N. Int. N. of       I-81 Exit 150/US 220.
                        Cloverdale.
VA 277...............  I-81 Exit 307 Stephens    1.6 MI. E. of I-81 Exit
                        City.                     307.
VA 419...............  I-81 Exit 141 Salem.....  Midland Ave. Salem.
VA 624...............  I-64 Exit 96............  Old SCL Waynesboro.
Commonwealth Blvd. in  Market Street...........  N. Fairy Street.
 Martins- ville.
 
Note 1: I-66 Washington, DC, area--There is a 24-hour total truck ban on
 I-66 from I-495 Capital Beltway to the District of Columbia. (Excepted
                        under 23 CFR 658.11(f)).
 
  Note 2: I-264 Norfolk--Truck widths are limited to 96 inches for the
  westbound tube of the Elizabeth River Downtown Tunnel from Norfolk to
              Portsmouth because of clearance deficiencies.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Washington
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              West Virginia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 19................  I-77 Bradley............  I-79 Gassaway.
US 35................  WV 34 Winfield..........  OH State Line.
US 48................  I-79 Morgantown.........  MD State Line.
US 50................  I-77 Parkersburg........  I-79 Clarksburg.
US 460...............  VA State Line Bluefield.  VA State Line
                                                  Kelleysville.

[[Page 281]]

 
WV 34................  I-64 Putnam Co..........  US 35 Winfield.
----------------------
                                Wisconsin
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 2.................  I-535/US 53 Superior....  MI State Line Hurley.
US 2.................  MI State Line W. of       MI State Line E. of
                        Florence.                 Florence.
US 8.................  US 63 Turtle Lake.......  MI State Line Norway
                                                  MI.
US 10................  US 53 Osseo.............  I-43 Manitowoc.
US 12................  I-94/CH ``EE'' W. of Eau  US 53 Eau Claire.
                        Claire.
US 12................  I-90/94 Lake Delton.....  End of 4-lane S. of W.
                                                  Baraboo.
US 12................  WI 67 S. Jct. Elkhorn...  IL State Line Genoa
                                                  City.
US 14................  US 51 N. of Janesville..  I-90 Janesville.
US 14................  WI 11/89 N. of Darien...  I-43 Darien.
US 18................  IA State Line Prairie Du  I-90 Madison.
                        Chien.
US 41................  National Ave. Milwaukee.  Garfield Ave.
                                                  Milwaukee.
US 41................  107th St. Milwaukee.....  MI State Line
                                                  Marinette.
US 45................  IL State Line Bristol...  WI 28 Kewaskum.
US 45................  WI 29 Wittenberg........  MI State Line Land
                                                  O'Lakes.
US 51................  SCL Janesville..........  US 14 Janesville.
US 51................  WI 78 N. of Portage.....  US 2 Hurley.
US 53................  US 14/61 La Crosse......  US 10 Osseo.
US 53................  I-94 Eau Claire.........  I-535/US 2 Superior.
US 61................  IA State Line Dubugue IA  MN State Line La Crosse
                                                  (via WI 129 Lancaster
                                                  Byp.).
US 63................  MN State Line Red Wing    US 2 W. of Ashland.
                        MN.
US 141...............  US 41 Abrams............  US 8 Pembine.
US 151...............  IA State Line Dubugue IA  US 18 E. of Dodgeville.
US 151...............  I-90/94 Madison.........  US 41 Fond Du Lac.
WI 11................  IA State Line Dubuque IA  US 51 Janesville.
WI 11................  I-90 Janesville.........  US 14/WI 89 N. of
                                                  Darien.
WI 11................  I-43 Elkhorn............  WI 31 Racine.
WI 13................  WI 21 Friendship........  US 2 Ashland.
WI 16................  WI 78 Portage...........  I-94 Waukesha.
WI 17................  US 8 Rhinelander........  US 45 Eagle River.
WI 20................  I-94 Racine.............  WI 31 Racine.
WI 21................  WI 27 Sparta............  US 41 Oshkosh.
WI 23................  WI 32 N. of Sheboygan     Taylor Dr. Sheboygan.
                        Falls.
WI 26................  I-94 Johnson Creek......  WI 16 Watertown.
WI 26................  US 151 Waupun...........  US 41 SW. of Oshkosh.
WI 27................  US 14/61 Westby.........  US 10 Fairchild.
WI 28................  US 41 Theresa...........  US 45 Kewaskum.
WI 29................  I-94 Elk Mound..........  US 53 Chippewa Falls.
WI 29................  WI 124 S. of Chippewa     US 41 Green Bay.
                        Falls.
WI 30................  US 151 Madison..........  I-90/94 Madison.
WI 31................  WI 11 Racine............  WI 20 Racine.
WI 32................  WI 29 W. of Green Bay...  Gillett.
WI 34................  WI 13 Wisconsin Rapids..  US 51 Knowlton.
WI 42................  I-43 Manitowoc..........  WI 57 SW. of Sturgeon
                                                  Bay.
WI 47................  US 10 Appleton..........  WI 29 Bonduel.
WI 50................  I-94 Kenosha............  45th Ave. Kenosha.
WI 54................  WI 13 Wisconsin Rapids..  US 51 Plover.
WI 57................  I-43 Green Bay..........  Sturgeon Bay.
WI 69................  WI 11 Monroe............  CH ``PB'' Paoli.
WI 73................  US 51 Plainfield........  WI 54 Wisconsin Rapids.
WI 78................  I-90/94 S. of Portage...  US 51 N. of portage.
WI 80................  WI 21 Necedah...........  WI 13 Pittsville.
WI 119...............  I-94 Milwaukee..........  WI 38 Milwaukee.
WI 124...............  US 53 N. of Eau Claire..  WI 29 S. of Chippewa
                                                  Falls.
WI 139...............  US 8 Cavour, Forest Co..  Long Lake.
WI 145...............  Broadway Milwaukee......  US 41/45 Milwaukee.
WI 172...............  US 41 Ashwaubenon.......  CH ``x'' S. of Green
                                                  Bay.
CH ``PB''............  WI 69 Paoli.............  US 18/151 E. of Verona.
----------------------
                                 Wyoming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No additional routes have been federally designated; STAA-dimensioned
   commercial vehicles may legally operate on all Federal-aid Primary
                        highways under State law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Note: Information on additional highways on which STAA-dimensioned
 vehicles may legally operate may be obtained from the respective State
                            highway agencies.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[55 FR 17953, Apr. 30, 1990; 55 FR 19145, May 8, 1990, as amended at 59 
FR 30421, June 13, 1994; 59 FR 36053, July 15, 1994; 60 FR 15214, Mar. 
22, 1995; 60 FR 16571, Mar. 31, 1995; 62 FR 30758, June 5, 1997; 63 FR 
70653, Dec. 22, 1998; 63 FR 71748, Dec. 30, 1998]

        Appendix B to Part 658--Grandfathered Semitrailer Lengths

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Feet and
                            State                                inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama......................................................       53-6
Alaska.......................................................       48-0
Arizona......................................................       57-6
Arkansas.....................................................       53-6
California...................................................   \1\ 48-0
Colorado.....................................................       57-4
Connecticut..................................................       48-0
Delaware.....................................................       53-0
District of Columbia.........................................       48-0
Florida......................................................       48-0
Georgia......................................................       48-0
Hawaii.......................................................       48-0
Idaho........................................................       48-0
Illinois.....................................................       53-0
Indiana......................................................   \2\ 48-6
Iowa.........................................................       53-0
Kansas.......................................................       57-6
Kentucky.....................................................       53-0
Louisiana....................................................       59-6
Maine........................................................       48-0
Maryland.....................................................       48-0
Massachusetts................................................       48-0
Michigan.....................................................       48-0
Minnesota....................................................       48-0

[[Page 282]]

 
Mississippi..................................................       53-0
Missouri.....................................................       53-0
Montana......................................................       53-0
Nebraska.....................................................       53-0
Nevada.......................................................       53-0
New Hampshire................................................       48-0
New Jersey...................................................       48-0
New Mexico...................................................       57-6
New York.....................................................       48-0
North Carolina...............................................       48-0
North Dakota.................................................       53-0
Ohio.........................................................       53-0
Oklahoma.....................................................       59-6
Oregon.......................................................       53-0
Pennsylvania.................................................       53-0
Puerto Rico..................................................       48-0
Rhode Island.................................................       48-6
South Carolina...............................................       48-0
South Dakota.................................................       53-0
Tennessee....................................................       50-0
Texas........................................................       59-0
Utah.........................................................       48-0
Vermont......................................................       48-0
Virginia.....................................................       48-0
Washington...................................................       48-0
West Virginia................................................       48-0
Wisconsin....................................................   \3\ 48-0
Wyoming......................................................       57-4
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Semitrailers up to 53 feet may also operate without a permit by
  conforming to a kingpin-to-rearmost axle distance of 38 feet.
  Semitrailers that are consistent with 23 CFR 658.13(h) may operate
  without a permit provided the distance from the kingpin to the center
  of the rear axle is 46 feet or less.
\2\ Semitrailers up to 53 feet in length may operate without a permit by
  conforming to a kingpin-to-rearmost axle distance of 40 feet 6 inches.
  Semitrailers that are consistent with 23 CFR 658.13(h) may operate
  without a permit provided the distance from the kingpin to the center
  of the rear axle is 46 feet or less.
\3\ Semitrailers up to 53 feet in length may operate without a permit by
  conforming to a kingpin-to-rear axle distance of 41 feet, measured to
  the center of the rear tandem assembly. Semitrailers that are
  consistent with 23 CFR 658.13(h) may operate without a permit provided
  the distance from the kingpin to the center of the rear axle is 46
  feet or less.


[53 FR 2599, Jan. 29, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 1931, Jan. 18, 1989; 62 
FR 10181, Mar. 5, 1997]

  Appendix C to Part 658--Trucks Over 80,000 Pounds on the Interstate 
       System and Trucks Over STAA Lengths on the National Network

    This appendix contains the weight and size provisions that were in 
effect on or before June 1, 1991 (July 6, 1991 for Alaska), for vehicles 
covered by 23 U.S.C. 127(d) (LCV's) and 49 U.S.C. app. 2311(j) 
(commercial motor vehicles (CMV's) with 2 or more cargo-carrying units). 
Weights and dimensions are ``frozen'' at the values shown here, which 
were in effect on June 1, 1991 (Alaska, July 6, 1991). All vehicles are 
listed by configuration type.

           Trucks Over 80,000 Pounds on the Interstate System

    In the State-by-State descriptions, CMV combinations which can also 
be LCV's are identified with the letters ``LCV'' following the type of 
combination vehicle. The maximum allowable gross vehicle weight is given 
in this appendix (in thousands of pounds indicated by a ``K''), as well 
as information summarizing the operational conditions, routes, and legal 
citations. The term ``Interstate System'' as used herein refers to the 
Dwight D. Eisenhower System of Interstate and Defense Highways.

            Trucks Over STAA Lengths on the National Network

    Listed for each State by combination type is either:
    1. The maximum cargo-carrying length (shown in feet); or
    2. A notation that such vehicle is not allowed (indicated by a 
``NO'').
    CMV's are categorized as follows:
    1. A CMV combination consisting of a truck tractor and two trailing 
units.
    2. A CMV combination consisting of a truck tractor and three 
trailing units.
    3. CMV combinations with two or more cargo-carrying units not 
included in descriptions 1 or 2.
    In the following table the left number is the maximum cargo-carrying 
length measured in feet from the front of the first cargo unit to the 
rear of the last cargo unit. This distance is not to include length 
exclusive devices which have been approved by the Secretary or by any 
State. Devices excluded from length determination shall only include 
items whose function is related to the safe and efficient operation of 
the semitrailer or trailer. No device excluded from length determination 
shall be designed or used for carrying cargo. The right number is the 
maximum gross weight in thousands of pounds that the type of vehicle can 
carry when operating as an LCV on the Interstate System. For every State 
where there is a length or weight number in the table that follows, 
additional information is provided.

             Vehicle Combinations Subject to Pub. L. 102-240
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   1  Truck
                                tractor and 2      2  Truck
             State                 trailing     tractor and 3   3  Other
                                    units       trailing units
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama.......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Alaska........................  95[foot].....  110[foot]......  83[foot]
Arizona.......................  95[foot] 129K  95[foot] 129K..  (1)
Arkansas......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
California....................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Colorado......................  111[foot]      115.5[foot]      78[foot]
                                 110K.          110K.
Connecticut...................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Delaware......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Dist. of Columbia.............  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Florida.......................  106[foot] (2)  NO.............  NO
Georgia.......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Hawaii........................  65[foot] (2).  NO.............  NO
Idaho.........................  95[foot]       95[foot] 105.5K  (1)
                                 105.5K.
Illinois......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO

[[Page 283]]

 
Indiana.......................  106[foot]      104.5[foot]      58[foot]
                                 127.4K.        127.4K.
Iowa..........................  100[foot]      100[foot] 129K.  78[foot]
                                 129K.
Kansas........................  109[foot]      109[foot] 120K.  NO
                                 120K.
Kentucky......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Louisiana.....................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Maine.........................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Maryland......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Massachusetts.................  104[foot]      NO.............  NO
                                 127.4K.
Michigan......................  58[foot] 164K  No.............  63[foot]
Minnesota.....................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Mississippi...................  65[foot] (2).  NO.............  NO
Missouri......................  110[foot]      109[foot] 120K.  NO
                                 120K(4).
Montana.......................  93[foot]       100[foot]        (1)
                                 137.8K.        131.06K.
Nebraska......................  95[foot] 95K.  95[foot] (2)...  68[foot]
Nevada........................  95[foot] 129K  95[foot] 129K..  98[foot]
New Hampshire.................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
New Jersey....................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
New Mexico....................  86.4K(3).....  NO.............  NO
New York......................  102[foot]      NO.............  NO
                                 143K.
North Carolina................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
North Dakota..................  103[foot]      100[foot]        103[foot
                                 105.5K.        105.5K.          ]
Ohio..........................  102[foot]      95[foot] 115K..  NO
                                 127.4K.
Oklahoma......................  110[foot] 90K  95[foot] 90K...  NO
Oregon........................  68[foot]       96[foot] 105.5K  70[foot]
                                 105.5K.                         5[foot]
                                                                 [foot]
Pennsylvania..................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Puerto Rico...................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Rhode Island..................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
South Carolina................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
South Dakota..................  100[foot]      100[foot] 129K.  (1)
                                 129K.
Tennessee.....................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Texas.........................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Utah..........................  95[foot] 129K  95[foot] 129K..  (1)
Vermont.......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Virginia......................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Washington....................  68[foot]       NO.............  68[foot]
                                 105.5K.
West Virginia.................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Wisconsin.....................  NO...........  NO.............  NO
Wyoming.......................  81[foot] 117K  NO.............  (1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1)--State submission includes multiple vehicles in this category--see
  individual State listings.
(2)--No maximum weight is established as this vehicle combination is not
  considered an ``LCV'' per the ISTEA definition. Florida's combination
  is not allowed to operate on the Interstate System, and the
  combinations for Hawaii, Mississippi, and Nebraska are not allowed to
  exceed 80,000 pounds.
(3)--No maximum cargo-carrying length is established for this
  combination. Because State law limits each trailing unit to not more
  than 28.5 feet in length, this combination is allowed to operate on
  all NN routes under the authority of the STAA of 1982, regardless of
  actual cargo-carrying length. The maximum weight listed is New
  Mexico's maximum allowable gross weight on the Interstate System under
  the grandfather authority of 23 U.S.C. 127.
(4)--These dimensions do not apply to the same combinations. The 110-
  foot length is limited to vehicles entering from Oklahoma, also
  limited to 90K gross weight. The 120K gross weight is limited to
  vehicles entering from Kansas, also limited to a cargo carrying length
  of 109 feet.

    The following abbreviation convention is used throughout the 
narrative State-by-State descriptions for the captions OPERATIONAL 
CONDITIONS, ROUTES, and LEGAL CITATIONS: two letter State abbreviation, 
dash, ``TT'' for truck tractor, and 2 or 3 for two or three trailing 
units. For example, the phrase ``Arizona truck tractor and 2 trailing 
units'', would be noted as ``AZ-TT2''; the phrase ``Indiana truck 
tractor and 3 trailing units'' would be noted as ``IN-TT3'', etc.

                              STATE: ALASKA

             COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: The combination must be in compliance with State laws and 
regulations. There are no highways in the State subject to Interstate 
System weight limits. Therefore, the ISTEA freeze as it applies to 
maximum weight is not applicable.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: Combinations with an overall length greater than 75 feet, 
measured bumper to bumper, must display an ``OVERSIZE<greek-i><greek-i> 
warning sign on the front and rear. In combinations where one cargo-
carrying unit is more than 5,000 pounds heavier than the other, the 
heavier unit shall be placed immediately behind the power unit. Weather 
restrictions are imposed when hazardous conditions exist, as determined 
by the Alaska Department of Transportation and Public Facilities 
(DOT&PF) and the Alaska Department of Public Safety, Division of State 
Troopers. Time of day travel is not restricted.
    PERMIT: None required.
    ACCESS: Alaska allows reasonable access not to exceed 5 miles to 
reach or return from terminals and facilities for food, fuel, or rest. 
The most direct route must be used. The Commissioner of the Alaska 
DOT&PF may allow access to specific routes if it can be shown that 
travel frequency, necessity, and route accommodation are required.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                From                       To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AK-1                  Anchorage (Potter Weigh   Palmer (Palmer-Wasilla
                       Station).                 Highway Junction).
AK-2                  Fairbanks (Gaffney Road   Delta Junction (MP 1412
                       Junction).                Alaska Highway).
AK-3                  Jct. AK-1...............  Fairbanks (Gaffney Road
                                                 Junction).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

    17 AAC 25, and 35; the Administrative Permit Manual.

[[Page 284]]

                              STATE: ALASKA

             COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 110 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT and ACCESS: Same as the AK-TT2 combination.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. Drivers of this combination must have 10 years 
of experience in Alaska and certified training in operation of these 
combinations.
    VEHICLE: Individual trailer length in a three trailing unit 
combination shall not exceed 28.5 feet. Engine horsepower rating shall 
not be less than 400 horsepower.
    These combinations are allowed to operate only between May 1 and 
September 30 of each year. Weather restrictions are imposed when 
hazardous conditions exist, as determined by the Alaska DOT&PF and the 
Department of Public Safety, Division of State Troopers. No movement is 
permitted if visibility is less than 1,000 feet.
    PERMIT: Permits are required with specified durations of not less 
than 3 months or more than 18 months. There is a fee.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AK-1............................  Anchorage (Potter   Jct. AK-3.
                                   Weigh Station).
AK-3............................  Jct. AK-1.........  Fairbanks (Gaffney
                                                       Road Junction)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

            LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the AK-TT2 combination.

                              STATE: ALASKA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 83 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the AK-tt2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Same as the AK-TT2 combination, except that overall 
combination length may not exceed 90 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the AK-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the AK-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: ARIZONA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Single-axle maximum weight limit is 20,000 pounds, tandem-
axle maximum weight limit is 34,000 pounds, and the gross vehicle weight 
limit is 129,000 pounds, subject to the Federal Bridge Formula.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. Drivers must comply with the Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation and 
Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes.
    VEHICLE: This vehicle must be able to operate at speeds compatible 
with other traffic on level roads and maintain 20 miles per hour speed 
on grades where operated. A heavy-duty fifth wheel is required. The 
kingpin must be a solid type, not a screw-out or folding type. All hitch 
connectors must be of a no-slack type, preferably an air-actuated ram. 
Axles must be those designed for the width of the body. All braking 
systems must comply with State and Federal requirements. A brake force 
limiting valve, sometimes called a ``slippery road'' valve, may be 
provided on the steering axle. Mud flaps or splash guards are required. 
When traveling on a smooth, paved surface, trailers must follow in the 
path of the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving more than 3 
inches to either side when the towing vehicle is moving in a straight 
line.
    PERMITS: Permits are required. Fees are charged. This vehicle is 
allowed continuous travel, however, the State may restrict or prohibit 
operations during periods when traffic, weather, or other safety 
considerations make such operations unsafe or inadvisable. All multiple-
trailer combinations shall be driven in the right-hand traffic lane.
    Access: Access is allowed for 20 miles from I-15 Exits 8 and 27 or 
20 miles from other authorized routes.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-15............................  Nevada............  Utah
US 89...........................  20 miles south of   Utah
                                   Utah.
US 160..........................  US 163............  New Mexico
US 163..........................  US 160............  Utah
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             27LEGAL CITATIONS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ARS 28-107......................  ARS 28-1009.......  ARS 28-1011.O
ARS 28-108.5....................  ARS 28-1009.01....  ARS 28-1012

[[Page 285]]

 
ARS 28-108.13...................  ARS 28-1011.A.....  ARS 28-1013
ARS 28-108.14...................  ARS 28-1011.C.....  ARS 28-1014
ARS 28-403......................  ARS 28-1011.F.....  ARS 28-1031
ARS 28-405......................  ARS 28-1011.K.....  ARS 28-1051
ARS 28-1001.....................  ARS 28-1011.L.....  ARS 28-1052
ARS 28-1004.G...................  ARS 28-1011.M.....  R17-40-426
ARS 28-1008.....................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             STATE: ARIZONA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 123,000 pounds (129,000 pounds on I-15).

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    VEHICLE, and ACCESS: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.
    Weight: Single-axle maximum weight limit is 20,000 pounds, tandem-
axle maximum weight limit is 34,000 pounds, and the gross vehicle weight 
is 123,500 pounds (129,000 on I-15), subject to the Federal Bridge 
Formula.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. Drivers must comply with the Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation and 
Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes. Drivers must be trained by an 
experienced driver of a three trailing unit combination. Training should 
be through special instructions or by traveling with the new driver 
until such time as the new driver is deemed adequately qualified by the 
trainer on the use and operation of these combinations.
    PERMIT: Permits are required. Fees are charged. This vehicle is 
allowed continuous travel, however, the State may restrict or prohibit 
operations during periods when traffic, weather, or other safety 
considerations make such operations unsafe or inadvisable. These 
combinations shall not be dispatched during adverse weather conditions. 
All multiple-trailer combinations shall be driven in the right-hand 
traffic lane.
    ROUTES: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: ARIZONA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 69 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, VEHICLE, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: ARIZONA

                 COMBINATION: Truck-semitrailer-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 98 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, VEHICLE, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the AZ-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: COLORADO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 111 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 110,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: The maximum gross weight is 110,000 pounds, subject to the 
formula W=800(L+40) where ``W'' equals the gross weight in pounds and 
``L'' equals the length in feet between the centers of the first and 
last axles, or the gross weight determined by the Federal Bridge 
Formula, whichever is least. A single axle shall not exceed 20,000 
pounds and a tandem axle shall not exceed 36,000 pounds.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. The driver cannot have had any suspension of 
driving privileges in any State during the past 3 years where such 
suspension arose out of the operation of a motor vehicle used as a 
contract or common carrier of persons or property.
    The driver must be certified by the motor carrier permit holder's 
safety office. The certification shall demonstrate that the driver has 
complied with all written requirements, and that the driver has 
successfully completed a company-approved road test for each type of 
combination vehicle operated.

[[Page 286]]

    VEHICLE: Vehicles shall not have fewer than six axles or more than 
nine axles. They shall be configured such that the shorter trailer shall 
be operated as the rear trailer, and the trailer with the heavier gross 
weight shall be operated as the front trailer. In the event that the 
shorter trailer is also the heavier, the load must be adjusted so that 
the front trailer is the longer and heavier of the two.
    Vehicles shall have adequate power to maintain a minimum speed of 20 
miles per hour on any grade over which the combination operates and can 
resume a speed of 20 miles per hour after stopping on any such grade.
    Tires must conform to the standards in the Department of Public 
Safety's (DPS) Rules and Regulations Concerning Minimum Standards for 
the Operation of Commercial Motor Vehicles, at 8 CCR 1507-1 and C.R.S. 
42-4-225 and 42-2-406.
    Vehicles are required to have a heavy-duty fifth wheel and equal 
strength pick-up plates that meet the standards in the DPS Commercial 
Vehicle Rules. This equipment must be properly lubricated and located in 
a position that provides stability during normal operation, including 
braking. The trailers shall follow in the path of the towing vehicle 
without shifting or swerving more than 3 inches to either side when the 
towing vehicle is moving in a straight line.
    Kingpins must be of a solid type and permanently fastened. Screw-out 
or folding type kingpins are prohibited.
    Hitch connections must be of a no-slack type, preferably air-
actuated ram.
    Drawbar lengths shall be adequate to provide for the clearances 
required between the towing vehicle and the trailer(s) for turning and 
backing maneuvers.
    Axles must be those designed for the width of the body of the 
trailer(s).
    Braking systems must comply with the DPS Commercial Vehicle Rules 
and C.R.S. 42-4-220. Fast air-transmission and release valves must be 
provided on all trailer(s) and converter dolly axles. A brake force 
limiting valve, sometimes called a ``slippery road'' valve, may be 
provided on the steering axle.
    PERMIT: An annual permit is required for which a fee is charged. 
Also, the vehicle must have an overweight permit pursuant to C.R.S. 42-
4-409(11)(a)(II) (A), (B), or (C), and comply with Rule 4-15 in the 
rules pertaining to Extra-Legal Vehicles or Loads.
    A truck tractor and two trailing units wherein at least one of the 
trailing units exceeds 28.5 feet in length shall not operate on the 
following designated highway segments during the hours of 6 a.m. to 9 
a.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., Monday through Friday, for Colorado 
Springs, Denver, and Pueblo. (A truck tractor with two trailing units 
wherein at least one of the trailing units exceeds 28.5 feet in length 
not operating at greater than the legal maximum weight of 80,000 pounds 
is subject to different hours-of-operation restrictions. Refer to rules 
pertaining to Extra-Legal Vehicles or Loads).

Colorado Springs: I-25 between Exit 135 (CO 83 Academy Blvd. So.) and 
          Exit 150 (CO 83, Academy Blvd. No.).
Denver: I-25 between Exit 200 (Jct. I-225) and Exit 223 (CO 128, 120th 
          Avenue),
    I-70 between Exit 259 (CO 26/US 40) and Exit 282 (Jct. I-225),
    I-76 between Exit 5 (Jct. I-25) and Exit 12 (US 85),
    I-225 entire length,
    I-270 entire length.
Pueblo: I-25 between Exit 94 (CO 45 Lake Ave.) and Exit 101 (US 50/CO 
          47).

    The holder of a longer vehicle combination (LVC) permit must have an 
established safety program as provided in Chapter 9 of the ``Colorado 
Department of Highways Rules and Regulations for Operation of Longer 
Vehicle Combinations on Designated State Highway Segments.'' Elements of 
the program include compliance with minimum safety standards at 8 CCR 
1507-1, hazardous materials regulations at 8 CCR 1507-7, -8, and -9, 
Colorado Uniform Motor Vehicle Law, Articles 1 through 4 of Title 42, 
C.R.S. as amended, and Public Utility Commission regulations at 4 CCR 
723-6, -8, -15, -22, and -23.
    ACCESS: A vehicle shall not be operated off the designated portions 
of the Interstate System except to access food, fuel, repairs, and rest 
or to access a facility. Access to a facility shall be subject to the 
following conditions:
    (1) The facility must:
    (a) Be either a manufacturing or a distribution center, a warehouse, 
or truck terminal located in an area where industrial uses are 
permitted;
    (b) Be a construction site; and
    (c) Meet the following criteria:
    1 vehicles are formed for transport or broken down for delivery on 
the premises;
    2 adequate off-roadway space exists on the premises to safely 
maneuver the vehicles; and
    3 adequate equipment is available on the premises to handle, load, 
and unload the vehicle, its trailers, and cargo.
    (2) The facility must be located within a maximum distance of 10 
miles from the point where the vehicle enters or exits the designated 
portions of the Interstate System. Such 10-mile distance shall be 
measured by the actual route(s) to be traveled to the facility, rather 
than by a straight line radius from the designated Interstate System to 
the facility;
    (3) The access route(s) between the designated Interstate System and 
the facility must be approved in advance by the public

[[Page 287]]

entity (Colorado DOT, municipality, or county) having jurisdiction for 
the roadway(s) that make up the route(s). Where the State of Colorado 
has jurisdiction over the access route(s), it will consider the 
following safety, engineering, and other criteria in determining whether 
to approve the route(s):
    (a) Safety of the motoring public;
    (b) Geometrics of the street and roadway;
    (c) Traffic volumes and patterns;
    (d) Protection of State highways, roadways, and structures;
    (e) Zoning and general characteristics of the route(s) to be 
encountered; and
    (f) Other relevant criteria warranted by special circumstances of 
the proposed route(s).
    Local entities, counties, and municipalities having jurisdiction 
over route(s), should consider similar criteria in determining whether 
to approve the proposed ingress and egress route(s); and
    (4) A permit holder shall access only the facility or location 
authorized by the permit. If the permit authorizes more than one 
facility or location, then on any single trip by an LVC from the 
designated Interstate System the permit holder may access only one 
facility or location before returning to the designated Interstate 
System.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-25............................  New Mexico........  Wyoming
I-70............................  Utah..............  I-70 Exit 90 Rifle
I-70............................  I-70 Exit 259       Kansas
                                   Golden.
I-76............................  Jct. I-70.........  Nebraska
I-225...........................  Jct. I-25.........  Jct. I-70
I-270...........................  Jct. I-76.........  Jct. I-70
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Vehicles must comply with all applicable statutes, 
such as C.R.S. 42-4-402(1), 42-4-404(1), 42-4-407(1)(c)(III)(A), 42-4-
409(11)(a)(II) (A), (B) or (C). All LVC's must comply with the Extra-
Legal Vehicles and Loads Rules and the Longer Vehicle Combination Rules. 
However, when the rules address the same subject, the LVC, since it is 
operating at greater than 80,000 pounds, must comply with the Extra-
Legal Vehicles and Loads Rules. Such rules are: 4-1-2 and 4-1-3 
concerning holiday travel restrictions, 4-1-5 concerning hours of 
operation restrictions, 4-8 concerning minimum distance between vehicles 
and 4-15 concerning maximum allowable gross weight.

                             STATE: COLORADO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

             LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 115.5 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 110,000 pounds

         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Same as the CO-TT2 combination.

    ROUTES: Same as the CO-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the CO-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: COLORADO

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 78 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, VEHICLE, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the CO-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the CO-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the CO-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: FLORIDA

             COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 106 feet

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: All overdimensional and weight regulations 
of the Florida Turnpike Authority shall apply to such units unless 
specifically excluded under the terms of the Tandem Trailer Permit or 
these regulations.
    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. Proposed drivers of tandem-trailer units shall 
be registered by the Florida Turnpike Authority prior to driving such 
equipment on the turnpike system. For further information, see Rule 14-
62.016 FAC.
    VEHICLE: A complete tandem-trailer combination shall consist of a 
truck tractor, first semitrailer, fifth-wheel converter dolly, and a 
second semitrailer. The converter

[[Page 288]]

dolly may be either a separate unit or an integral component of the 
first semitrailer. The width shall not exceed 102 inches and the height 
shall not exceed 13 feet 6 inches. A tractor used in the tandem-trailer 
operations shall be capable of hauling the maximum gross load to be 
transported by a permittee at a speed of not less than 40 miles per hour 
on all portions of the turnpike system excepting that portion of the 
roadway, as posted in 1988, between mileposts 234 and 238 where a 
minimum speed of 30 miles per hour will be permitted.
    Every tandem-trailer combination shall be equipped with full air 
brakes or air-activated hydraulic brakes on the tractor and either air 
or electric brakes on the dolly and trailers.
    A tractor, which will be used to haul a complete tandem-trailer 
combination with a total gross weight of 110,000 pounds or more, shall 
be equipped with tandem rear axles and driving power shall be applied to 
all wheels on both axles. When the above tandem-axle tractor is 
required, a tandem-axle dolly converter must be used.
    Every tandem-trailer combination shall be equipped with emergency 
equipment that equals or exceeds both the equipment requirements and the 
performance standards cited in Chapter 316, Florida Statutes and subpart 
H ``Emergency Equipment'' of 49 CFR 393.95.
    A converter (fifth-wheel) dolly used in the tandem-trailer 
operations may have either single or tandem axles, according to its 
total gross weight. In addition to the primary towbar(s), the dolly 
vehicle must be equipped with safety chains or cables for connecting the 
dolly to the lead semitrailer and must be adequate to prevent breakaway.
    Lamps and Reflectors. Each tractor, trailer, and converter dolly in 
a tandem-trailer combination shall be equipped with electric lamps and 
reflectors mounted on the vehicle in accordance with Chapter 316, 
Florida Statutes, and subpart B ``Lighting Devices, Reflectors and 
Electrical Equipment,'' of 49 CFR 393.9 through 49 CFR 393.33.
    Coupling Devices. Coupling devices shall be so designed, 
constructed, and installed and the vehicles in a tandem-trailer 
combination shall equal or exceed both the equipment requirements and 
the performance standards established on 49 CFR 393.70, except that such 
devices shall be so designed and constructed as to ensure that any such 
combination traveling on a level, smooth paved surface will follow in 
the path of the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving from side to 
side over 2 inches to each side of the path of the vehicle when it is 
moving in a straight line. (For further information see Rule 14-62.002; 
14-62.005; 14-62.006; 14-62.007; 14-62.008; 14-62.009; 14-62.010; 14-
62.011; 14-62.012; 14-62.013; and 14-62.015, FAC)
    PERMIT: Tandem-trailer units may operate on the turnpike system 
under a Tandem Trailer Permit issued by the Florida Turnpike Authority 
upon application, except as provided in subparagraph (2) below.
    (1) The Florida Turnpike Authority shall provide a copy of each such 
permit to the Motor Carrier Compliance Office.
    (2) Tandem-trailer trucks of the dimensions mandated by the STAA of 
1982 and operating in compliance with Rule Chapter 14-54, FAC, and under 
the provisions of section 316.515, Florida Statutes shall be exempt from 
the provisions of this rule chapter to the extent provided in Rule 14-
54.0011, FAC.
(For further information see Rules 14-62.001; 14-62.022; 14-62.023; 14-
62.024; 14-62.026; 14-62.027, FAC)
    ACCESS: Staging. Tandem-trailer combinations shall be made up and 
broken up only in special assembly (staging) areas as designated for 
this purpose. For further information, see Rule 14-62.017, FAC. Make-up 
and break-up of tandem-trailer combinations shall not be allowed on a 
public right-of-way unless the area is designated for such use or unless 
an emergency exists.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida's Turnpike..............  South end           Exit 304 Wildwood.
                                   Homestead
                                   Extension at US 1.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Chapter 14-62, ``Regulations Governing Tandem 
Combinations of Florida's Turnpike,'' Florida Administrative Code.

                              STATE: HAWAII

             COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units

                 LENGTH OF CARGO CARRYING UNITS: 65 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: No load may exceed the carrying capacity of the axles 
specified by the manufacturer and no combination vehicle shall have a 
total weight in excess of its designed gross combination weight limit.
    PERMITS: No permits are required.
    ACCESS: Designated routes off the NN.
    ROUTES: All NN routes except HI-95 from H-1 to Barbers Point Harbor.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Chapter 291, Section 34, Hawaii Revised Statutes 
and Chapter 104 of Title 19, Administrative Rules.

[[Page 289]]

                              STATE: IDAHO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Single axle: 20,000 pounds, tandem axle: 34,000 pounds, and 
gross vehicle weight up to 105,500 pounds.
    Axle spacing: must comply with Idaho Code 49-1001.
    Trailer weights: The respective loading of any trailer shall not be 
substantially greater than the weight of any trailer located ahead of it 
in the vehicle combination. Substantially greater shall be defined as 
more than 4,000 pounds heavier.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The rules provide that all CMV's with two or more cargo-
carrying units (except for truck-trailer combinations which are limited 
to an 85-foot combination length) are subject to calculated maximum off-
tracking (CMOT) limits. The CMOT formula is:

CMOT = R - [R\2\ - (A\2\ + B\2\ + C\2\ + D\2\ + E\2\)]\1/2\ R = 161
A, B, C, D, E, etc.= measurements between points of articulation or 
          pivot. Squared dimensions to stinger steer points of 
          articulation are negative.

    The power unit of LCV's and extra-length combinations shall have 
adequate power and traction to maintain a speed of 15 miles per hour 
under normal operating conditions on any up-grade over which the 
combination is operated.
    Fifth-wheel, drawbar, and other coupling devices shall be as 
specified by Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, section 393.70.
    Every combination operated under special permit authority shall be 
covered by insurance meeting State and Federal requirements. Evidence of 
this insurance must be carried in the permitted vehicle.
    PERMIT: Permits are required. Permit duration is for 1 year from the 
date of issuance.
    ACCESS: Combinations with a CMOT limit of less than 6.5 feet may use 
any Interstate or designated highway system interchange for access. 
Combinations with a CMOT of 6.5 to 8.75 feet may use only the following 
Interstate System interchanges:

I-15 Exits 58 and 119.
I-84 Exits 3, 49, 50, 52, 54, 57, 95, 168, 173, 182, 208, and 211.
I-86 Exits 36, 40, 56, and 58.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Other regulations and restrictions that must be 
complied with are:

Idaho Code 49-1001, -1002, -1004, -1010, and -1011.
Idaho Transportation Department Rules 39.C.01, .06, .08, .09, .10, .11, 
          .15, and .19-.23.

                              STATE: IDAHO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.

                              STATE: IDAHO

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 78 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Overall combination length limited to 85 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.

                              STATE: IDAHO

   COMBINATION: Truck-trailer-trailer, and Truck-semitrailer-trailer.

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 98 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Overall combination length limited to 105 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the ID-TT2 combination.

[[Page 290]]

                             STATE: INDIANA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 106 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 127,400 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Single axle=22,400 pounds. Axles spaced less than 40 inches 
between centers are considered to be single axles.
    Tandem axle=36,000 pounds. Axles spaced more than 40 inches but less 
than 9 feet between centers are considered to be tandem axles.
    Gross vehicle weight=90,000 pounds plus 1,070 pounds per foot for 
each foot of total vehicle length in excess of 60 feet with a maximum 
gross weight not to exceed 127,400 pounds.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement, and a Toll Road identification card. Drivers 
must be at least 26 years old, in good health, and with 5 years of 
experience driving tractor-semitrailers or tandem-trailer combinations. 
Experience must include driving in all four seasons.
    VEHICLE: Lightest trailer to the rear. Distance between coupled 
trailers shall not exceed 9 feet. The combination vehicle, including 
coupling devices, shall be designed and constructed so as to ensure that 
while traveling on a level, smooth paved surface each trailing unit will 
follow in the path of the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving 
from side to side more than 3 inches. The combination vehicle must have 
at least five axles but not more than nine axles and except on ramps be 
able to achieve and maintain a speed of 45 miles per hour. Following 
distance is 500 feet, and passing maneuvers must be completed within 1 
mile. The truck tractor must be equipped at a minimum with emergency 
equipment including fire extinguisher, spare fuses, tire chains, tire 
tread minimums, and disabled vehicle warning devices. Every dolly must 
be coupled with safety chain directly to the frame of the semitrailer by 
which it is towed. Each unit in a multi-trailer combination must be 
equipped at a minimum with electric lights and reflectors mounted on the 
vehicle.
    PERMIT: A free annual tandem-trailer permit must be obtained from 
the Indiana DOT for loads which exceed 90,000 pounds. A multiple-trip 
access permit, for which a fee is charged, must also be obtained for 
access to points of delivery or to breakdown locations. Permission to 
operate can be temporarily suspended by the Indiana DOT due to weather, 
road conditions, holiday traffic, or other emergency conditions. Any 
oversize vehicle whose length exceeds 80 feet shall not be operated at a 
speed in excess of 45 miles per hour. Oversize loads are not to be 
operated at any time when wind velocity exceeds 25 miles per hour.
    ACCESS: 15 miles from toll gates.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-80/90 (IN Toll Road)..........  Toll Road Gate 21.  Ohio.
I-90 (IN Toll Road).............  Illinois..........  Toll Road Gate 21.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Indiana Code 9-8-1-16
Indiana Code 8-15-2
135 Indiana Administrative Code 2

                             STATE: INDIANA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

             LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 104.5 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 127,400 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the IN-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Semitrailers and trailers shall not be longer than 28.5 
feet, and the minimum number of axles for the combination is seven. 
Three trailing unit combinations must be equipped with adequate spray-
suppressant mud flaps which are properly maintained.
    ROUTES: Same as the IN-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the IN-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: INDIANA

   COMBINATION: Combination of three or more vehicles coupled together

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO CARRYING UNITS: 58 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The maximum width is 102 inches, and the maximum height is 
13 feet 6 inches.

    PERMIT: None required.


[[Page 291]]


    ACCESS: Unlimited.

                   ROUTES: All roads within the State.

                 LEGAL CITATIONS: Indiana Code 9-8-1-2.

                               STATE: IOWA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV.

 LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 100 feet when entering Sioux City 
from South Dakota or South Dakota from Sioux City; 65 feet when entering 
          Sioux City from Nebraska or Nebraska from Sioux City.

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds when entering Sioux City 
 from South Dakota or South Dakota from Sioux City; 95,000 pounds when 
     entering Sioux City from Nebraska or Nebraska from Sioux City.

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    Iowa allows vehicles from South Dakota and Nebraska access to 
terminals which are located within the corporate limits of Sioux City 
and its commercial zone as shown in 49 CFR 1048.101 on November 28, 
1995. These vehicles must be legal in the State from which they enter 
Iowa.

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, VEHICLE, AND PERMIT: Same conditions which apply to 
a truck tractor and 2 trailing units legally operating in South Dakota 
or Nebraska.

    ACCESS: These combinations may operate on any road within the 
corporate limits of Sioux City and its commercial zone as shown in 49 
CFR 1048.101 on November 28, 1995, when authorized by appropriate State 
or local authority.

    ROUTES: LCV combinations may operate on all Interstate System routes 
in Sioux City and its commercial zone as shown in 49 CFR 1048.101 on 
November 28, 1995. If subject only to the ISTEA freeze on length, they 
may operate on all NN routes in Sioux City and its commercial zone, as 
above.

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Iowa Code Sec. 321.457(2)(f) (1995).

                               STATE: IOWA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV.

 LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 100 feet when entering Sioux City from 
              South Dakota or South Dakota from Sioux City.

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 POUNDS when entering Sioux City 
           from South Dakota or South Dakota from Sioux City.

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, VEHICLE, AND PERMIT: Same as the SD-TT3 combination.

    ACCESS: Same as the IA-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the IA-TT2 combination.

    LEGAL CITATION: Same as the IA-TT2 combination.

                               STATE: IOWA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer.

  LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 78 feet when entering Sioux City 
from South Dakota or South Dakota from Sioux City; 68 feet when entering 
          Sioux City from Nebraska or Nebraska from Sioux City.

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    Iowa allows vehicles from South Dakota and Nebraska access to 
terminals which are located within the corporate limits of Sioux City 
and its commercial zone, as shown in 49 CFR 1048.101 on November 28, 
1995. These vehicles must be legal in the State from which they enter 
Iowa.

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, VEHICLE, AND PERMIT: Same conditions which apply to 
a truck-trailer combination legally operating in Nebraska or South 
Dakota.

    ACCESS: Same as the IA-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as IA-TT2 combination.

    LEGAL CITATION: Same as the IA-TT2 combination.

                              STATE: KANSAS

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 109 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 120,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Combinations consisting of a truck tractor and two trailing 
units must

[[Page 292]]

comply with the Federal Bridge Formula, with maximum weights of 20,000 
pounds on a single axle and 34,000 pounds on a tandem axle, and with a 
maximum gross weight of 120,000 pounds.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: Truck tractor and two trailing unit combinations must meet 
legal width and height with no time-of-day travel restrictions or other 
special requirements.
    PERMIT: Permits are not required for operation on the Kansas 
Turnpike. A permit is required for access between the Turnpike and motor 
freight terminals located within a 10-mile radius of each toll booth, 
except at the northeastern end of the Turnpike where a 20-mile radius is 
allowed. Access permits are valid for 6 months.
    ACCESS: Turnpike access routes include all routes between the 
Turnpike and a motor freight terminal located within a 10-mile radius of 
each toll booth, except at the northeastern end of the Turnpike where a 
20-mile radius is allowed.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-35 Kansas Tpk. Authority (KTA)  Oklahoma..........  KTA Exit 127.
I-70 KTA........................  KTA Exit 182......  KTA Exit 223.
I-335 KTA.......................  KTA Exit 127......  KTA Exit 177.
I-470 KTA.......................  KTA Exit 177......  KTA Exit 182.
LEGAL CITATIONS:
Kansas Statutes Annotated (KSA)
KSA 8-1911......................  KSA 68-2004.......  KSA 68-2019.
KSA 8-1914......................  KSA 68-2005.......  KSA 68-2048a.
KSA 68-2003.....................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              STATE: KANSAS

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 109 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 120,000 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: The operations of triple trailing unit 
combinations are governed by two sets of criteria: (1) The Turnpike and 
Turnpike access rules, and (2) the SVC rules which apply off of the 
Turnpike except in the case of vehicles operating under Turnpike access 
authority. The Turnpike and Turnpike access rules allow a maximum 
combination vehicle length of 119 feet overall. The SVC rules require 
``Triples'' to have trailers of no more than 28.5 feet maximum length or 
a cargo-carrying length of approximately 95 feet.
    The Turnpike and Turnpike access rules have no time-of-day travel 
restrictions or other special requirements.
    The SVC rules have several operational conditions. SVC's cannot 
operate on holidays or during holiday weekends. SVC's cannot be 
dispatched or operated during adverse weather conditions. SVC's must 
travel in the right lane, except for passing, and the following distance 
is 100 feet for every 10 miles per hour. SVC permits can include any 
restrictions deemed necessary, including specific routes and hours, 
days, and/or seasons of operation. Rules and regulations can be 
promulgated regarding driver qualifications, vehicle equipment, and 
operational standards.
    WEIGHT: All triple trailing unit combinations must comply with the 
Federal Bridge Formula with maximum axle weights of 20,000 pounds on a 
single axle and 34,000 pounds on a tandem axle. The maximum gross weight 
is 120,000 pounds on the Turnpike and Turnpike access routes, but the 
SVC's have a maximum weight of 110,000 pounds.
    DRIVER: A commercial driver's license with the appropriate 
endorsement is required under both Turnpike and SVC rules. In addition, 
for SVC operation drivers must have completed SVC driver training and a 
company road test. Drivers must also have 2 years of experience driving 
tractor-semitrailers and 1 year driving doubles.
    VEHICLE: Vehicle requirements apply to the SVC program only. All 
axles, except steering axles, must have dual wheels, and all vehicles 
must be able to achieve and maintain a speed of 40 miles per hour on all 
grades. Antispray mud flaps shall be attached to the rear of each axle 
except the steering axle. Mud flaps shall have a surface designed to 
absorb and deflect excess moisture to the road surface. Drop and lift 
axles are prohibited. Vehicles may have a minimum of six and a maximum 
of nine axles. The heaviest trailers are to be placed forward. Hazardous 
cargo is prohibited. Convex mirrors are required on both sides of the 
cab. Equipment must comply with the requirements of 49 CFR 390-399.
    Any SVC shall be stable at all times during normal braking and 
normal operation. When traveling on a level, smooth paved surface, an 
SVC shall follow the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving beyond 
the restraints of the lane of travel.
    PERMIT: Same as the KS-TT2 combination on the Turnpike and Turnpike 
access routes. A fee per company plus a permit fee for each power unit 
is required for the SVC program, and the SVC permits are valid for 1 
year. SVC's operated pursuant to regulation 36-1-33 under an annual 
permit shall be covered by insurance.
    ACCESS: Turnpike access routes include all routes between the 
Turnpike and a motor

[[Page 293]]

freight terminal located within a 10-mile radius of each toll booth, 
except at the northeastern end of the Turnpike where a 20-mile radius is 
allowed. SVC access routes include all routes between the Interstate and 
a motor freight terminal located within 5 miles of the Interstate at 
Goodland.

                                 ROUTES:

    A. For vehicles subject to the Turnpike and Turnpike access rules:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-35 KTA........................  Oklahoma..........  KTA Exit 127.
I-70 KTA........................  KTA Exit 182......  KTA Exit 223.
I-335 KTA.......................  KTA Exit 127......  KTA Exit 177.
I-470 KTA.......................  KTA Exit 177......  KTA Exit 182.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. For vehicles subject to the SVC rules:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-70............................  Colorado..........  I-70 Exit 19
                                                       Goodland.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the KS-TT2 combination, plus KSA 8-1915.

                          STATE: MASSACHUSETTS

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

                LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 104 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 127,400 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Any combination of vehicles may not exceed a maximum gross 
weight of 127,400 pounds. The maximum gross weight of the tractor and 
first semitrailer shall not exceed 71,000 pounds. The maximum gross 
weight of each unit of dolly and semitrailer shall not exceed 56,400 
pounds. The maximum gross weight for the tractor and first semitrailer 
is governed by the formula 35,000 pounds plus 1,000 pounds per foot 
between the center of the foremost axle and the center of the rearmost 
axle of the semitrailer. The maximum gross weight on any one axle is 
22,400 pounds, and on any tandem axle it is 36,000 pounds. Axles less 
than 46 inches between centers are considered to be one axle.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement and must be registered with the Massachusetts 
Turnpike Authority (MTA). Registration shall include all specified 
driving records, safety records, physical examinations, and minimum of 5 
years of driving experience with tractor trailers.
    VEHICLE:
    (1) Brake Regulation. The brakes on any vehicle, dolly converter, or 
combination of vehicles used in tandem-trailer operations as a minimum 
shall comply with Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations in 49 CFR 
part 393. In addition, any vehicle, dolly converter or combination of 
vehicles used in tandem-trailer operations shall meet the requirements 
of the provisions of the Massachusetts Motor Vehicle Law. Tandem-trailer 
combinations certified on or after June 1, 1968, shall be equipped with 
suitable devices to accelerate application and release of the brakes of 
the towed vehicle.
    (2) Axles. A tractor used to haul a tandem trailer combination with 
a gross weight of more than 110,000 pounds shall be equipped with tandem 
rear axles, each of which shall be engaged to bear its full share of the 
load on the roadway surface.
    (3) Tandem Assembly. When the gross weight of the trailers vary by 
more than 20 percent, they shall be coupled with the heaviest trailer 
attached to the tractor. Coupling devices and towing devices shall 
comply with the Federal regulations as stated in 49 CFR part 393. When 
the distance between the rear of the one semitrailer and the front of 
the following semitrailer is 10 feet or more, the dolly shall be 
equipped with a device, or the trailers shall be connected along the 
sides with suitable material, which will indicate to other Turnpike 
users that the trailers are connected and are in effect one unit. The 
MTA shall approve the devices or connections to be used on the 
semitrailers that would indicate it is one unit. Coupling devices shall 
be so designed, constructed, and installed, and the vehicles in a tandem 
trailer combination shall be so designed and constructed to ensure that 
when traveling on a level, smooth paved surface they will follow in the 
path of the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving over 3 inches to 
each side of the path of the towing vehicle when it is moving in a 
straight line. A tandem trailer unit may pass another vehicle traveling 
in the same direction only if the speed differential will allow the 
tandem trailer unit to complete the maneuver and return to the normal 
driving lane within a distance of 1 mile.
    Each truck tractor shall be equipped with at least one spare fuse or 
other overload protective device, if the devices are not of a reset 
type, for each kind and size used. The vehicle is to carry at least one 
set of tire chains for at least one driving wheel on each side between 
October 15 and May 1 of each year. Each truck tractor shall carry a fire 
extinguisher which shall have an aggregate rating of 20 BC.
    PERMIT: A permittee must demonstrate to the MTA that it has 
insurance coverage of the type and amounts required by Turnpike 
regulation. Both the tractor manufacturer and the permittee shall 
certify to the MTA, prior to the approval of a tractor, that it is 
capable of hauling the maximum permissible gross load to be transported 
by the permittee

[[Page 294]]

at a speed not less than 20 miles per hour on all portions of the 
turnpike system. The MTA may revoke or temporarily suspend any permit at 
will and the instructions of the MTA or Massachusetts State Police shall 
be complied with immediately.
    ACCESS: Makeup and breakup areas. Tandem trailer units shall not 
leave the Turnpike right-of-way and shall be assembled and disassembled 
only in designated areas.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-90 Mass Turnpike..............  New York State....  Turnpike Exit 18
                                                       Boston.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

    The MTA, Massachusetts Rules and Regulations 730, and CMR 4.00.

                             STATE: MICHIGAN

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

                 LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 58 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 164,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: The single-axle weight limit for LCV's is 18,000 pounds for 
axles spaced 9 feet or more apart. For axles spaced more than 3.5 but 
less than 9 feet apart, the single-axle weight limit is 13,000 pounds. 
The tandem-axle weight limit is 16,000 pounds per axle for the first 
tandem and 13,000 pounds per axle for all other tandems. Axles spaced 
less than 3.5 feet apart are limited to 9,000 pounds per axle. Maximum 
load per inch width of tire is 700 pounds. Maximum gross weight is 
determined based on axle and axle group weight limits.
    When restricted seasonal loadings are in effect, load per inch width 
of tire and maximum axle weights are reduced as follows: Rigid 
pavements--525 pounds per inch of tire width, 25 percent axle weight 
reduction; Flexible pavements--450 pounds per inch of tire width, 35 
percent axle weight reduction.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: Truck height may not exceed 13.5 feet. There is no overall 
length for LCV's operating on the Interstate System when semitrailer and 
trailer lengths do not exceed 28.5 feet. If either the trailer or 
semitrailer is longer than 28.5 feet, the distance from the front of the 
first box to the rear of the second box may not exceed 58 feet. A 
combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles, and the ratio 
of gross weight to net horsepower delivered to the clutch shall not 
exceed 400 to 1.
    PERMIT: Permits for divisible loads of more than 80,000 pounds must 
conform to either Federal or grandfathered axle and bridge spacing 
requirements.
    ACCESS: All designated State highways.
    ROUTES: All Interstate routes and designated State highways.

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Michigan Public Act 300, section 257.722
Michigan Public Act 300, section 257.719

                             STATE: MICHIGAN

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 63 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The overall length of this combination is limited to 70 
feet. The only cargo that may be carried is saw logs, pulpwood, and tree 
length poles.
    PERMIT: None required.
    ACCESS: All NN routes.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Michigan Public Act 300, section 257.719.

                           STATE: MISSISSIPPI

             COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 65 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: Each trailing unit may be a maximum of 30 feet long.
    PERMIT: None required.
    ACCESS: No restrictions, may operate Statewide.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Section 63-5-19, Mississippi Code, Annotated, 1972.

[[Page 295]]

                             STATE: MISSOURI

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 110 feet

    MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 120,000 pounds when entering 
Missouri from Kansas; 95,000 pounds when entering from Nebraska; 90,000 
pounds when entering from Oklahoma.
    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Missouri allows vehicles from neighboring 
States access to terminals in Missouri which are within 20 miles of the 
Missouri State Line. These vehicles must be legal in the State from 
which they are entering Missouri.
    WEIGHT, DRIVER, VEHICLE: Same conditions which apply to a truck 
tractor and two trailing units legally operating in Kansas, Nebraska, or 
Oklahoma.
    PERMIT: Annual blanket overdimension permits are issued to allow a 
truck tractor and two trailing units legally operating in Kansas, 
Nebraska, or Oklahoma to move to and from terminals in Missouri which 
are located within a 20-mile band of the State Line for these three 
States. There is a permit fee per power unit. The permits carry routine 
permit restrictions, but do not address driver qualifications or any 
other restrictions not included in the rules and regulations for all 
permitted movement.
    ACCESS: Routes as necessary to reach terminals.
    ROUTES: All NN routes within a 20-mile band from the Kansas, 
Nebraska, and Oklahoma borders.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Sec. 304.170 and Sec. 304.200 Revised Statutes of 
Missouri 1990.

                             STATE: MISSOURI

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 109 feet

    MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 120,000 pounds when entering 
Missouri from Kansas; 90,000 pounds when entering from Oklahoma.
    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Missouri allows vehicles from neighboring 
States access to terminals in Missouri which are within 20 miles of the 
Missouri State Line. These vehicles must be legal in the State from 
which they are entering Missouri.
    WEIGHT, DRIVER, VEHICLE: Same conditions which apply to a truck 
tractor and three trailing units legally operating in Kansas or 
Oklahoma.
    PERMIT: Annual blanket overdimension permits are issued to allow a 
truck tractor and three trailing units legally operating in Kansas or 
Oklahoma, to move to and from terminals in Missouri which are located 
within a 20-mile band of the State Line for these two States. There is a 
permit fee per power unit. The permits carry routine permit 
restrictions, but do not address driver qualifications or any other 
restrictions not included in the rules and regulations for all permitted 
movement.
    ACCESS: Routes as necessary to reach terminals.
    ROUTES: All NN routes within a 20-mile band from the Kansas and 
Oklahoma borders.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Sec. 304.170 & Sec. 304.200 Revised Statutes of 
Missouri 1990.

                             STATE: MONTANA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

                 LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 93 feet

 MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 137,800 pounds for vehicles operating 
 under the Montana/Alberta Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). For other 
   MT-TT2 combinations, the maximum allowable gross weight is 131,060 
                                 pounds.

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Except for vehicles operating under the MOU, any vehicle 
carrying a divisible load over 80,000 pounds must comply with the 
Federal Bridge Formula found in 23 U.S.C. 127.
Maximum single-axle limit: 20,000 pounds
Maximum tandem-axle limit: 34,000 pounds
Maximum gross weight limit: 131,060 pounds
Maximum weight allowed per inch of tire width is 600 pounds.
    WEIGHT, MONTANA/ALBERTA MOU:
Maximum single-axle limit: 20,000 pounds
Maximum tandem-axle limit: 37,500 pounds
Maximum tridem-axle limit:
    Axles spaced from 94<gr-thn-eq> to less than 118<gr-thn-eq>: 46,300 
pounds
    Axles spaced from 118<gr-thn-eq> to less than 141<gr-thn-eq>: 50,700 
pounds
    Axles spaced from 141<gr-thn-eq> to 146<gr-thn-eq>: 52,900 pounds
Maximum gross weight:
    A-Train: 118,000 pounds
    B-Train (eight axle): 137,800 pounds
    B-Train (seven axle): 124,600 pounds

    The designation of ``A-Train'' or ``B-Train'' refers to the manner 
in which the two trailing units are connected.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: No special requirements beyond compliance with Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.
    PERMIT: Special permit required for double trailer combinations if 
either trailer exceeds 28.5 feet. Permits are available on an annual or 
a trip basis and provide for continuous travel. Statutory reference: 61-
10-124,

[[Page 296]]

MCA. For vehicles being operated under the Montana/Alberta MOU, 
operators must have paid gross vehicle weight fees for the total weight 
being carried. In addition, a term Restricted Route and Oversize Permit 
for which an annual fee is charged must be obtained. Finally, vehicle 
operators must secure a single-trip, overweight permit prior to each 
trip.
    ACCESS: Access must be authorized by the Montana DOT. For vehicles 
operated under the Montana/Alberta MOU, access routes from I-15 into 
Shelby are authorized when permits are issued. For vehicles with a 
cargo-carrying length greater than 88 feet, but not more than 93 feet, a 
2-mile access from the Interstate System is automatically granted to 
terminals and service areas. Access outside the 2-mile provision may be 
granted on a case-by-case basis by the Administrator of the Motor 
Carrier Services Division.
    ROUTES: Combinations with a cargo-carrying length greater than 88 
feet, but not more than 93 feet, are limited to the Interstate System. 
Combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 88 feet or less can use all 
NN routes except U.S. 87 from milepost 79.3 to 82.5. For vehicles being 
operated under the Montana/Alberta MOU, the only route available is I-15 
from the border with Canada to Shelby.
    LEGAL CITATION:

61-10-124 MCA...................  61-10-104 MCA.....  ARM 18.8.509(6)
61-10-107 (3) MCA...............  61-10-121 MCA.....  ARM 18.8.517, 518
 

Montana/Alberta Memorandum of Understanding
Administrative Rules of Montana

                             STATE: MONTANA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 100 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 131,060 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Any vehicle carrying a divisible load over 80,000 pounds 
must comply with the Federal Bridge Formula found in 23 U.S.C. 127.
Maximum single-axle limit: 20,000 pounds
Maximum tandem-axle limit: 34,000 pounds
Maximum gross weight limit: 131,060 pounds
Maximum weight allowed per inch of tire width is 600 pounds.

    DRIVER: Drivers of three trailing unit combinations must be 
certified by the operating company. This certification includes an 
actual driving test and knowledge of Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations and State law pertaining to triple vehicle operations. 
Drivers are also required to have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The 100-foot cargo-carrying length is only with a 
conventional tractor within a 110-foot overall length limit. If a 
cabover tractor is used, the cargo length is 95 feet within a 105-foot 
overall length limit. Vehicles involved in three trailing unit 
operations must comply with the following regulations:
    1. Shall maintain a minimum speed of 20 miles per hour on any grade;
    2. Kingpins must be solid and permanently affixed;
    3. Hitch connections must be no-slack type;
    4. Drawbars shall be of minimum practical length;
    5. Permanently affixed axles must be designed for the width of the 
trailer;
    6. Anti-sail mudflaps or splash and spray suppression devices are 
required;
    7. The heavier trailers shall be in front of lighter trailers;
    8. A minimum distance of 100 feet per 10 miles per hour is required 
between other vehicles except when passing;
    9. Operating at speeds greater than 55 miles per hour is prohibited; 
and
    10. Vehicle and driver are subject to Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations.
    Reference: 18.8.517 Administrative Rules of Montana.
    PERMIT: Special triple vehicle permits are required for the 
operation of these combinations. Permits are available on an annual or 
trip basis. Permits are good for travel on the Interstate System only 
and are subject to the following conditions:
    1. Travel is prohibited during adverse weather conditions;
    2. Transportation of Class A explosives is prohibited; and
    3. Companies operating triple combinations must have an established 
safety program including driver certifications.
    ACCESS: Access is for 2 miles beyond the Interstate System, or 
further if granted by the Administrator of the Motor Carrier Services 
Division.
    ROUTES: Interstate System routes in the State.

    LEGAL CITATION: 18.8.517 Administrative Rules of Montana.

[[Page 297]]

                             STATE: MONTANA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-Trailer

                 LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 88 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.

    DRIVER, and ACCESS: Same as the MT-TT2 combination.

    VEHICLE: Same as the MT-TT2 combination, except overall length 
limited to 95 feet.

    PERMIT: Special permit required if overall length exceeds 75 feet. 
Special permits allow continuous travel and are available on an annual 
or trip basis.

    ROUTES: Same as the MT-TT2 combination.

    LEGAL CITATIONS: 61-10-121 and 61-10-124, MCA.

                             STATE: MONTANA

                   COMBINATION: Truck-trailer-trailer

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 103 feet

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.

    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the MT-TT2 combination.

    VEHICLE: The cargo-carrying unit length is 103 feet with a 
conventional truck within a 110-foot overall length limit, and 98 feet 
with a cab-over-engine truck within a 105-foot overall length limit. On 
two-lane highways the cargo-carrying unit length is 88 feet within a 95-
foot overall length limit.

    ROUTES: All NN routes except U.S. 87 between mileposts 79.3 and 
82.5.

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

61-10-124 MCA
61-10-121 MCA
ARM 18-8-509

                             STATE: NEBRASKA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

   LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet for combination units 
 traveling empty. 65 feet for combination units carrying cargo, except 
 those carrying seasonally harvested products from the field where they 
  are harvested to storage, market, or stockpile in the field, or from 
     stockpile to market, which may extend the length to 71.5 feet.

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT:
Maximum weight:
    Single axle = 20,000 pounds
    Tandem axle = 34,000 pounds
    Gross = Determined by Federal Bridge Formula B, but not to exceed 
95,000 pounds.
    Truck tractor and 2 trailing unit combinations with a length of 
cargo-carrying units of over 65 feet are required to travel empty.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. There are no additional special qualifications 
where the cargo-carrying unit lengths are 65 feet or less. For cargo-
carrying unit lengths over 65 feet, the driver must comply with all 
State and Federal requirements and must not have had any accidents while 
operating such vehicles.
    VEHICLE: For combinations with a cargo-carrying length over 65 feet, 
but not over 85 feet, the semitrailer cannot exceed 48 feet in length 
and the full trailer cannot be less than 26 feet or more than 28 feet 
long. The shorter trailer must be placed to the rear. The wheel path of 
the trailer(s) cannot vary more than 3 inches from that of the towing 
vehicle.
    For combinations with a cargo-carrying length greater than 85 feet, 
up to and including 95 feet, the trailers must be of approximately equal 
length.
    PERMIT: A weight permit in accordance with Chapter 12 of the 
Nebraska Department of Roads (NDOR) Rules and Regulations is required 
for operating on the Interstate System with weight in excess of 80,000 
pounds.
    A length permit, in accordance with Chapters 8 or 11 of the NDOR 
Rules and Regulations, is required for two trailing unit combinations 
with a length of cargo-carrying units over 65 feet. Except for permits 
issued to carriers hauling seasonally harvested products in combinations 
with a cargo-carrying length greater than 65 feet but not more than 71.5 
feet which may move as necessary to accommodate crop movement 
requirements, holders of length permits are subject to the following 
conditions.
    Movement is prohibited on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays; when 
ground wind

[[Page 298]]

speed exceeds 25 miles per hour; when visibility is less than 800 feet; 
or when steady rain, snow, sleet, ice, or other conditions cause 
slippery pavement. Beginning November 15 until April 16 permission to 
move must be obtained from the NDOR Permit Office within 3 hours of 
movement. Beginning April 16 until November 15 permission to move must 
be obtained within 3 days of the movement.
    Fees are charged for all permits. Length permits for combinations 
carrying seasonally harvested products are valid for 30 days and are 
renewable but may not authorize operation for more than 120 days per 
year.
    All permits are subject to revocation if the terms are violated.
    ACCESS: Access to NN routes is not restricted for two trailing unit 
combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 65 feet or less, or 71.5 
feet or less if involved in carrying seasonally harvested products. For 
two trailing unit combinations with a cargo-carrying length greater than 
65 feet and not involved in carrying seasonally harvested products, 
access to and from I-80 is limited to designated staging areas within 
six miles of the route between the Wyoming State Line and Exit 440 
(Nebraska Highway 50); and except for weather, emergency, and repair, 
cannot reenter I-80 after exiting.
    ROUTES: Except for length permits issued to carriers hauling 
seasonally harvested products in combinations with a cargo-carrying 
length greater than 65 feet but not more than 71.5 feet which may use 
all non-Interstate NN routes, vehicles requiring length permits are 
restricted to Interstate 80 between the Wyoming State Line and Exit 440 
(Nebraska Highway 50). Combinations not requiring length permits may use 
all NN routes.

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Nebraska Revised Statutes Reissued 1988
Sec. 39-6,179 (Double trailers under 65 feet)
Sec. 39-6,179.01 (Double trailers over 65 feet)
Sec. 39-6,180.01 (Authorized weight limits)
Sec. 39-6,181 (Vehicles; size; weight; load; overweight; special 
permits; etc.)
Nebraska Department of Roads Rules and Regulations, Title 408, Chapter 1 
(Double trailers over 65 feet)

                             STATE: NEBRASKA

             COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: A truck tractor and three trailing unit combination is 
required to travel empty.
    DRIVER: Same as the NE-TT2 combination.
    PERMIT: A length permit, in accordance with Chapter 11 of the NDOR 
Rules and Regulations is required for a three trailing unit combination. 
Conditions of the length permit prohibit movements on Saturdays, 
Sundays, and holidays; when ground wind speed exceeds 25 miles per hour; 
and when visibility is less than 800 feet. Movement is also prohibited 
during steady rain, snow, sleet, ice, or other conditions causing 
slippery pavement. Beginning November 15 until April 16 permission to 
move must be obtained from the NDOR Permit Office within 3 hours of 
movement. Beginning April 16 until November 15 permission to move must 
be obtained within 3 days of the movement. A fee is charged for the 
annual length permit. These permits can be revoked if the terms are 
violated.
    ACCESS: Access to and from I-80 is limited to designated staging 
areas within 6 miles of the route between Wyoming State Line and Exit 
440 (Nebraska Route 50). Except for weather, emergency, and repair, 
three trailing unit combinations cannot reenter the Interstate after 
having exited.
    VEHICLE: A three trailing unit combination must have trailers of 
approximately equal length and the overall vehicle length cannot exceed 
105 feet.
    ROUTES: I-80 from Wyoming to Exit 440 (Nebraska Highway 50).

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Neb. Rev. Stat. Sec. 39-6.179,01 (Reissue 1988)
Nebraska Department of Roads Rules and Regulations, Title 408, Chapter 1

                             STATE: NEBRASKA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 68 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The overall vehicle length, including load, cannot exceed 
75 feet.
    PERMIT: No permit is required.
    ACCESS: Statewide during daylight hours only.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Neb. Rev. Stat. Sec. 39-6,179.

[[Page 299]]

                              STATE: NEVADA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: The single-axle weight limit is 20,000 pounds, the tandem-
axle weight limit is 34,000 pounds, and the gross weight is subject to 
the Federal Bridge Formula limits, provided that two consecutive tandems 
with a distance of 36 feet or more between the first and last axle may 
carry 34,000 pounds on each tandem.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement, be at least 25 years old, and have had a 
medical exam within previous 24 months. Every operator must be covered 
by a liability insurance policy with personal injury and property damage 
limits meeting State requirements.
    VEHICLE: No trailer may be longer than 48 feet. If one trailer is 48 
feet long, the other trailer cannot exceed 42 feet. Towed vehicles must 
not shift or sway more than 3 inches to right or left and must track in 
a straight line on a level, smooth paved highway. Vehicles must be able 
to accelerate and operate on a level highway at speeds which are 
compatible with other traffic and with the speed limits and must be able 
to maintain a minimum of 20 miles per hour on any grade on which they 
may operate. All vehicles must have safety chains on converter dollies. 
Vehicles must carry snow chains for each drive wheel.
    Vehicle operations may be suspended in adverse weather and high 
winds, as determined by police or the Nevada DOT.
    The shortest trailer must be in the rear of a combination unless it 
is heavier than the longer trailer.
    Brakes must comply with all State and Federal requirements for 
commercial vehicles including automatic braking for separation of 
vehicles, parking brakes, and working lights.
    Vehicles must not exceed posted speed limits and cannot operate on 
any highway on which they cannot at all times stay on the right side of 
the center line. All LCV's must keep a distance of at least 500 feet 
from each other.
    Every full-sized truck or truck tractor used in a combination of 
vehicles must be equipped with at least the following emergency and 
safety equipment:
    1. One fire extinguisher which meets ``Classification B'' of the 
National Fire Protection Association.
    2. One spare light bulb for every electrical lighting device used on 
the rear of the last vehicle in a combination of vehicles.
    3. One spare fuse for each different kind and size of fuse used in 
every vehicle in the combination of vehicles. If the electrical system 
of any vehicle in the combination contains any devices for protection of 
electrical circuits from overloading, other than fuses and circuit 
breakers which can be reset, one spare of each such device must be kept 
as emergency and safety equipment.
    4. Any flares, reflectors or red electrical lanterns which meet 
State or Federal law or regulation.
    Before operating a combination of vehicles on a highway of this 
State, the owner or operator of the combination shall certify to the 
Nevada DOT, on a form provided by it, that all vehicles and equipment in 
the combination meet the requirements of and will be operated in 
compliance with NAC 484.300 to 484.440, inclusive.
    All axles except for steering axles and axles that weigh less than 
10,000 pounds must have at least four tires unless the tire width of 
each tire on the axles is 14 inches or greater.
    PERMIT: Permits are required and a fee is charged. They may be 
revoked for violation of any of the provisions of the legal regulations. 
The State may suspend operation on roads deemed unsafe or impracticable. 
Permits must be carried in the vehicle along with identification devices 
issued by the Nevada Department of Motor Vehicles.
    ACCESS: As authorized by the Nevada DOT.
    ROUTES: All NN routes, except US 93 from Nevada State route 500 to 
Arizona.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: NRS 484.400, .405(4), .425, .430, .739, 408.100-4, 
.100-6(a), and 706.531. Also, ``Regulations for the Operation of 70 to 
105 foot Combinations'' (1990).

                              STATE: NEVADA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Same as the NV-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the NV-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the NV-TT2 combination.

[[Page 300]]

                              STATE: NEVADA

          COMBINATION: Truck-trailer, and Truck-trailer-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 98 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, VEHICLE, and ACCESS: Same as the NV-TT2 combination.
    PERMITS: Same as the NV-TT2 combination, except permits for Truck-
trailer, or Truck-trailer-trailer combinations are only required when 
the overall length is 70 feet or more.
    ROUTES: Same as the NV-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the NV-TT2 combination.

                            STATE: NEW MEXICO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

           LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: Not applicable

              MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 86,400 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: The cargo-carrying length restriction does 
not apply to this combination. The length of each trailing unit is 
limited to 28.5 feet. This describes a two trailing unit vehicle whose 
operation is guaranteed by the STAA of 1982 regardless of inter-unit 
spacing. As long as each trailing unit is 28.5 feet long or less, cargo-
carrying length is not restricted. This combination is listed as a LCV 
because it can exceed the 80,000-pound threshold established in the 
Congressional definition. The 86,400-pound gross weight limit is 
grandfathered for New Mexico.
    WEIGHT: Single axle = 21,600 pounds. Tandem axle = 34,200 pounds. 
Load per inch of tire width = 600 pounds. The total gross weight with 
load imposed on the highway by any vehicle or combination of vehicles 
where the distance between the first and last axles is less than 19 feet 
shall not exceed that given for the respective distances in the 
following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Allowed
                                                                 load in
    Distance in feet between first and last axles of group       pounds
                                                                on group
                                                                of axles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.............................................................    34,320
5.............................................................    35,100
6.............................................................    35,880
7.............................................................    36,660
8.............................................................    37,440
9.............................................................    38,220
10............................................................    39,000
11............................................................    39,780
12............................................................    40,560
13............................................................    41,340
14............................................................    42,120
15............................................................    42,900
16............................................................    43,680
17............................................................    44,460
18............................................................    45,240
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The total gross weight with load imposed on the highway by any 
vehicle or combination of vehicles where the distance between the first 
and last axles is 19 feet or more shall not exceed that given for the 
respective distances in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Allowed
                                                                 load in
    Distance in feet between first and last axles of group       pounds
                                                                on group
                                                                of axles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
19............................................................    53,100
20............................................................    54,000
21............................................................    54,900
22............................................................    55,800
23............................................................    56,700
24............................................................    57,600
25............................................................    58,500
26............................................................    59,400
27............................................................    60,300
28............................................................    61,200
29............................................................    62,100
30............................................................    63,000
31............................................................    63,900
32............................................................    64,800
33............................................................    65,700
34............................................................    66,600
35............................................................    67,500
36............................................................    68,400
37............................................................    69,300
38............................................................    70,200
39............................................................    71,100
40............................................................    72,000
41............................................................    72,900
42............................................................    73,800
43............................................................    74,700
44............................................................    75,600
45............................................................    76,500
46............................................................    77,400
47............................................................    78,300
48............................................................    79,200
49............................................................    80,100
50............................................................    81,000
51............................................................    81,900
52............................................................    82,800
53............................................................    83,700
54............................................................    84,600
55............................................................    85,500
56 and over...................................................    86,400
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The distance between the centers of the axles shall be measured to 
the nearest even

[[Page 301]]

foot. When a fraction is exactly one-half the next larger whole number 
shall be used.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: No special requirements beyond normal Federal Motor Carrier 
or State regulations. The maximum length of the trailing units is 28.5 
feet.
    PERMIT: None Required.
    ACCESS: STAA vehicles must be allowed reasonable access in 
accordance with 23 CFR 658.19.
    ROUTES: All Interstate highways.

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

66-7-409 NMSA 1978
66-7-410 NMSA 1978

                             STATE: NEW YORK

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 102 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 143,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: The following information pertains to tandem trailer 
combinations with either trailer more than 28.5 feet long but not more 
than 48 feet long. A nine-axle combination vehicle may not exceed a 
total maximum gross weight of 143,000 pounds. An eight-axle combination 
vehicle may not exceed a total maximum gross weight of 138,400 pounds. 
The maximum gross weight that may be carried upon any combination of 
units is limited by the maximum gross weight that can be carried upon 
the axles as follows. For a nine-axle combination: Drive axles--36,000 
pounds, axles four/five--36,000 pounds, axles six/seven--27,000 pounds, 
and axles eight/nine--36,000 pounds. A minimum 12-foot axle spacing 
between the fifth and sixth axles is also required on the nine-axle LCV. 
For an eight-axle combination: Drive axles--36,000 pounds, axles four/
five--36,000 pounds, sixth axle--22,400 pounds, and axles seven/eight--
36,000 pounds. The eight-axle LCV has no minimum axle-spacing 
requirements. For gross weights in excess of 138,400 pounds the 
combination must include a tandem-axle dolly to meet the nine-axle 
requirements. Maximum permissible gross weight for B-train combination 
is 127,000 pounds.
    When the gross weight of the two trailers in a tandem combination 
vary more than 20 percent, the heaviest of the two must be placed in the 
lead position.
    For tandem trailer combinations in which neither trailing unit 
exceeds 28.5 feet in length the following maximum allowable weights 
apply: for a single axle--28,000 pounds (except that steering axles may 
not exceed 22,400 pounds), for a tandem axle--42,500 pounds, for a tri-
axle--52,500 pounds. The gross weight may not exceed 100,000 pounds or 
the manufacturers gross weight rating, whichever is lower.
    DRIVER: For operation on highways under the jurisdiction of the New 
York State Thruway Authority (NYSTA), except for the full length of I-84 
and that portion of I-287 from Thruway exit 8 to I-95, the driver must 
have a commercial driver's license with the appropriate endorsement, and 
hold a Tandem Trailer Driver's Permit issued by the NYSTA. In order to 
obtain an NYSTA driver's permit, an applicant must (1) hold a valid 
commercial driver's license with multiple-trailer endorsement; (2) be 
over 26 years old, in good health, and have at least 5 years of provable 
experience driving tractor-trailer combinations; and (3) meet all other 
application requirements with regard to driving history established by 
the NYSTA. Qualified drivers receive a Tandem Trailer Driver's Permit 
for Tandem Vehicle Operation which is valid only for the operation of 
the certified equipment owned by the company to which the permit is 
issued.
    For operation on highways under the jurisdiction of the New York 
State DOT, cities not wholly included in one county, the full length of 
I-84 and that portion of I-287 from Thruway exit 8 to I-95, the driver 
must have a commercial driver's license with the appropriate 
endorsement.
    VEHICLE: All vehicles must meet the requirements of applicable 
Federal and State statutes, rules, and regulations. Vehicles operating 
on highways under the jurisdiction of the NYSTA, except for the full 
length of I-84 and that portion of I-287 from Thruway exit 8 to I-95, 
must also meet the following additional requirements. The tractor 
manufacturer and the permittee shall certify to the NYSTA prior to the 
approval of the tractor that it is capable of hauling the maximum 
permissible gross load at a speed of not less than 20 miles per hour on 
all portions of the thruway system.
    The brakes on any vehicle, dolly converter, or combination of 
vehicles shall comply with 49 CFR part 393 and, in addition, any vehicle 
or dolly converter shall meet the provisions of the New York State 
Traffic Law.
    Tandem trailer operations shall be equipped, at a minimum, with 
emergency equipment as required by 49 CFR part 393, subpart H, as 
amended, tire chains from October 15 to May 1 of each year, a fire 
extinguisher with an aggregate rating of 20BC, and each trailer with 
specific lamps and reflectors.
    All tractors certified by the NYSTA for use with tandem trailers 
will be assigned an identification number by the NYSTA which must be 
placed on the vehicle. The number

[[Page 302]]

must be at least 3 inches in height and visible to a person standing at 
ground level opposite the driver's position in the cab.
    Axle Type. Tractors to be used for hauling 110,000 pounds or more 
shall be equipped with tandem rear axles, both with driving power. 
Tractors to be used for hauling 110,000 pounds or less may have a single 
drive axle. Tandem combinations using single wheel tires commonly 
referred to as ``Super Singles'' are required to use triple-axle 
tractors, dual-axle trailers, and dual-axle dollies.
    Dollies. Every converter dolly certified on and after June 1, 1968, 
used to convert a semitrailer to a full trailer may have either single 
or tandem axles at the option of the permittee. Single-axle dollies may 
not utilize low profile tires. Combination vehicles with a gross weight 
in excess of 138,400 pounds must have a tandem-axle dolly to meet the 
nine-axle requirement. If the distance between two semitrailers is 10 
feet or more, the dolly shall be equipped with a device or the trailers 
connected along the sides with suitable material to indicate they are in 
effect one unit. The devices or connection shall be approved by the 
NYSTA prior to use on a tandem trailer combination. The NYSTA tandem-
trailer provisions require that converter dollies shall be coupled with 
one or more safety chains or cables to the frame or an extension of the 
frame of the motor vehicle by which it is towed. Each dolly converter 
must also be equipped with mud flaps. Tandem combinations using a 
sliding fifth wheel attached to the lead trailer, known as a ``B-Train'' 
combination, will require a separate Thruway Engineer Service approval 
prior to the initial tandem run. Special provisions regarding B-Trains 
will be reviewed at the time of the application or request for use on 
the Thruway.
    PERMIT: For operation on highways under the jurisdiction of the New 
York State DOT, cities not wholly included in one county, or the 
following highway sections under NYSTA jurisdiction; the full length of 
I-84 and that portion of I-287 from Thruway exit 8 to I-95, a permit to 
exceed the weight limits set forth in section 385(15) of the New York 
State Vehicle and Traffic Law must be obtained from the State DOT, city 
involved, or the NYSTA. A fee is charged for the permit.
    For operation on highways under the jurisdiction of the NYSTA, 
except for the full length of I-84 and that portion of I-287 from 
Thruway exit 8 to I-95, companies must file an application for a Tandem 
Trailer Permit with the NYSTA. Permits are issued to such companies upon 
meeting qualifications, including insurance, for tandem combinations 
over 65 feet in length. No permit fee is charged; however, Thruway tolls 
are charged for each use of the Thruway, and the equipment must be 
certified by the NYSTA annually. The annual re-certification of 
equipment is handled by: New York State Thruway Authority, Manager of 
Traffic Safety Services, P.O. Box 189, Albany, New York 12201-0189
    Transportation of hazardous materials is subject to special 
restrictions plus 49 CFR part 397 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations.
    ACCESS: For tandem trailer combinations with either trailer more 
than 28.5 feet long but not more than 48 feet long, the following access 
is available to authorized operating routes.

I-87 (New York Thruway) Access provided at Thruway Exit 21B to or from a 
          point 1,500 feet north of the Thruway on US 9W.
I-90 (NYSTA-Berkshire Section) access provided at:
    (1) Thruway Exit B-1 to or from a point 0.8 mile north of the 
southern most access ramp on US 9.
    (2) Thruway Exit B-3 within a 2,000-foot radius of the Thruway ramps 
to NY 22.
I-90 (New York Thruway) access provided at:
    (1) Thruway Exit 28 within a radius of 1,500 feet of the toll booth 
at Fultonville, New York.
    (2) Thruway Exit 32 to or from a point 0.6 mile north of the Thruway 
along NY 233.
    (3) Thruway Exit 44 to or from a point 0.8 mile from the Thruway 
along NY 332 and Collett Road.
    (4) Thruway Exit 52 to or from:
    (a) A point 1.7 miles west and south of the Thruway via Walden 
Avenue and NY 240 (Harlem Road);
    (b) A point 0.85 mile east and south of the Thruway via Walden 
Avenue and a roadway purchased by the Town of Cheektowaga from Sorrento 
Cheese, Inc.
    (5) Thruway Exit 54 to or from a point approximately 2.5 miles east 
and north of the Thruway via routes NY 400 and NY 277.
    (6) Thruway Exit 56 to or from a point approximately 2 miles west 
and south of the Thruway via NY 179 and Old Mile Strip Road.
I-190 (NYSTA--Niagara Section) access provided at:
    (1) Thruway Exit N1 to or from:
    (a) A point 0.8 mile west of the Thruway exit along Dingens Street.
    (b) A point 0.45 mile from the Thruway exit via Dingens Street and 
James E. Casey Drive.
    (2) Thruway Exit N5 to or from a point approximately 1.0 miles south 
of the Thruway via Louisiana Street and South Street.
    (3) Thruway Exit N15 to or from a point 0.5 mile southeast of the 
Thruway via NY 325 (Sheridan Drive) and Kenmore Avenue.
    (4) Thruway Exit N17 to or from:

[[Page 303]]

    (a) A point 1.5 miles north of the Thruway on NY 266 (River Road).
    (b) A point approximately 0.4 mile south of the Thruway on NY 266 
(River Road).

    Tandem trailer combinations in which neither trailing unit exceeds 
28.5 feet in length are restricted to the Designated Qualifying and 
Access Highway System.
    ROUTES: For tandem trailer combinations with either trailer more 
than 28.5 feet long, but not more than 48 feet long, the following 
routes are available:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-87 (New York Thruway).........  Bronx/Westchester   Thruway Exit 24.
                                   County Line.
I-90 (New York Thruway).........  Pennsylvania......  Thruway Exit 24.
I-90 (New York Thruway Berkshire  Thruway Exit B-1..  Massachusetts.
 Section).
I-190 (New York Thruway Niagara   Thruway Exit 53...  Int'l Border with
 Section).                                             Canada.
NY 912M (Berkshire Connection of  Thruway Exit 21A..  Thruway Exit B-1.
 the New York Thruway).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Tandem trailer combinations in which neither trailing unit exceeds 
28.5 feet in length may operate on all NN Highways.

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Public Authorities Law--Title 9, sec. 350, et. seq. (section 361 is most 
relevant)
New York State Thruway Authority Rules & Regulations, sections 100.6, 
100.8, and 103.13
New York State Vehicle & Traffic Law, sections 385 and 1630

                           STATE: NORTH DAKOTA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 103 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: The Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) of any vehicle or combination 
of vehicles is determined by the Federal Bridge Formula, including the 
exception for two sets of tandems spaced 36 feet apart.
    No single axle shall carry a gross weight in excess of 20,000 
pounds. Axles spaced 40 inches or less apart are considered one axle. 
Axles spaced 8 feet or more apart are considered as individual axles. 
The gross weight of two individual axles may be restricted by the weight 
formula. Spacing between axles shall be measured from axle center to 
axle center.
    Axles spaced over 40 inches but less than 8 feet apart shall not 
carry a gross weight in excess of 17,000 pounds per axle. The gross 
weight of three or more axles in a grouping is determined by the 
measurement between the extreme axle centers. During the spring breakup 
season or on otherwise posted highways, reductions in the above axle 
weights may be specified.
    The weight in pounds on any one wheel shall not exceed one-half the 
allowable axle weight. Dual tires are considered one wheel.
    The weight per inch of tire width shall not exceed 550 pounds. The 
width of tire shall be the manufacturer's rating.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The cargo length of a two trailing unit combination may not 
exceed 100 feet (when the power unit is a truck tractor) or 103 feet 
(when the power unit is a truck) when traveling on the NN or local 
highways designated by local authorities.
    All hitches must be of a load-bearing capacity capable of bearing 
the weight of the towed vehicles. The towing vehicle must have a hitch 
commonly described as a fifth wheel or gooseneck design, or one that is 
attached to the frame.
    The hitch on the rear of the vehicle connected to the towing vehicle 
must be attached to the frame of the towed vehicle. All hitches, other 
than a fifth wheel or gooseneck, must be of a ball and socket type with 
a locking device or a pintle hook.
    The drawn vehicles shall be equipped with brakes and safety chains 
adequate to control the movement of, and to stop and hold, such 
vehicles. When the drawn vehicle is of a fifth wheel or gooseneck 
design, safety chains are not required.
    In any truck or truck tractor and two trailer combination, the 
lighter trailer must always be operated as the rear trailer, except when 
the gross weight differential with the other trailer does not exceed 
5,000 pounds.
    The power unit shall have adequate power and traction to maintain a 
minimum speed of 15 miles per hour on all grades.
    PERMIT: No permits are required for GVW of 80,000 pounds or less. 
Single-trip permits are required for GVW exceeding 80,000 pounds. 
Weather restrictions (37-06-04-06, NDAC), weight distribution on 
trailers (37-06-04, NDAC), and signing requirements (37-06-04-05, NDAC) 
are applicable.
    Movements of LCV's are prohibited when:
    1. Road surfaces, due to ice, snow, slush, or frost present a 
slippery condition which may be hazardous to the operation of the unit 
or to other highway users;
    2. Wind or other conditions may cause the unit or any part thereof 
to swerve, whip, sway, or fail to follow substantially in the path of 
the towing vehicle; or

[[Page 304]]

    3. Visibility is reduced due to snow, ice, sleet, fog, mist, rain, 
dust, or smoke.
    The North Dakota Highway Patrol may restrict or prohibit operations 
during periods when in its judgment traffic, weather, or other safety 
conditions make travel unsafe.
    The last trailer in any combination must have a ``LONG LOAD'' sign 
mounted on the rear. It must be a minimum of 12 inches in height and 60 
inches in length. The lettering must be 8 inches in height with 1-inch 
brush strokes. The letters must be black on a yellow background.
    Legal width--8 feet 6 inches on all highways.
    Legal height--13 feet 6 inches.
    ACCESS: Access for vehicles with cargo-carrying length of 68 feet or 
more is 10 miles off the NN. Vehicles with a cargo-carrying length less 
than 68 feet may travel on all highways in North Dakota.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: North Dakota Century Code, section 38-12-04; North 
Dakota Administrative Code, article 37-06.

                           STATE: NORTH DAKOTA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 100 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the ND-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Same as the ND-TT2 combination, and in addition, in any 
combination with three trailing units the lightest trailer must always 
be operated as the rear trailer. For the first two trailing units the 
lighter trailer must always be second except when the gross weight 
differential with the other trailer does not exceed 5,000 pounds.

                 ROUTES: Same as the ND-TT2 combination.

            LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the ND-TT2 combination.

                           STATE: NORTH DAKOTA

          COMBINATION: Truck-trailer, and Truck-trailer-trailer

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 103 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, VEHICLE, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the ND-TT2 combination.

                 ROUTES: Same as the ND-TT2 combination.

            LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the ND-TT2 combination.

                               STATE: OHIO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 102 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 127,400 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Long double combination vehicles are only 
allowed on that portion of Ohio's Interstate System which is under the 
jurisdiction of the Ohio Turnpike Commission (OTC). These same vehicles 
are not allowed on any portion of the Interstate System under the 
jurisdiction of the Ohio DOT.
    WEIGHT: The OTC has established the following provisions for 
operation:
    Maximum Weight: Single axle = 21,000 pounds; tandem axle spaced 4 
feet or less apart = 24,000 pounds; tandem axle spaced more than 4 feet 
but less than 8 feet apart = 34,000 pounds; gross weight for doubles 90 
feet or less in length = 90,000 pounds; gross weight for doubles over 90 
feet but less than 112 feet in length = 127,400 pounds.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement, be over 26 years of age, in good health, and 
shall have not less than 5 years of experience driving tractor-trailer 
or tractor-short double trailer motor vehicles. Such driving experience 
shall include experience throughout the four seasons. Drivers must 
comply with the applicable current requirements of the Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations, Federal Hazardous Materials Regulations, and 
the Economic and Safety regulations of the Ohio Public Utility 
Commission.
    VEHICLE: Vehicles being operated under permit at night must be 
equipped with all lights and reflectors required by the Ohio Public 
Utilities Commission and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, 
except that the trailer shall be equipped with two red tail lights and 
two red or amber stop lights mounted with one set on each side. Trailer 
and semitrailer length for doubles cannot exceed 48 feet, and mixed 
trailer length combinations are not allowed for combination vehicles 
over 90 feet in length. Combined cargo-carrying length, including the 
trailer hitch, cannot be less than 80 feet or more than 102 feet. The 
number of axles on a double shall be a minimum of five and

[[Page 305]]

a maximum of nine. A tractor used in the operation of a double shall be 
capable of hauling the maximum weight at a speed of not less than 40 
miles per hour on all portions of the Turnpike.
    PERMIT: A special permit is required if the vehicle is over 102 
inches wide, 14 feet high, or 65 feet in length including overhang. 
Tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combinations require a permit if over 75 
feet in length, excluding an allowed 3-foot front overhang and a 4-foot 
rear overhang. For vehicles over 120 inches wide, 14 feet high, or 80 
feet long or if any unit of the combination vehicle is over 60 feet in 
length, travel is restricted to daylight hours Monday through noon 
Saturday, except holidays and the day before and after holidays. 
Operators are restricted to daylight driving if the load overhang is 
more than 4 feet. A ``Long Double Trailer Permit'' issued by the OTC is 
required for operation of doubles in excess of 90 feet in length. Towing 
units and coupling devices shall have sufficient structural strength to 
ensure safe operation. Vehicles and coupling devices shall be so 
designed, constructed, and installed in a double as to ensure that any 
towed vehicles when traveling on a level, smooth paved surface will 
follow in the path of the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving 
more than 3 inches to either side of the path of the towing vehicle when 
the latter is moving in a straight line. Vehicle coupling devices and 
brakes shall meet the requirements of the Ohio Public Utilities 
Commission and Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. The distance 
between the rearmost axle of a semitrailer and the front axle of the 
next semitrailer in a coupled double unit shall not exceed 12 feet 6 
inches. In no event shall the distance between the semitrailers coupled 
in a double exceed 9 feet. Double and triple trailer combinations must 
be equipped with adequate, properly maintained spray-suppressant mud 
flaps on all axles except the steering axle. In the event that the gross 
weights of the trailers vary by more than 20 percent, they shall be 
coupled according to their gross weights with the heavier trailer 
forward. A minimum distance of 500 feet shall be maintained between 
double units and/or triple units except when overtaking and passing 
another vehicle. A double shall remain in the right-hand, outside lane 
except when passing or when emergency or work-zone conditions exist. 
When, in the opinion of the OTC, the weather conditions are such that 
operation of a double is inadvisable, the OTC will notify the permittee 
that travel is prohibited for a certain period of time.
    Class A and B explosives; Class A poisons; and Class 1, 2, and 3 
radioactive material cannot be transported in double trailer 
combinations. Other hazardous materials may be transported in one 
trailer of a double. The hazardous materials should be placed in the 
front trailer unless doing so will result in the second trailer weighing 
more than the first trailer.
    ACCESS: Tandem trailer units shall not leave the Turnpike right-of-
way and shall be assembled and disassembled only in designated areas 
located at Exits 4, 7, 10, 11, 13, 14, and 16.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-76 Ohio Turnpike..............  Turnpike Exit 15..  Pennsylvania.
I-80 Ohio Turnpike..............  Turnpike Exit 8A..  Turnpike Exit 15.
I-80/90 Ohio Turnpike...........  Indiana...........  Turnpike Exit 8A.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Statutory authority, as contained in Chapter 5537 
of the Ohio Revised Code, to regulate the dimensions and weights of 
vehicles using the Turnpike.

                               STATE: OHIO

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 115,000 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Same as the OH-TT2 combination, except as 
follows:
    WEIGHT: Gross weight for triples with an overall length greater than 
90 feet but not over 105 feet in length = 115,000 pounds.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement, be over 26 years of age, in good health, and 
shall have not less than 5 years of experience driving double trailer 
combination units. Such driving experience shall include experience 
throughout the four seasons. Each driver must have special training on 
triple combinations to be provided by the Permittee.
    VEHICLE: Triple trailer combination vehicles are allowed to operate 
on the Turnpike provided the combination vehicle is at least 90 feet 
long but less than 105 feet long and each trailer is not more than 28.5 
feet in length. The minimum number of axles on the triple shall be seven 
and the maximum is nine.
    PERMIT: A triple trailer permit to operate on the Turnpike is 
required for triple trailer combinations in excess of 90 feet in length. 
There is an annual fee for the permit. Class A and B explosives; Class A 
poisons; and Class 1, 2, and 3 radioactive material cannot be 
transported in triple trailer combinations. Other hazardous materials 
may be transported in two trailers of a triple. The hazardous materials 
should be placed in the front two trailers unless doing so will result 
in the third trailer weighing more than either one of the lead trailers.

[[Page 306]]

    ACCESS: With two exceptions, triple trailer units shall not leave 
the Turnpike right-of-way and shall be assembled and disassembled only 
in designated areas located at Exits 4, 7, 10, 11, 13, 14, and 16. The 
first exception is that triple trailer combinations are allowed on State 
Route 21 from I-80 Exit 11 (Ohio Turnpike) to a terminal located 
approximately 500 feet to the north in the town of Richfield. The second 
exception is for a segment of State Route 7 from Ohio Turnpike Exit 16 
to 1 mile south.

                                 Routes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-76 Ohio Turnpike..............  Turnpike Exit 15..  Pennsylvania.
I-80 Ohio Turnpike..............  Turnpike Exit 8A..  Turnpike Exit 15.
I-80/90 Ohio Turnpike...........  Indiana...........  Turnpike Exit 8A.
OH-7............................  Turnpike Exit 16..  Extending 1 mile
                                                       south.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the OH-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: OKLAHOMA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 110 feet

              MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 90,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Single axle = 20,000 pounds; tandem axle = 34,000 pounds; 
gross vehicle weight = 90,000 pounds. The total weight on any group of 
two or more consecutive axles shall not exceed the amounts shown in 
Table 1.

                                  Table 1--Oklahoma Allowable Axle Group Weight
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Maximum load (lbs) by axle group
                         Axle Spacing (ft)                          --------------------------------------------
                                                                     2 Axles  3 Axles  4 Axles  5 Axles  6 Axles
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 4.................................................................   34,000  .......  .......  .......  .......
 5.................................................................   34,000  .......  .......  .......  .......
 6.................................................................   34,000  .......  .......  .......  .......
 7.................................................................   34,000  .......  .......  .......  .......
 8.................................................................   34,000   42,000  .......  .......  .......
 9.................................................................   39,000   42,500  .......  .......  .......
10.................................................................   40,000   43,500  .......  .......  .......
11.................................................................  .......   44,000  .......  .......  .......
12.................................................................  .......   45,000   50,000  .......  .......
13.................................................................  .......   45,500   50,500  .......  .......
14.................................................................  .......   46,500   51,500  .......  .......
15.................................................................  .......   47,000   52,000  .......  .......
16.................................................................  .......   48,000   52,500   58,000  .......
17.................................................................  .......   48,500   53,500   58,500  .......
18.................................................................  .......   49,500   54,000   59,000  .......
19.................................................................  .......   50,000   54,500   60,000  .......
20.................................................................  .......   51,000   55,500   60,500   66,000
21.................................................................  .......   51,500   56,000   61,000   66,500
22.................................................................  .......   52,500   56,500   61,500   67,000
23.................................................................  .......   53,000   57,500   62,500   68,000
24.................................................................  .......   54,000   58,000   63,000   68,500
25.................................................................  .......   54,500   58,500   63,500   69,000
26.................................................................  .......   56,000   59,500   64,000   69,500
27.................................................................  .......   57,500   60,000   65,000   70,000
28.................................................................  .......   59,000   60,500   65,500   71,000
29.................................................................  .......   60,500   61,500   66,000   71,500
30.................................................................  .......   62,000   62,000   66,500   72,000
31.................................................................  .......   63,500   63,500   67,000   72,500
32.................................................................  .......   64,000   64,000   68,000   73,500
33.................................................................  .......  .......   64,500   68,500   74,000
34.................................................................  .......  .......   65,000   69,000   74,500
35.................................................................  .......  .......   66,000   70,000   75,000
36.................................................................  .......  .......   68,000   70,500   75,500
37.................................................................  .......  .......   68,000   71,000   76,000
38.................................................................  .......  .......   69,000   72,000   77,000
39.................................................................  .......  .......   70,000   72,500   77,500
40.................................................................  .......  .......   71,000   73,000   78,000
41.................................................................  .......  .......   72,000   73,500   78,500
42.................................................................  .......  .......   73,000   74,000   79,000
43.................................................................  .......  .......   73,280   75,000   80,000
44.................................................................  .......  .......   73,280   75,500   80,500
45.................................................................  .......  .......   73,280   76,000   81,000
46.................................................................  .......  .......   73,280   76,500   81,500
47.................................................................  .......  .......   73,500   77,500   82,000
48.................................................................  .......  .......   74,000   78,000   82,000
49.................................................................  .......  .......   74,500   78,500   83,500
50.................................................................  .......  .......   75,500   79,000   84,000
51.................................................................  .......  .......   76,000   80,000   84,500
52.................................................................  .......  .......   76,500   80,500   85,000
53.................................................................  .......  .......   77,500   81,000   86,000
54.................................................................  .......  .......   78,000   81,500   86,500
55.................................................................  .......  .......   78,500   82,500   87,000
56.................................................................  .......  .......   79,500   83,000   87,500
57.................................................................  .......  .......   80,000   83,500   88,000
58.................................................................  .......  .......  .......   84,000   89,000
59.................................................................  .......  .......  .......   85,000   89,500
60.................................................................  .......  .......  .......   85,500   90,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    DRIVER: All drivers must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement and must meet the requirements of the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (49 CFR parts 390-397). State 
requirements more stringent and not in conflict with Federal 
requirements take precedence.
    VEHICLE: All vehicles must meet the requirements of applicable 
Federal and State statutes, rules, and regulations. Vehicles and load 
shall not exceed 102 inches in width on the Interstate System and four-
lane divided highways. Maximum semitrailer length is 53 feet.

    Multiple trailer combinations must be stable at all times during 
braking and normal operation. A multiple trailer combination when 
traveling on a level, smooth, paved surface must follow in the path of 
the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving more than 3 inches to 
either side when the towing vehicle is moving in a straight line. 
Heavier trailers are to be placed to the front in multiple trailer 
combinations.

[[Page 307]]

    PERMIT: An annual special authorization permit is required for 
tandem trailer vehicles operating on the Interstate System having a 
gross weight of more than 80,000 pounds. A fee is charged for the 
special authorization permit.
    ACCESS: Access is allowed from legally available routes (listed 
below) to service facilities and terminals within a 5-mile radius. 
Access is also authorized on two-lane roadways which connect multi-lane 
divided highways when such connection does not exceed 15 miles.
    ROUTES: Doubles with 29-foot trailers may use any route on the NN. 
Doubles with at least one trailer or semitrailer over 29 feet in length 
are limited to the Interstate and other multi-lane divided highways 
listed below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                From                       To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-35................  Texas...................  Kansas.
I-40................  Texas...................  Arkansas.
I-44................  Texas...................  Missouri.
I-235...............  Entire length in
                       Oklahoma City.
I-240...............  Entire length in
                       Oklahoma City.
I-244...............  Entire length in Tulsa..
I-444...............  Entire length in Tulsa..
I-40 Bus............  I-40 Exit 119...........  US 81 El Reno.
US 60...............  I-35 Exit 214...........  US 177 Ponca City.
US 62...............  US 69 Muskogee..........  OK 80 Ft. Gibson.
US 62...............  I-44 Exit 39A Lawton....  OK 115 Cache.
US 64...............  Cimarron Turnpike.......  I-244 Tulsa.
US 64...............  I-35 Exit 186 Perry.....  US 77 Perry.
US 64...............  I-40 Exit 325 Roland....  Arkansas.
US 69...............  Texas...................  I-44 (Will Rogers Tpk.)
                                                 Exit 282.
US 70...............  OK 76 Wilson............  I-35 Exits 31A-B
                                                 Ardmore.
US 75...............  I-40 Exits 240A-B         I-244 Exit 2 Tulsa.
                       Henryetta.
US 75...............  I-44 Exits 6A-B Tulsa...  Dewey.
US 77...............  I-35 Exit 141 Edmond....  3.5 mi. W of I-35.
US 81...............  I-44 (Bailey Tpk.) Exit   South Intersection OK 7
                       80.                       Duncan.
US 81...............  OK 51 Hennessey.........  11.5 mi. N of US 412.
US 169..............  OK 51 Tulsa.............  OK 20 Collinsville.
US 270..............  Indian Nation Tpk. Exit   US 69 McAlester.
                       4.
US 270..............  OK 9 Tecumseh...........  I-40 Exit 181.
US 271..............  Texas...................  Indian Nation Tpk. Hugo.
US 412..............  I-44 Exit 241 Catoosa...  US 69.
US 412..............  OK 58 Ringwood..........  I-35 Exits 194A-B.
US 412..............  US 69 Chouteau..........  OK 412 B.
OK 3................  I-44 Exit 123...........  Oklahoma/Canadian County
                                                 Line.
OK 3A...............  OK 3 Oklahoma City......  I-44 Exit 125B Oklahoma
                                                 City.
OK 7................  I-44 Exits 36A-B........  OK 65 Pumpkin Center.
OK 7................  I-35 Exit 55............  US 177 Sulphur.
OK 7................  South intersection US 81  7.5 mi. E of US 81.
                       Duncan.
OK 9................  I-35 Exit 108A..........  US 77 Norman.
OK 11...............  I-35 Exit 222...........  US 177 Blackwell.
OK 11...............  US 75 Tulsa.............  I-244 Exit 12B.
OK 33...............  US 77 Guthrie...........  I-35 Exit 157 Guthrie.
OK 51...............  I-35 Exit 174...........  US 177 Stillwater.
OK 51...............  I-44 Exit 231 Tulsa.....  Muskogee Tpk. Broken
                                                 Arrow.
OK 165..............  Connecting two sections
                       of the Muskogee
                       Turnpike at Muskogee.
OK 165..............  US 64/Bus. US 64          Muskogee Tpk.
                       Muskogee.
Cimarron Tpk........  I-35 Exit 194...........  US 64.
Cimarron Tpk Conn...  US 177 Stillwater.......  Cimarron Tpk.
Indian Nation         US 70/271 Hugo..........  I-40 Exits 240A-B
 Turnpike.                                       Henryetta.
Muskogee Tpk........  OK 51 Broken Arrow......  US 62/OK 165 Muskogee.
Muskogee Tpk........  OK 165 Muskogee.........  I-40 Exit 286 Webber's
                                                 Falls.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 308]]

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Title 47 1981 O.S. 14-101
Title 47 1990 O.S. 14-103, -109, and -116
DPS Size and Weight Permit Manual 595:30.

                             STATE: OKLAHOMA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

              MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 90,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT and ACCESS: Same as the OK-TT2 combination.
    DRIVER: Same as the OK-TT2 combination except that in addition, a 
driver of a three trailing unit combination must have had at least 2 
years of experience driving tractor-trailer combinations.
    VEHICLE: All vehicles must meet the requirements of applicable 
Federal and State statutes, rules, and regulations. Vehicle and load 
shall not exceed 102 inches in width on the Interstate System and other 
four-lane divided highways. Maximum unit length of triple trailers is 29 
feet. Truck tractors pulling triple trailers must have sufficient 
horsepower to maintain a minimum speed of 40 miles per hour on the level 
and 20 miles per hour on grades under normal operation conditions. 
Heavy-duty fifth wheels, pick-up plates equal in strength to the fifth 
wheel, solid kingpins, no-slack hitch connections, mud flaps and splash 
guards, and full-width axles are required on triple trailer 
combinations. All braking systems must comply with State and Federal 
requirements.
    Multiple trailer combinations must be stable at all times during 
braking and normal operation. A multiple trailer combination when 
traveling on a level, smooth paved surface must follow in the path of 
the towing vehicle without shifting or swerving more than 3 inches to 
either side when the towing vehicle is moving in a straight line. 
Heavier trailers are to be placed to the front in multiple trailer 
combinations.
    PERMIT: An annual special combination permit is required for the 
operation of triple-trailer combinations on the Interstate System and 
other four-lane divided primary highways. This permit also authorizes 
such combinations to exceed 80,000 pounds on the Interstate System.
    The permit holder must certify that the driver of a triple-trailer 
combination is qualified. Operators of triple-trailer combinations must 
maintain a 500-foot following distance and must drive in the right lane, 
except when passing or in an emergency.
    Speed shall be reduced and extreme caution exercised when operating 
triple-trailer combinations under hazardous conditions, such as those 
caused by snow, wind, ice, sleet, fog, mist, rain, dust, or smoke. When 
conditions become sufficiently dangerous, as determined by the company 
or driver, operations shall be discontinued and shall not resume until 
the vehicle can be safely operated. The State may restrict or prohibit 
operations during periods when, in the State's judgment, traffic, 
weather, or other safety conditions make such operations unsafe or 
inadvisable.
    Class A and B explosives; Class A poisons; Class 1, 2, and 3 
radioactive material; and any other material deemed to be unduly 
hazardous by the U.S. Department of Transportation cannot be transported 
in triple-trailer combinations.
    A fee is charged for the annual special authorization permit.
    ROUTES: Same as the OK-TT2 combination.

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Title 47 1981 O.S. 14-101
Title 47 1990 O.S. 14-109, -116, -121
DPS Size and Weight Permit Manual 595:30.

                              STATE: OREGON

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 68 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Maximum allowable weights are as follows: single wheel--
10,000 pounds, single axle--20,000 pounds, tandem axle--34,000 pounds. 
Gross vehicle weights over 80,000 pounds must follow the Oregon extended 
weight table, with a maximum of 105,500 pounds. Weight is also limited 
to 600 pounds per inch of tire width.

                          EXTENDED WEIGHT TABLE

    Gross weights over 80,000 pounds are authorized only when operating 
under the authority of a Special Transportation Permit.

                        MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE WEIGHTS

    1. The maximum allowable weights for single axles and tandem axles 
shall not exceed those specified under ORS 818.010.
    2. The maximum allowable weight for groups of axles spaced at 46 
feet or less apart shall not exceed those specified under ORS 818.010.
    3. The maximum weights for groups of axles spaced at 47 feet or more 
and the gross combined weight for any combination of vehicles shall not 
exceed those set forth in the following table:

[[Page 309]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Maximum gross weight in pounds on
                                 ---------------------------------------
      Axle spacing in feet                                        8 or
                                   5 Axles   6 Axles   7 Axles    More
                                                                  axles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
47..............................    77,500    81,000    81,000    81,000
48..............................    78,000    82,000    82,000    82,000
49..............................    78,500    83,000    83,000    83,000
50..............................    79,000    84,000    84,000    84,000
51..............................    80,000    84,500    85,000    85,000
52..............................    80,500    85,000    86,000    86,000
53..............................    81,000    86,000    87,000    87,000
54..............................    81,500    86,500    88,000    91,000
55..............................    82,500    87,000    89,000    92,000
56..............................    83,000    87,500    90,000    93,000
57..............................    83,500    88,000    91,000    94,000
58..............................    84,000    89,000    92,000    95,000
59..............................    85,000    89,500    93,000    96,000
60..............................    85,500    90,000    94,000    97,000
61..............................    86,000    90,500    95,000    98,000
62..............................    87,000    91,000    96,000    99,000
63..............................    87,500    92,000    97,000   100,000
64..............................    88,000    92,500    97,500   101,000
65..............................    88,500    93,000    98,000   102,000
66..............................    89,000    93,500    98,500   103,000
67..............................    90,000    94,000    99,000   104,000
68..............................    90,000    95,000    99,500   105,000
69..............................    90,000    95,500   100,000   105,500
70..............................    90,000    96,000   101,000   105,500
71..............................    90,000    96,500   101,500   105,000
72..............................    90,000    96,500   102,000   105,500
73..............................    90,000    96,500   102,500   105,500
74..............................    90,000    96,500   103,000   105,500
75..............................    90,000    96,500   104,000   105,500
76..............................    90,000    96,500   104,500   105,500
77..............................    90,000    96,500   105,000   105,500
78..............................    90,000    96,500   105,500   105,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Distance measured to nearest foot; when exactly one-half foot, take 
next larger number.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: For a combination which includes a truck tractor and two 
trailing units, the lead trailing unit (semitrailer) may be up to 40 
feet long. The second trailing unit may be up to 35 feet long. However, 
the primary control is the total cargo-carrying distance which has a 
maximum length of 68 feet. Any towed vehicles in a combination must be 
equipped with safety chains or cables to prevent the towbar from 
dropping to the ground in the event the coupling fails. The chains or 
cables must have sufficient strength to control the towed vehicle in the 
event the coupling device fails and must be attached with no more slack 
than necessary to permit proper turning. However, this requirement does 
not apply to a fifth-wheel coupling if the upper and lower halves of the 
fifth wheel must be manually released before they can be separated.
    PERMIT: A permit is required for operation if the gross combination 
weight exceeds 80,000 pounds. A fee is charged. Permitted movements must 
have the lighter trailing unit placed to the rear, and use splash and 
spray devices when operating in rainy weather. Movement is not allowed 
when road surfaces are hazardous due to ice or snow, or when other 
atmospheric conditions make travel unsafe.
    ACCESS: As allowed by the Oregon DOT.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: ORS 810.010, ORS 810.030 through 810.060, and ORS 
818.010 through 818.235.

                              STATE: OREGON

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 96 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the OR-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Trailing units must be of equal length. The overall length 
of the combination is limited to 105 feet. Any towed vehicles in a 
combination must be equipped with safety chains or cables to prevent the 
towbar from dropping to the ground in the event the coupling fails. The 
chains or cables must have sufficient strength to control the towed 
vehicle in the event the coupling device fails and must be attached with 
no more slack than necessary to permit proper turning. However, this 
requirement does not apply to a fifth-wheel coupling if the upper and 
lower halves of the fifth wheel must be manually released before they 
can be separated.
    ROUTES: The following NN routes are also open to truck tractor and 
three trailing unit combinations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-5.............................  California........  Washington.
I-105...........................  Entire length in
                                   the Eugene-
                                   Springfield area.
I-205...........................  Jct. I-5..........  Washington.
I-405...........................  Entire length in
                                   Portland.
I-82............................  Washington........  Jct. I-84.
I-84............................  Jct. I-5..........  Idaho.
US 20...........................  Jct OR 22/OR 126    US 26 Vale.
                                   Santiam Junction.
US 20...........................  East Jct OR 99E     I-5 Exit 233.
                                   Albany.
US 26...........................  US 101 Cannon       OR 126 Prineville.
                                   Beach Junction.
US 20/26........................  Vale..............  Idaho.
US 30...........................  US 101 Astoria....  I-405 Exit 3
                                                       Portland.
US 95...........................  Nevada............  Idaho.
SPUR US 95......................  OR 201............  Idaho.
US 97...........................  California........  Washington.
US 101..........................  US 30 Astoria.....  US 26 Cannon Beach
                                                       Jct.
US 101..........................  OR 18 Otis........  US 20 Newport.
US 101..........................  Bandon............  North city limit
                                                       Coos Bay.

[[Page 310]]

 
US 197..........................  I-84 Exit 87 The    Washington.
                                   Dalles.
US 395..........................  I-82 Exit 1         I-84 Exit 188
                                   Umatilla.           Stanfield.
US 395..........................  US 26 John Day....  OR 140 Lakeview.
US 730..........................  I-84 Exit 168.....  Washington.
OR 6............................  US 101 Tillamook..  US 26 near Banks.
OR 8............................  OR 47 Forest Grove  OR 217 Beaverton.
OR 11...........................  Washington........  Mission Cutoff
                                                       near Pendleton.
OR 18...........................  US 101 Otis.......  OR 99W Dayton.
OR 19...........................  I-84 Exit 137.....  South 2.5 miles.
OR 22...........................  OR 18 near          OR 99E Salem.
                                   Willamena.
OR 22...........................  I-5 Exit 253......  Jct US 20/OR 126
                                                       Santiam Jct.
OR 31...........................  US 97 La Pine.....  US 395 Valley
                                                       Falls.
OR 34...........................  Jct US 20/OR 99W    I-5 Exit 228.
                                   Corvallis.
OR 35...........................  I-84 Exit 64......  Mt. Hood Hood
                                                       River.
OR 39...........................  OR 140 East of      California.
                                   Klamath Falls.
OR 58...........................  I-5 Exit 188        US 97 near
                                   Goshen.             Chemult.
OR 62...........................  OR 99 Medford.....  OR 140 White City.
OR 78...........................  Jct US 20/ US 395   US 95 Burns
                                   Burns.              Junction.
OR 99...........................  I-5 Exit 58 Grants  I-5 Exit 48 Rogue
                                   Pass.               River.
OR 99...........................  I-5 Exit 192        Jct OR 99E/ OR 99W
                                   Eugene.             Junction City.
OR 99E..........................  I-5 Exit 307        I-205 Exit 9
                                   Portland.           Oregon City.
OR 99E..........................  I-5 Exit 233        Tangent.
                                   Albany.
OR 99E..........................  OR 228 Halsey.....  Harrisburg.
OR 99W..........................  Jct US 20/OR 34     I-5 Exit 294
                                   Corvallis.          Portland.
OR 126..........................  US 20 Sisters.....  US 26 Prineville.
OR 138..........................  I-5 Exit 136        East 2 miles.
                                   Sutherlin.
OR 140..........................  OR 62 White City..  Jct US 97/OR 66
                                                       Klamath Falls.
OR 201..........................  Jct US 20/US 26...  SPUR US 95 Cairo
                                                       Junction.
OR 207..........................  I-84 Exit 182.....  OR 74 Lexington.
OR 207/OR 74....................  Jct OR 207/OR 74    Jct OR 207/ OR 74/
                                   Lexington.          OR 206 Heppner.
OR 212..........................  I-205 Exit 12.....  US 26 Boring.
OR 214..........................  I-5 Exit 271        OR 99E Woodburn.
                                   Woodburn.
OR 217..........................  I-5 Exit 292        US 26 Beaverton.
                                   Tigard.
OR 224..........................  OR 99E Milwaukie..  I-205 Exit 13.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the OR-TT2 combination.

                              STATE: OREGON

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

           LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 70 feet, 5 inches.

WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws and 
 regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the ISTEA 
                 freeze as it applies to maximum weight.

DRIVER, ACCESS, ROUTES, AND LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as OR-TT2 combination.

VEHICLE: The truck or trailer may be up to 40 feet long not to exceed 75 
  feet overall. The truck may have a built-in hoist to load cargo. Any 
 towed vehicle in a combination must be equipped with safety chains or 
 cables to prevent the towbar from dropping to the ground in the event 
 the coupling fails. The chains or cables must have sufficient strength 
to control the towed vehicle in the event the coupling device fails and 
  must be attached with no more slack than necessary to permit proper 
   turning. However, this requirement does not apply to a fifth-wheel 
   coupling if the upper and lower halves of the fifth wheel must be 
             manually released before they can be separated.

                 PERMIT: No overlength permit required.

                           STATE: SOUTH DAKOTA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

                LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 100 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: For all combinations, the maximum gross weight on two or 
more consecutive axles is limited by the Federal Bridge Formula but 
cannot exceed 129,000 pounds. The weight on single axles or tandem axles 
spaced 40 inches or less apart may not exceed 20,000 pounds. Tandem 
axles spaced more than 40 inches but 96 inches or less may not exceed 
34,000 pounds. Two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross 
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the 
first and last axles of the tandems is 36 feet or more. The weight on 
the steering axle may not exceed 600 pounds per inch of tire width.
    For combinations with a cargo-carrying length greater than 81.5 feet 
the following additional regulations also apply. The weight on all axles 
(other than the steering axle) may not exceed 500 pounds per inch of 
tire width. Lift axles and belly axles are not

[[Page 311]]

considered load-carrying axles and will not count when determining 
allowable vehicle weight.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: For all combinations, a semitrailer or trailer may neither 
be longer than nor weigh 3,000 pounds more than the trailer located 
immediately in front of it. Towbars longer than 19 feet must be flagged 
during daylight hours and lighted at night.
    For combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 81.5 feet or less, 
neither trailer may exceed 45 feet, including load overhang. Vehicles 
may be 12 feet wide when hauling baled feed during daylight hours.
    For combinations with a cargo-carrying length over 81.5 feet long, 
neither trailer may exceed 48 feet, including load overhang. Loading the 
rear of the trailer heavier than the front is not allowed. All axles 
except the steering axle require dual tires. Axles spaced 8 feet or less 
apart must weigh within 500 pounds of each other. The trailer hitch 
offset may not exceed 6 feet. The maximum effective rear trailer 
overhang may not exceed 35 percent of the trailer's wheelbase. The power 
unit must have sufficient power to maintain 40 miles per hour. A ``LONG 
LOAD'' sign measuring 18 inches high by 7 feet long with black on yellow 
lettering 10 inches high is required on the rear. Offtracking is limited 
to 8.75 feet for a turning radius of 161 feet.

Offtracking Formula = 161 - [161\2\ - (L<INF>1</INF>\2\ + 
L<INF>2</INF>\2\ + L<INF>3</INF>\2\ + L<INF>4</INF>\2\ + 
L<INF>5</INF>\2\ + L<INF>6</INF>\2\ + L<INF>7</INF>\2\ + 
L<INF>8</INF>\2\)]\1/2\

    Note: L<INF>1</INF> through L<INF>8</INF> are measurements between 
points of articulation or vehicle pivot points. Squared dimensions to 
stinger steer points of articulation are negative. For two trailing unit 
combinations where at least one trailer is 45 feet long or longer, all 
the dimensions used to calculate offtracking must be written in the 
``Permit Restriction'' area of the permit along with the offtracking 
value derived from the calculation.
    PERMIT: For combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 81.5 feet 
or less, a single-trip permit is required for movement on the Interstate 
System if the gross vehicle weight exceeds 80,000 pounds. An annual or 
single-trip permit is required for hauling baled feed over 102 inches 
wide.
    For combinations with a cargo-carrying length greater than 81.5 
feet, a single-trip permit is required for all movements. Operations 
must be discontinued when roads are slippery due to moisture, visibility 
must be good, and wind conditions must not cause trailer whip or sway.
    For all combinations, a fee is charged for any permit.
    ACCESS: For combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 81.5 feet 
or less, access is Statewide off the NN unless restricted by the South 
Dakota DOT.
    For combinations with a cargo-carrying length greater than 81.5 
feet, access to operating routes must be approved by the South Dakota 
DOT.
    ROUTES: Combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 81.5 feet or 
less may use all NN routes. Combinations with a cargo-carrying length 
over 81.5 feet, are restricted to the Interstate System and:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         From                 To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US 14...........................  W. Jct. US 14       So. Jct. US 14 and
                                   Bypass and US 14    US 281.
                                   Brookings.
Bypass US 14....................  I-29 Exit 133       W. Jct. US 14
                                   Brookings.          Bypass and US 14
                                                       Brookings.
US 85...........................  I-90 Exit 10        North Dakota.
                                   Spearfish.
US 281..........................  I-90 Exit 310.....  So. Jct. US 14 and
                                                       US 281.
US 281..........................  8th Ave. Aberdeen.  North Dakota.
SD 50...........................  Burleigh Street     I-29 Exit 26.
                                   Yankton.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    LEGAL CITATIONS: SDCL 32-22-8.1, -38, -39, -41, -42, and -52; and 
Administrative Rules 70:03:01:37, :47, :48, and :60 through :70.

                           STATE: SOUTH DAKOTA

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

                LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 100 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the SD-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Same as the SD-TT2 combination, except trailer lengths are 
limited to 28.5 feet, including load overhang, and the overall length 
cannot exceed 110 feet, including load overhang.
    ROUTES: Same as the SD-TT2 combination with a cargo-carrying length 
over 81.5 feet.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: SDCL 32-22-14.14, -38, -39, -42, and -52; and 
Administrative Rules 70:03:01:60 through :70.

                           STATE: SOUTH DAKOTA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-Trailer

                 LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 73 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.

[[Page 312]]

    DRIVER, and PERMIT: Same as the SD-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Same as the SD-TT2 combination except that in addition, the 
overall length including load overhang is limited to 80 feet. Trailer 
length is not limited.
    ACCESS: Same as the access provisions for the SD-TT2 combination 
with a cargo-carrying length of 81.5 feet or less.
    ROUTES: Same as the route provisions for the SD-TT2 combination with 
a cargo-carrying length of 81.5 feet or less.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: SDCL 32-22-8.1, -38, -39, -41, -42, and -52; and 
Administrative Rules 70:03:01:37, :47, and :48.

                           STATE: SOUTH DAKOTA

                       COMBINATION: Truck-Trailer

                 LENGTH OF CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 78 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, and PERMIT: Same as the SD-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Same as the SD-TT2 combination with a cargo-carrying length 
over 81.5 feet, except that in addition, the overall length is limited 
to 85 feet.
    ACCESS: Same as the access provisions for the SD-TT2 combination 
with a cargo-carrying length greater than 81.5 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the route provisions for the SD-TT2 combination with 
a cargo-carrying length greater than 81.5 feet.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: SDCL 32-22-38, -39, -42, and -52; and 
Administrative Rules 70:03:01:60 through :70.

                               STATE: UTAH

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Weight limits are as follows:
Single axle: 20,000 pounds
Tandem axle: 34,000 pounds
Gross weight: 129,000 pounds
Vehicles must comply with the Federal Bridge Formula
    Tire loading on vehicles requiring an overweight or oversize permit 
shall not exceed 500 pounds per inch of tire width for tires 11 inches 
wide and greater, and 450 pounds per inch of tire width for tires less 
than 11 inches wide as designated by the tire manufacturer on the side 
wall of the tire. Tire loading on vehicles not requiring an overweight 
or oversize permit shall not exceed 600 pounds per inch of tire width as 
designated by the tire manufacturer on the sidewall.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement. Carriers must certify that their drivers have a 
safe driving record and have passed a road test administered by a 
qualified safety supervisor.
    VEHICLE: While in transit, no trailer shall be positioned ahead of 
another trailer which carries an appreciably heavier load. An empty 
trailer shall not precede a loaded trailer. Vehicles shall be powered to 
operate on level terrain at speeds compatible with other traffic. They 
must be able to maintain a minimum speed of 20 miles per hour under 
normal operating conditions on any grade of 5 percent or less over which 
the combination is operated and be able to resume a speed of 20 miles 
per hour after stopping on any such grade, except in extreme weather 
conditions.
    Oversize signs are required on vehicles in excess of 75 feet in 
length on two-lane highways.
    A heavy-duty fifth wheel is required. All fifth wheels must be clean 
and lubricated with a light-duty grease prior to each trip. The fifth 
wheel must be located in a position which provides adequate stability. 
Pick-up plates must be of equal strength to the fifth wheel. The kingpin 
must be of a solid type and permanently fastened. Screw-out or folding-
type kingpins are prohibited.
    All hitch connections must be of a no-slack type, preferably a 
power-actuated ram. Air-actuated hitches which are isolated from the 
primary air transmission system are recommended.
    The drawbar length should be the practical minimum consistent with 
the clearances required between trailers for turning and backing 
maneuvers.
    Axles must be those designed for the width of the body.
    All braking systems must comply with State and Federal requirements. 
In addition, fast air transmission and release valves must be provided 
on all semitrailer and converter-dolly axles. A brake force limiting 
valve, sometimes called a ``slippery road'' valve, may be provided on 
the steering axle. Anti-sail type mud flaps are recommended.
    The use of single tires on any combination vehicle requiring an 
overweight or oversize permit shall not be allowed on single axles. A 
single axle is defined as one having more than 8 feet between it and the 
nearest axle or group of axles on the vehicle.
    When traveling on a level, smooth paved surface, the trailing units 
must follow in the path of the towing vehicle without shifting or 
swerving more than 3 inches to either side when the towing vehicle is 
moving in a

[[Page 313]]

straight line. Each combination shall maintain a minimum distance of 500 
feet from another commercial vehicle traveling in the same direction on 
the same highway. Loads shall be securely fastened to the transporter 
with material and devices of sufficient strength to prevent the load 
from becoming loose, detached, dangerously displaced, or in any manner a 
hazard to other highway users. The components of the load shall be 
reinforced or bound securely in advance of travel to prevent debris from 
being blown off the unit and endangering the safety of the traveling 
public. Any debris from the special permit vehicle deposited on the 
highway shall be removed by the permittee.
    Bodily injury and property damage insurance is required before a 
special Transportation Permit will be issued.
    In the event any claim arises against the State of Utah, Utah 
Department of Transportation, Utah Highway Patrol, or their employees 
from the operation granted under the permit, the permittee shall agree 
to indemnify and hold harmless each of them from such claim.
    PERMIT: Permits must be purchased. The Utah DOT Motor Carrier Safety 
Division will, on submission of an LCV permit request, assign an 
investigator to perform an audit on the carrier, which must have an 
established safety program that is in compliance with the Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations (49 CFR parts 387-399), the Federal Hazardous 
Materials Regulations (49 CFR parts 171-178), and a ``Satisfactory'' 
safety rating. The request must show a travel plan for the operation of 
the vehicles. Permits are subject to Highway Patrol supervision and 
permitted vehicles may be subject to temporary delays or removed from 
the highways when necessary during hazardous road, weather, or traffic 
conditions. The permit will be cancelled without refund if violated. 
Expiration dates cannot be extended except for reasons beyond the 
control of the permittee, including adverse weather. Permits are void if 
defaced, modified, or obliterated. Lost or destroyed permits cannot be 
duplicated and are not transferable.
    ACCESS: Routes approved by the Utah DOT plus local delivery 
destination travel on two-lane roads.
    ROUTES: For combinations with a cargo-carrying length of 85 feet or 
less, all NN routes. Combinations with a cargo-carrying length over 85 
feet are restricted to the following NN routes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               From                        To
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I-15...............  Arizona.................  Idaho.
I-70...............  Jct. I-15...............  Colorado.
I-80...............  Nevada..................  Wyoming.
I-84...............  Idaho...................  Jct. I-80.
I-215..............  Entire length in the
                      Salt Lake City area.
UT-201.............  I-80 Exit 102 Lake Point  300 West Street, Salt
                      Jct.                      Lake City.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            LEGAL CITATIONS:

Utah Code 27-12-154 and -155; Utah Administrative Code, Section R-909-1.

                               STATE: UTAH

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 3 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 95 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 129,000 pounds

    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Same as the UT-TT2 combination.
    ROUTES: Same as the UT-TT2 combination with a cargo-carrying length 
greater than 85 feet.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the UT-TT2 combination.

                               STATE: UTAH

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 88 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, VEHICLE, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the UT-TT2 combination.
ROUTES:
    1. Truck-trailer combinations hauling bulk gasoline or LP gas: 
cargo-carrying length less than or equal to 78 feet, all NN routes; 
cargo-carrying lengths over 78 feet up to and including 88 feet, same as 
UT-TT2 with cargo-carrying length over 85 feet.
    2. All other truck-trailer combinations: cargo-carrying length less 
than or equal to 70 feet, all NN routes; cargo-carrying lengths over 70 
feet up to and including 78 feet, same as UT-TT2 with cargo-carrying 
length over 85 feet.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the UT-TT2 combination.

                               STATE: UTAH

                   COMBINATION: Truck-trailer-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 88 feet

   OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: Same as the Utah truck-trailer combination.

    ROUTES: Same as the UT-TT2.

[[Page 314]]

    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the UT-TT2 combination.

                               STATE: UTAH

                   COMBINATION: Automobile transporter

              LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 105 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT, DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the Utah truck-trailer 
combination.
    VEHICLE: The cargo-carrying length of automobile transporters that 
carry vehicles on the power unit is the same as the overall length.
    ROUTES: For automobile transporters with a cargo-carrying length of 
92 feet or less, all NN routes. Automobile transporters with a cargo-
carrying length over 92 feet up to and including 105 feet, same as UT-
TT2 with cargo-carrying length over 85 feet.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the UT-TT2 combination.

                            STATE: WASHINGTON

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 68 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 105,500 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: Single axle limit=20,000 pounds; tandem axle limit=34,000 
pounds; gross weight must comply with the Federal Bridge Formula.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: Operating conditions are the same for permitted doubles as 
for STAA of 1982 doubles.
    PERMIT: Combinations with a cargo-carrying length over 60 feet in 
length but not exceeding 68 feet must obtain an annual overlength permit 
to operate. A fee is charged.
    ACCESS: All State routes except SR 410 and SR 123 in or adjacent to 
Mt. Rainier National Park. In addition, restrictions may be imposed by 
local governments having maintenance responsibilities for local 
highways.
    ROUTES: All NN routes except SR 410 and SR 123 in the vicinity of 
Mt. Rainier National Park.
    LEGAL CITATIONS:
RCW 46.37, 46.44.030, .037(3), .041, and .0941.

                            STATE: WASHINGTON

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 68 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the WA-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: Overall length limited to 75 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the WA-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the WA-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: WYOMING

          COMBINATION: Truck tractor and 2 trailing units--LCV

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 81 feet

             MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE GROSS WEIGHT: 117,000 pounds

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: No single axle shall carry a load in excess of 20,000 
pounds. No tandem axle shall carry a load in excess of 36,000 pounds. No 
triple axle, consisting of three consecutive load-bearing axles that 
articulate from an attachment to the vehicle including a connecting 
mechanism to equalize the load between axles having a spacing between 
the first and third axle of at least 96 inches and not more than 108 
inches, shall carry a load in excess of 42,500 pounds. No vehicles 
operated on the Interstate System shall exceed the maximum weight 
allowed by application of Federal Bridge Weight Formula B.
    No wheel shall carry a load in excess of 10,000 pounds. No tire on a 
steering axle shall carry a load in excess of 750 pounds per inch of 
tire width and no other tire on a vehicle shall carry a load in excess 
of 600 pounds per inch of tire width. ``Tire width'' means the width 
stamped on the tire by the manufacturer.
    Dummy axles may not be considered in the determination of allowable 
weights.
    DRIVER: The driver must have a commercial driver's license with the 
appropriate endorsement.
    VEHICLE: The lead semitrailer can be up to 48 feet long with the 
trailing unit up to 40 feet long. In a truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer 
combination, the heavier towed vehicle shall be directly behind the 
truck-tractor and the lighter towed vehicle shall be last if the weight 
difference between consecutive towed vehicles exceeds 5,000 pounds.

[[Page 315]]

    PERMITS: No permits required.
    ACCESS: Unlimited access off the NN to terminals.
    ROUTES: All NN routes.
    LEGAL CITATIONS:
WS 31-5-1001, -1002, -1004, -1008, and WS 31-17-1-1 through 31-17-117.

                             STATE: WYOMING

                       COMBINATION: Truck-trailer

               LENGTH OF THE CARGO-CARRYING UNITS: 78 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: No single vehicle shall exceed 60 feet in length within an 
overall limit of 85 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS:
WS 31-5-1002

                             STATE: WYOMING

                COMBINATION: Automobile/Boat Transporter

                 LENGTH OF CARGO CARRYING UNITS: 85 feet

                         OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: The cargo-carrying length of automobile transporters that 
carry vehicles on the power unit is the same as the overall length. No 
single vehicle shall exceed 60 feet in length within an overall limit of 
85 feet.
    ROUTES: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.

                             STATE: WYOMING

                  COMBINATION: Saddlemount Combination

                 LENGTH OF CARGO CARRYING UNITS: 85 feet

    WEIGHT: This combination must operate in compliance with State laws 
and regulations. Because it is not an LCV, it is not subject to the 
ISTEA freeze as it applies to maximum weight.
    DRIVER, PERMIT, and ACCESS: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.
    VEHICLE: The cargo-carrying length of saddlemount combinations that 
carry vehicles on the power unit is the same as the overall length. No 
single vehicle shall exceed 60 feet in length within an overall limit of 
85 feet.
    No more than three saddlemounts may be used in any combination, 
except additional vehicles may be transported when safely loaded upon 
the frame of a vehicle in a properly assembled saddlemount combination.
    Towed vehicles in a triple saddlemount combination shall have brakes 
acting on all wheels which are in contact with the roadway.
    All applicable State and Federal rules on coupling devices shall be 
observed and complied with.
    ROUTES: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.
    LEGAL CITATIONS: Same as the WY-TT2 combination.

[59 FR 30422, June 13, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 15215, Mar. 22, 1995; 
60 FR 16571, Mar. 31, 1995; 62 FR 10181, Mar. 5, 1997; 63 FR 70653, Dec. 
22, 1998; 67 FR 15110, Mar. 29, 2002]

 Appendix D to Part 658--Devices That Are Excluded From Measurement of 
            the Length or Width of a Commercial Motor Vehicle

    The following devices are excluded from measurement of the length or 
width of a commercial motor vehicle, as long as they do not carry 
property and do not exceed the dimensional limitations included in Sec. 
658.16. This list is not exhaustive.
    1. All devices at the front of a semitrailer or trailer including, 
but not limited to, the following:
    (a) A device at the front of a trailer chassis to secure containers 
and prevent movement in transit;
    (b) A front coupler device on a semitrailer or trailer used in road 
and rail intermodal operations;
    (c) Aerodynamic devices, air deflector;
    (d) Air compressor;
    (e) Certificate holder (manifest box);
    (f) Door vent hardware;
    (g) Electrical connector;
    (h) Gladhand;
    (i) Handhold;
    (j) Hazardous materials placards and holders;
    (k) Heater;
    (l) Ladder;
    (m) Non-load carrying tie-down devices on automobile transporters;
    (n) Pickup plate lip;
    (o) Pump offline on tank trailer;
    (p) Refrigeration unit;
    (q) Removable bulkhead;

[[Page 316]]

    (r) Removable stakes;
    (s) Stabilizing jack (anti-nosedive device);
    (t) Stake pockets;
    (u) Step;
    (v) Tarp basket;
    (w) Tire carrier; and
    (x) Uppercoupler.
    2. Devices excluded from length measurement at the rear of a 
semitrailer or trailer including, but not limited to, the following:
    (a) Handhold;
    (b) Hazardous materials placards and holders;
    (c) Ladder;
    (d) Pintle hook;
    (e) Removable stakes;
    (f) Splash and spray suppression device;
    (g) Stake pockets; and
    (h) Step.
    3. Devices excluded from width determination, not to exceed 3 inches 
from the side of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the 
following:
    (a) Corner caps;
    (b) Hazardous materials placards and holders;
    (c) Lift pads for trailer on flatcar (piggyback) operation;
    (d) Rain gutters;
    (e) Rear and side door hinges and their protective hardware;
    (f) Side marker lamps;
    (g) Structural reinforcement for side doors or intermodal operation 
(limited to 1 inch from the side within the 3 inch maximum extension);
    (h) Tarping systems for open-top trailers;
    (i) Movable devices to enclose the cargo area of flatbed 
semitrailers or trailers, usually called tarping systems, where no 
component part of the system extends more than 3 inches from the sides 
or back of the vehicle when the vehicle is in operation. This exclusion 
applies to all component parts of tarping systems, including the 
transverse structure at the front of the vehicle to which the sliding 
walls and roof of the tarp mechanism are attached, provided the 
structure is not also intended or designed to comply with 49 CFR 
393.106, which requires a headerboard strong enough to prevent cargo 
from penetrating or crushing the cab; the transverse structure may be up 
to 108 inches wide if properly centered so that neither side extends 
more than 3 inches beyond the structural edge of the vehicle. Also 
excluded from measurement are side rails running the length of the 
vehicle and rear doors, provided the only function of the latter, like 
that of the transverse structure at the front of the vehicle, is to seal 
the cargo area and anchor the sliding walls and roof. On the other hand, 
a headerboard designed to comply with 49 CFR 393.106 is load bearing and 
thus limited to 102 inches in width. However, the ``wings'' designed to 
close the gap between such a headerboard and the movable walls and roof 
of a tarping system are width exclusive, provided they are add-on pieces 
designed to bear only the load of the tarping system itself and are not 
integral parts of the load-bearing headerboard structure;
    (j) Tie-down assembly on platform trailers;
    (k) Wall variation from true flat; and
    (l) Weevil pins and sockets on low-bed trailers.

[67 FR 15110, Mar. 29, 2002]


<R03>
PART 660_SPECIAL PROGRAMS (DIRECT FEDERAL)--Table of Contents




                        Subpart A_Forest Highways

Sec.
660.101 Purpose.
660.103 Definitions.
660.105 Planning and route designation.
660.107 Allocations.
660.109 Program development.
660.111 Agreements.
660.112 Project development.
660.113 Construction.
660.115 Maintenance.
660.117 Funding, records and accounting.

Subparts B-D [Reserved]

                     Subpart E_Defense Access Roads

660.501 Purpose.
660.503 Objectives.
660.505 Scope.
660.507 Definitions.
660.509 General principles.
660.511 Eligibility.
660.513 Standards.
660.515 Project administration.
660.517 Maneuver area roads.
660.519 Missile installations and facilities.


<R04>
                        Subpart A_Forest Highways

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 1608-1610; 23 U.S.C. 101, 202, 204, and 315; 49 
CFR 1.48.

    Source: 59 FR 30300, June 13, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 660.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement the Forest Highway (FH) 
Program which enhances local, regional, and national benefits of FHs 
funded under the public lands highway category of the coordinated 
Federal Lands Highway Program. As provided in 23 U.S.C. 202, 203, and 
204, the program, developed in cooperation with State and local 
agencies, provides safe and adequate transportation access to and 
through National Forest System (NFS)

[[Page 317]]

lands for visitors, recreationists, resource users, and others which is 
not met by other transportation programs. Forest highways assist rural 
and community economic development and promote tourism and travel.


<R05>
Sec. 660.103  Definitions.

    In addition to the definitions in 23 U.S.C. 101(a), the following 
apply to this subpart:
    Cooperator means a non-Federal public authority which has 
jurisdiction and maintenance responsibility for a FH.
    Forest highway means a forest road under the jurisdiction of, and 
maintained by, a public authority and open to public travel.
    Forest road means a road wholly or partly within, or adjacent to, 
and serving the NFS and which is necessary for the protection, 
administration, and utilization of the NFS and the use and development 
of its resources.
    Jurisdiction means the legal right or authority to control, operate, 
regulate use of, maintain, or cause to be maintained, a transportation 
facility, through ownership or delegated authority. The authority to 
construct or maintain such a facility may be derived from fee title, 
easement, written authorization, or permit from a Federal agency, or 
some similar method.
    Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) means that organization 
designated as the forum for cooperative transportation decisionmaking 
pursuant to the provisions of part 450 of this title.
    Metropolitan Transportation Plan means the official intermodal 
transportation plan that is developed and adopted through the 
metropolitan transportation planning process for the metropolitan 
planning area.
    National Forest System means lands and facilities administered by 
the Forest Service (FS), U.S. Department of Agriculture, as set forth in 
the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resource Planning Act of 1974, as 
amended (16 U.S.C. 1601 note, 1600-1614).
    Open to public travel means except during scheduled periods, extreme 
weather conditions, or emergencies, open to the general public for use 
with a standard passenger auto, without restrictive gates or prohibitive 
signs or regulations, other than for general traffic control or 
restrictions based on size, weight, or class of registration.
    Public authority means a Federal, State, county, town, or township, 
Indian tribe, municipal or other local government or instrumentality 
with authority to finance, build, operate, or maintain toll or toll-free 
facilities.
    Public lands highway means: (1) A forest road under the jurisdiction 
of and maintained by a public authority and open to public travel or (2) 
any highway through unappropriated or unreserved public lands, 
nontaxable Indian lands, or other Federal reservations under the 
jurisdiction of and maintained by a public authority and open to public 
travel.
    Public road means any road or street under the jurisdiction of and 
maintained by a public authority and open to public travel.
    Renewable resources means those elements within the scope of 
responsibilities and authorities of the FS as defined in the Forest and 
Rangeland Renewable Resource Planning Act of August 17, 1974 (88 Stat. 
476) as amended by the National Forest Management Act of October 22, 
1976 (90 Stat. 2949; 16 U.S.C. 1600-1614) such as recreation, 
wilderness, wildlife and fish, range, timber, land, water, and human and 
community development.
    Resources means those renewable resources defined above, plus other 
nonrenewable resources such as minerals, oil, and gas which are included 
in the FS's planning and land management processes.
    Statewide transportation plan means the official transportation plan 
that is: (1) Intermodal in scope, including bicycle and pedestrian 
features, (2) addresses at least a 20-year planning horizon, and (3) 
covers the entire State pursuant to the provisions of part 450 of this 
title.


<R05>
Sec. 660.105  Planning and route designation.

    (a) The FS will provide resource planning and related transportation 
information to the appropriate MPO and/or State Highway Agency (SHA) for 
use in developing metropolitan and statewide transportation plans 
pursuant to the

[[Page 318]]

provisions of part 450 of this title. Cooperators shall provide various 
planning (23 U.S.C. 134 and 135) information to the Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) for coordination with the FS.
    (b) The management systems required under 23 U.S.C. 303 shall 
fulfill the requirement in 23 U.S.C. 204(a) regarding the establishment 
and implementation of pavement, bridge, and safety management systems 
for FHs. The results of bridge management systems and safety management 
systems on all FHs and results of pavement management systems for FHs on 
Federal-aid highways are to be provided by the SHAs for consideration in 
the development of programs under Sec. 660.109 of this part. The FHWA 
will provide appropriate pavement management results for FHs which are 
not Federal-aid highways.
    (c) The FHWA, in consultation with the FS, the SHA, and other 
cooperators where appropriate, will designate FHs.
    (1) The SHA and the FS will nominate forest roads for FH 
designation.
    (2) The SHA will represent the interests of all cooperators. All 
other agencies shall send their proposals for FHs to the SHA.
    (d) A FH will meet the following criteria:
    (1) Generally, it is under the jurisdiction of a public authority 
and open to public travel, or a cooperator has agreed, in writing, to 
assume jurisdiction of the facility and to keep the road open to public 
travel once improvements are made.
    (2) It provides a connection between adequate and safe public roads 
and the resources of the NFS which are essential to the local, regional, 
or national economy, and/or the communities, shipping points, or markets 
which depend upon those resources.
    (3) It serves:
    (i) Traffic of which a preponderance is generated by use of the NFS 
and its resources; or
    (ii) NFS-generated traffic volumes that have a substantial impact on 
roadway design and construction; or
    (iii) Other local needs such as schools, mail delivery, commercial 
supply, and access to private property within the NFS.


<R05>
Sec. 660.107  Allocations.

    On October 1 of each fiscal year, the FHWA will allocate 66 percent 
of Public Lands Highway funds, by FS Region, for FHs using values based 
on relative transportation needs of the NFS, after deducting such sums 
as deemed necessary for the administrative requirements of the FHWA and 
the FS; the necessary costs of FH planning studies; and the FH share of 
costs for approved Federal Lands Coordinated Technology Implementation 
Program studies.


<R05>
Sec. 660.109  Program development.

    (a) The FHWA will arrange and conduct a conference with the FS and 
the SHA to jointly select the projects which will be included in the 
programs for the current fiscal year and at least the next 4 years. 
Projects included in each year's program will be selected considering 
the following criteria:
    (1) The development, utilization, protection, and administration of 
the NFS and its resources;
    (2) The enhancement of economic development at the local, regional, 
and national level, including tourism and recreational travel;
    (3) The continuity of the transportation network serving the NFS and 
its dependent communities;
    (4) The mobility of the users of the transportation network and the 
goods and services provided;
    (5) The improvement of the transportation network for economy of 
operation and maintenance and the safety of its users;
    (6) The protection and enhancement of the rural environment 
associated with the NFS and its resources; and
    (7) The results for FHs from the pavement, bridge, and safety 
management systems.
    (b) The recommended program will be prepared and approved by the 
FHWA with concurrence by the FS and the SHA. Following approval, the SHA 
shall advise any other cooperators in the State of the projects included 
in the final program and shall include the approved program in the 
State's process for development of the Statewide Transportation 
Improvement Program. For projects located in metropolitan areas, the 
FHWA and the SHA will

[[Page 319]]

work with the MPO to incorporate the approved program into the MPO's 
Transportation Improvement Program.


<R05>
Sec. 660.111  Agreements.

    (a) A statewide FH agreement shall be executed among the FHWA, the 
FS, and each SHA. This agreement shall set forth the responsibilities of 
each party, including that of adherence to the applicable provisions of 
Federal and State statutes and regulations.
    (b) The design and construction of FH projects will be administered 
by the FHWA unless otherwise provided for in an agreement approved under 
this subpart.
    (c) A project agreement shall be entered into between the FHWA and 
the cooperator involved under one or more of the following conditions:
    (1) A cooperator's funds are to be made available for the project or 
any portion of the project;
    (2) Federal funds are to be made available to a cooperator for any 
work;
    (3) Special circumstances exist which make a project agreement 
necessary for payment purposes or to clarify any aspect of the project; 
or
    (4) It is necessary to document jurisdiction and maintenance 
responsibility.


<R05>
Sec. 660.112  Project development.

    (a) Projects to be administered by the FHWA or the FS will be 
developed in accordance with FHWA procedures for the Federal Lands 
Highway Program. Projects to be administered by a cooperator shall be 
developed in accordance with Federal-aid procedures and procedures 
documented in the statewide agreement.
    (b) The FH projects shall be designed in accordance with part 625 of 
this chapter or those criteria specifically approved by the FHWA for a 
particular project.


<R05>
Sec. 660.113  Construction.

    (a) No construction shall be undertaken on any FH project until 
plans, specifications, and estimates have been concurred in by the 
cooperator(s) and the FS, and approved in accordance with procedures 
contained in the statewide FH agreement.
    (b) The construction of FHs will be performed by the contract 
method, unless construction by the FHWA, the FS, or a cooperator on its 
own account is warranted under 23 U.S.C. 204(e).
    (c) Prior to final construction acceptance by the contracting 
authority, the project shall be inspected by the cooperator, the FS, and 
the FHWA to identify and resolve any mutual concerns.


<R05>
Sec. 660.115  Maintenance.

    The cooperator having jurisdiction over a FH shall, upon acceptance 
of the project in accordance with Sec. 660.113(c), assume operation 
responsibilities and maintain, or cause to be maintained, any project 
constructed under this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 660.117  Funding, records and accounting.

    (a) The Federal share of funding for eligible FH projects may be any 
amount up to and including 100 percent. A cooperator may participate in 
the cost of project development and construction, but participation 
shall not be required.
    (b) Funds for FHs may be used for:
    (1) Planning;
    (2) Federal Lands Highway research;
    (3) Preliminary and construction engineering; and
    (4) Construction.
    (c) Funds for FHs may be made available for the following 
transportation-related improvement purposes which are generally part of 
a transportation construction project:
    (1) Transportation planning for tourism and recreational travel;
    (2) Adjacent vehicular parking areas;
    (3) Interpretive signage;
    (4) Acquisition of necessary scenic easements and scenic or historic 
sites;
    (5) Provisions for pedestrians and bicycles;
    (6) Construction and reconstruction of roadside rest areas including 
sanitary and water facilities; and
    (7) Other appropriate public road facilities as approved by the 
FHWA.
    (d) Use of FH funds for right-of-way acquisition shall be subject to 
specific approval by the FHWA.

[[Page 320]]

    (e) Cooperators which administer construction of FH projects shall 
maintain their FH records according to 49 CFR part 18.
    (f) Funds provided to the FHWA by a cooperator should be received in 
advance of construction procurement unless otherwise specified in a 
project agreement.

Subparts B-D [Reserved]


<R04>
                     Subpart E_Defense Access Roads

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 210, 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 49 FR 21924, May 24, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 660.501  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe policies and 
procedures governing evaluations of defense access road needs, and 
administration of projects financed under the defense access roads and 
other defense related special highway programs.


<R05>
Sec. 660.503  Objectives.

    The defense access roads program provides a means by which the 
Federal Government may pay its fair share of the cost of:
    (a) Highway improvements needed for adequate highway service to 
defense and defense related installations;
    (b) New highways to replace those which must be closed to permit 
establishment or expansion of defense installations;
    (c) Repair of damage to highways caused by major military maneuvers;
    (d) Repair of damages due to the activities of contractors engaged 
in the construction of missile sites; and
    (e) Missile routes to ensure their continued ability to support the 
missile transporter-erector (TE) vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 660.505  Scope.

    This regulation focuses on procedures as they apply to the defense 
access roads and other special highway programs of the Department of 
Defense (DOD).


<R05>
Sec. 660.507  Definitions.

    (a) Defense installation. A military reservation or installation, or 
defense related industry or source of raw materials.
    (b) Military Traffic Management Command (MTMC). The military 
transportation agency with responsibilities assigned by the Secretary of 
Defense for maintaining liaison with the Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA) and other agencies for the integration of defense needs into the 
Nation's highway program.
    (c) Certification. The statement to the Secretary of Transportation 
by the Secretary of Defense (or such other official as the President may 
designate) that certain roads are important to the national defense.
    (d) Access road. An existing or proposed public highway which is 
needed to provide essential highway transportation services to a defense 
installation. (This definition may include public highways through 
military installations only when right-of-way for such roads is 
dedicated to public use and the roads are maintained by civil 
authority.)
    (e) Replacement road. A public road constructed to replace one 
closed by establishment of a new, or the expansion of an old, defense 
installation.
    (f) Maneuver area road. A public road in an area delineated by 
official orders for field maneuvers or exercises of military forces.
    (g) Transporter-erector route. A public road specifically designated 
for use by the TE vehicle for access to missile sites.


<R05>
Sec. 660.509  General principles.

    (a) State and local highway agencies are expected to assume the same 
responsibility for developing and maintaining adequate highways to 
permanent defense installations as they do for highways serving private 
industrial establishments or any other permanent traffic generators. The 
Federal Government expects that highway improvements in the vicinity of 
defense installations will receive due priority consideration and 
treatment as State and local agencies develop their programs of 
improvement. The FHWA will provide assistance, as requested by MTMC,

[[Page 321]]

to ascertain State program plans for improvements to roads serving as 
access to defense installations. Roads which serve permanent defense 
installations and which qualify under established critieria as Federal-
aid routes should be included in the appropriate Federal-aid system.
    (b) It is recognized that problems may arise in connection with the 
establishment, expansion, or operation of defense installations which 
create an unanticipated impact upon the long-range requirements for the 
development of highways in the vicinity. These problems can be resolved 
equitably only by Federal assistance from other than normal Federal-aid 
highway programs for part or all of the cost of highway improvements 
necessary for the functioning of the installation.


<R05>
Sec. 660.511  Eligibility.

    (a) The MTMC has the responsibility for determining the eligibility 
of proposed improvements for financing with defense access roads funds. 
The evaluation report will be furnished to MTMC for its use in making 
the determination of eligibility and certification of importance to the 
national defense. The criteria upon which MTMC will base its 
determination of eligibility are included in the Federal-Aid Highway 
Program Manual, Volume 6, Chapter 9, Section 5, Attachment 2. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ This document is available for inspection and copying from the 
FHWA headquarters and field offices as prescribed by 49 CFR part 7, 
appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) If the project is determined to be eligible for financing either 
in whole or in part with defense access road funds, MTMC will certify 
the project as important to the national defense and will authorize 
expenditure of defense access road funds. The Commander, MTMC, is the 
only representative of the DOD officially authorized to make the 
certification required by section 210, title 23, U.S.C., in behalf of 
the Secretary of Defense.


<R05>
Sec. 660.513  Standards.

    (a) Access roads to permanent defense installations and all 
replacement roads shall be designed to conform to the same standards as 
the agency having jurisdiction is currently using for other comparable 
highways under similar conditions in the area. In general, where the 
agency having jurisdiction does not have established standards, the 
design shall conform to American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards. Should local agencies 
desire higher standards than are currently being used for other 
comparable highways under similar conditions in the area, they shall 
finance the increases in cost.
    (b) Access roads to temporary military establishments or for service 
to workers temporarily engaged in construction of defense installations 
should be designed to the minimum standards necessary to provide service 
for a limited period without intolerable congestion and hazard. As a 
guide, widening to more than two lanes generally will not be undertaken 
to accommodate anticipated one-way, peak-hour traffic of less than 1,200 
vehicles per hour and resurfacing or strengthening of existing pavements 
will be held to the minimum type having the structural integrity to 
carry traffic for the short period of anticipated use.


<R05>
Sec. 660.515  Project administration.

    (a) Determination of the agency best able to accomplish the 
location, design, and construction of the projects covered by this 
regulation will be made by the FHWA Division Administrator after 
consultation with the State and/or local highway agency within whose 
jurisdiction the highway lies. When an agency other than the State or 
local highway agency is selected to administer the project, the Division 
Administrator will be responsible during the life of the project for any 
necessary coordination between the selected agency and the State or 
local highway agency.
    (b) Defense access road projects under the supervision of a State or 
local highway agency, whether on or off the Federal-aid system, shall be 
administered in accordance with Federal-aid procedures, as modified 
specifically herein or as limited by the delegations of authority to 
Regional and Division Administrators, unless approval of other 
procedures has been obtained

[[Page 322]]

from Washington Headquarters Office of Direct Federal Programs (HDF-1).
    (c) The Division Administrator shall have a firm commitment from the 
State or local highway agency, within whose jurisdiction the access road 
lies, that it will accept the responsibility for maintenance of the 
completed facility before authorization of acquisition of right-of-way 
or construction of a project.
    (d) When defense access road funds are available for a pro-rata 
portion of the total project cost, the remaining portion of the project 
may be funded as a Federal-aid project if on a Federal-aid route. 
Defense access road funds shall not be substituted for the State's 
matching share of the Federal-aid portion of a project.


<R05>
Sec. 660.517  Maneuver area roads.

    (a) Claims by a highway agency for costs incurred to restore, to 
their former condition, roads damaged by maneuvers involving a military 
force at least equal in strength to a ground division or an air wing 
will be paid from funds appropriated for the maneuver and transferred to 
FHWA by the DOD agency. Defense access road funds may be used to 
reimburse the highway authority pending transfer of funds by the DOD 
agency.
    (b) Costs incurred by State or local highway authorities while 
conducting a pre- or post-condition survey may be included in the claim 
to DOD for direct settlement or in the damage repair project as 
appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 660.519  Missile installations and facilities.

    Should damage occur to public highways as a result of construction 
activities, the contractor would normally be held responsible for 
restoring the damages. However, should the contractor deny 
responsibility on the basis of contract terms, restoration is provided 
for under 23 U.S.C. 210(h).
    (a) Restoration under the contract. (1) The highway agency having 
jurisdiction over the road shall take appropriate actions, such as load 
and speed restrictions, to protect the highway. When extensive damage is 
anticipated and the contractor under the terms of the contract is 
responsible, it may be necessary to require a performance bond to assure 
restoration.
    (2) If the contractor does not properly maintain the roads when 
requested in writing, the highway agency having jurisdiction over the 
road shall perform extraordinary maintenance as necessary to keep the 
roads serviceable and maintain adequate supporting records of the work 
performed. Claims shall be presented to the contractor for this 
extraordinary maintenance and any other work required to restore the 
roads. If the contractor denies responsibility on the basis of the 
contract terms, the claim with the required supporting documentation 
shall be presented to the contracting officer for disposition and 
arrangement for reimbursement.
    (b) Restoration under 23 U.S.C. 210(h). (1) To implement 23 U.S.C. 
210(h), DOD must make the determination that a contractor for a missile 
installation or facility did not include in the bid the cost of 
repairing damage caused to public highways by the operation of the 
contractor's vehicles and equipment. The FHWA must then make the 
determination that the State highway agency is, or has been, unable to 
prevent such damage by restrictions upon the use of the highways without 
interference with, or delay in, the completion of the contract. If these 
determinations are made, the Division Administrator will be authorized 
by the Washington Headquarters to reimburse the highway agency for the 
cost of the work necessary to keep the roads in a serviceable condition.
    (2) Upon receipt of a damage claim, division office representatives 
accompanied by representatives of the agencies that made the original 
condition survey will inspect the roads on which damage is claimed. The 
Division Administrator shall then prepare an estimate of the cost of 
restoring the roads to original condition as well as any documented cost 
for extraordinary maintenance for which reimbursement has not been 
received. No allowance for upgrading the roads shall be included.

[[Page 323]]


<R03>
PART 661_INDIAN RESERVATION ROAD BRIDGE PROGRAM--Table of Contents




Sec.
661.1 What is the purpose of this regulation?
661.3 Who must comply with this regulation?
661.5 What definitions apply to this regulation?
661.7 What is the Indian Reservation Road Bridge Program (IRRBP)?
661.9 How will the bridge project be funded/programmed once eligibility 
          has been determined?
661.11 After a bridge project has been completed what happens with the 
          excess or surplus funding?
661.13 What restrictions are there on the use of the IRRBP funds?
661.15 What is the total funding available for the IRR Bridge Program?
661.17 When will these funds become available?
661.19 When does an eligible project receive funding?
661.21 How long will these funds be available?
661.23 What can these IRR bridge funds be used for?
661.25 What are the criteria for bridge eligibility?
661.27 When is a bridge eligible for replacement?
661.29 When is a bridge eligible for rehabilitation?
661.31 How does ownership impact project selection?
661.33 Do IRRBP projects have to be on a transportation improvement 
          program (TIP)?
661.35 What percent of the funding in any fiscal year is available for 
          use on BIA owned IRR bridges and non-BIA owned IRR bridges?
661.37 What percent of a specific project's construction costs is 
          covered under this program?
661.39 When are IRR bridge projects eligible for funding?
661.41 What does a complete application package consist of?
661.43 How are the FY 1998 projects to be treated?
661.45 How is a list of deficient bridges to be generated?
661.47 In the event of project cost over runs, how would they be funded?
661.49 Could regular IRR funds be used to fund a bridge project?
661.51 Could bridge maintenance be performed with these funds?

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 120(j) and (k), 202, and 315; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 64 FR 38572, July 19, 1999, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 661.1  What is the purpose of this regulation?

    The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe policies for project 
selection and fund allocation procedures for administering the Indian 
Reservation Road Bridge Program (IRRBP).


<R05>
Sec. 661.3  Who must comply with this regulation?

    Public authorities must comply to participate in the IRRBP by 
preparing plans, specification and estimates (PS&E) for deficient Indian 
Reservation Road (IRR) bridges and make application for construction 
funds for the replacement or rehabilitation of these bridges.


<R05>
Sec. 661.5  What definitions apply to this regulation?

    The following definitions apply to this regulation:
    Construction engineering (CE) is the supervision and inspection of 
construction activities; additional staking functions considered 
necessary for effective control of the construction operations; testing 
materials incorporated into construction; checking shop drawings; and 
measurements needed for the preparation of pay estimates.
    Functional obsolescence (FO) is the state or process of being one in 
which the deck geometry, load carrying capacity (comparison of the 
original design load to the State legal load), clearance, or approach 
roadway alignment no longer meets the usual criteria for the system of 
which it is an integral part.
    Indian reservation road means a public road that is located within 
or provides access to an Indian reservation or Indian trust land or 
restricted Indian land which is not subject to fee title alienation 
without the approval of the Federal Government, or Indian and Alaska 
Native villages, groups, or communities in which Indians and Alaskan 
Natives reside, whom the Secretary of the Interior has determined are 
eligible for services generally available to Indians under Federal laws 
specifically applicable to Indians.
    Indian reservation road bridge means a structure located on an 
Indian reservation road (IRR), including supports,

[[Page 324]]

erected over a depression or an obstruction, such as water, a highway, 
or a railway, and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or 
other moving loads, and having an opening measured along the center of 
the roadway of more than 20 feet between undercopings of abutments or 
spring lines of arches, or extreme ends of the openings for multiple 
boxes; it may also include multiple pipes, where the clear distance 
between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening.
    Public authority means a Federal, State, county, town, or township, 
Indian tribe, municipal or other local government or instrumentality 
with authority to finance, build, operate, or maintain toll or toll-free 
facilities.
    Public road means any road or street under the jurisdiction of and 
maintained by a public authority and open to public travel.
    Structural deficient (SD) bridge means a bridge that has been 
restricted to light vehicles only, is closed or requires immediate 
rehabilitation to remain open.
    Sufficiency rating (SR) means the numerical rating of a bridge based 
on its structural adequacy and safety, essentiality for public use, and 
its serviceability and functional obsolescence.


<R05>
Sec. 661.7  What is the Indian Reservation Road Bridge Program (IRRBP)?

    Section 202(d)(4) of title 23, U.S.C., establishes a nationwide 
priority program for improving deficient Indian reservation road (IRR) 
bridges and reserves not less than $13 million of IRR funds per year to 
replace and rehabilitate bridges that are in poor condition. This 
program which addresses the replacement of deficient IRR bridges is 
referred to as the IRRBP.


<R05>
Sec. 661.9  How will the bridge project be funded/programmed once 
eligibility has been determined?

    (a) Funding and/or programming of construction projects for IRR 
bridges would be based on the order of receipt of a complete application 
package, i.e., eligibility requirements met, PS&E package is complete, 
etc. All application packages would be placed in a queue upon submission 
to the BIADOT and date stamped. This submission queue would form the 
basis for prioritization during any fiscal year (FY). After the queue 
for the FY is filled up, that is, the IRRBP funding is used up, a queue 
for the following FY would be established.
    (b) In those cases where application packages have arrived at the 
same time, application packages would be ranked and prioritized based on 
the following criteria:
    (1) Bridge sufficiency rating (SR);
    (2) Bridge status with structurally deficient (SD) having precedence 
over functionally obsolete (FO);
    (3) Bridges on school bus routes;
    (4) Detour length;
    (5) Average daily traffic; and
    (6) Truck average daily traffic.


<R05>
Sec. 661.11  After a bridge project has been completed what happens 
with the excess or surplus funding?

    Since the funding is project specific, once a bridge construction 
project has been completed under this program, any excess or surplus 
funding would be returned to BIADOT/FHWA for use on additional approved 
deficient IRR bridge projects.


<R05>
Sec. 661.13  What restrictions are there on the use of the IRRBP funds?

    The IRRBP funds can only be used for construction and construction 
engineering (CE) and may not be used for project development.


<R05>
Sec. 661.15  What is the total funding available for the IRR Bridge Program?

    The statute provides a total program funding of not less than $13 
million for each fiscal year.


<R05>
Sec. 661.17  When will these funds become available?

    These funds become available on October 1 of each fiscal year.


<R05>
Sec. 661.19  When does an eligible project receive funding?

    The statute provides that these funds are provided after the 
Secretary of Transportation (FHWA) approves a completed PS&E.

[[Page 325]]


<R05>
Sec. 661.21  How long will these funds be available?

    The statute provides that the funds for each fiscal year are 
available for the year authorized plus three years (a total of four 
years).


<R05>
Sec. 661.23  What can these IRR bridge funds be used for?

    The statute provides that these funds can be used to replace, 
rehabilitate, seismically retrofit, paint, apply calcium magnesium 
acetate to, apply sodium acetate/formate or other environmentally 
acceptable, minimally corrosive anti-icing and deicing compositions, or 
install scour countermeasures for deficient IRR bridges, including 
multiple pipe culverts.


<R05>
Sec. 661.25  What are the criteria for bridge eligibility?

    (a) Bridge eligibility requires the following:
    (1) Have an opening of 20 feet or more;
    (2) Be on an IRR;
    (3) Be unsafe because of structural deficiencies, physical 
deterioration or functional obsolescence; and
    (4) Be recorded in the national bridge inventory (NBI) maintained by 
the FHWA.
    (b) Bridges that were constructed, rehabilitated or replaced in the 
last 10 years, will be eligible only for seismic retrofit or 
installation of scour countermeasures.


<R05>
Sec. 661.27  When is a bridge eligible for replacement?

    To be eligible for replacement, the bridge must be considered 
deficient for reasons of structural deficiency or functional 
obsolescence. Also, the bridge must have a sufficiency rating of less 
than 50 to be eligible for replacement.


<R05>
Sec. 661.29  When is a bridge eligible for rehabilitation?

    To be eligible for rehabilitation, the bridge must be considered 
deficient for reasons of structural deficiency or functional 
obsolescence. Also, the bridge must have a sufficiency rating of less 
than or equal to 80 to be eligible for rehabilitation. A bridge would be 
eligible for replacement if the total life cycle cost for bridge 
rehabilitation exceeds the costs to replace.


<R05>
Sec. 661.31  How does ownership impact project selection?

    Since the Federal government has both a trust responsibility and 
owns the BIA bridges on Indian reservations, primary consideration would 
be given to funding construction projects for deficient BIA owned IRR 
bridges. We emphasize that consideration could also be given to the 
funding of construction projects for the deficient non-BIA, IRR bridges, 
however; these projects must be supported by a tribal resolution.


<R05>
Sec. 661.33  Do IRRBP projects have to be on a transportation improvement 
program (TIP)?

    Yes. All IRRBP projects have to be listed on an approved TIP. Under 
23 U.S.C. 204(j), IRR bridges must appear on the BIA's IRRBP TIP and be 
forwarded to the State.


<R05>
Sec. 661.35  What percent of the funding in any fiscal year is available 
for use on BIA owned IRR bridges and non-BIA owned IRR bridges?

    Up to 80 percent ($10.4 million) of funding in any fiscal year would 
be available for use on BIA owned IRR bridges. This would leave 20 
percent ($2.6 million) of funding in any fiscal year that would be 
available for use on non-BIA owned IRR bridges. A smaller percentage of 
available funds has been set aside for non-BIA IRR bridges, since States 
and counties have access to Federal-aid and other funding to replace and 
rehabilitate their bridges and that 23 U.S.C. 204(c) requires that IRR 
funds be supplemental to and not in lieu of other funds apportioned to 
the State. The program policy will be to maximize the number of IRR 
bridges participating in the IRRBP in a given fiscal year regardless of 
ownership.


<R05>
Sec. 661.37  What percent of a specific project's construction costs is 
covered under this program?

    The following funding provisions apply in administration of the 
IRRBP:
    (a) 100 percent IRRBP funding would be provided for a BIA owned IRR 
bridge;
    (b) Up to 80 percent of the IRRBP funding would be provided for a 
State,

[[Page 326]]

county, or locally owned non-BIA IRR bridge;
    (c) States, counties, local and tribal governments would be required 
to provide at least 20 percent of the funds for non-BIA owned IRR 
bridges;
    (d) The IRRBP funding ceiling for any single non-BIA owned IRR 
bridge project would be $1.5 million.


<R05>
Sec. 661.39  When are IRR bridge projects eligible for funding?

    The statute provides that IRR funds to carry out IRRBP projects 
shall be made available only on approval of the PS&E by the Secretary 
(FHWA). Approval consists of having completed and approved bridge 
design, specifications and estimates. The project must be ready for 
construction, right of way must have been acquired, and the project 
contract must be awarded within 120 calendar days of funding. A copy of 
the FHWA or BIADOT PS&E approval letter, certification checklist and 
IRRBP TIP must be forwarded by the area office to the BIADOT/FLH for 
review and acceptance. For non-BIA IRR bridges, the application package 
must also include a tribal resolution supporting the project. Submittal 
of an incomplete application package would form the basis for project 
disapproval and the BIA area office would have to revise and resubmit 
the package.


<R05>
Sec. 661.41  What does a complete application package consist of?

    A complete application package would consist of the following: the 
FHWA or BIADOT PS&E approval letter, certification checklist and IRRBP 
TIP. In addition to the preceding items, for non-BIA IRR bridges, the 
application package must also include a tribal resolution supporting the 
project.


<R05>
Sec. 661.43  How are the FY 1998 projects to be treated?

    In order not to penalize any BIA area office which completed PS&E 
packages in FY 1998 that were not funded because the project selection/
fund allocation procedures for distribution of funds for FY 1998 were 
not in place, the funds for approved projects would be made available to 
the BIA area offices on receipt and acceptance of their application 
packages.


<R05>
Sec. 661.45  How is a list of deficient bridges to be generated?

    (a) In consultation with the BIA, a list of deficient BIA IRR 
bridges will be developed each fiscal year by the FHWA based on the 
annual April update of the NBI. The NBI is based on data from the 
inspection of all bridges. Likewise, a list of non-BIA IRR bridges will 
be obtained from the NBI. These lists would form the basis for 
identifying bridges that would be considered potentially eligible for 
participation in the IRRBP. Two separate master bridge lists (one each 
for BIA and non-BIA IRR bridges) will be developed and will include, at 
a minimum, the following:
    (1) Sufficiency rating (SR);
    (2) Status (structurally deficient or functionally obsolete);
    (3) Average daily traffic (NBI item 29);
    (4) Detour length (NBI item 19); and
    (5) Truck average daily traffic (NBI item 109).
    (b) These lists would be provided by the FHWA to the BIADOT for 
publication and notification of affected BIA area offices, Indian tribal 
governments (ITG)s, and State and local governments.
    (c) BIA area offices in consultation with ITGs, are encouraged to 
prioritize the design for bridges that are structurally deficient over 
bridges that are simply functionally obsolete, since the former is more 
critical structurally than the latter. Bridges that have higher average 
daily traffic (ADT) should be considered before those that have lower 
ADT. Detour length should also be a factor in selection and submittal of 
bridges, with those having a higher detour length being of greater 
concern. Lastly, bridges with higher truck ADT should take precedence 
over those which have lower truck ADT. Other items of note should be 
whether school buses use the bridge and the types of trucks that may 
cross the bridge and the loads imposed.

[[Page 327]]


<R05>
Sec. 661.47  In the event of project cost over runs, how would they be 
funded?

    (a) Because of the critical nature of this program, BIA area road 
engineer (ARE) approved costs in excess of the project estimate could be 
funded out of this program depending on the availability of funds and 
subject to BIADOT/FLH project approval procedures. The ARE would request 
additional IRRBP funding for a specific bridge project and submit a 
request with appropriate justification along with an explanation as to 
why this additional IRRBP funding is necessary.
    (b) In addition, project cost over runs may be funded out of regular 
IRR program funds.


<R05>
Sec. 661.49  Could regular IRR funds be used to fund a bridge project?

    Yes. Regular IRR construction funds can be used to fund a bridge 
project with the concurrence of the FHWA, BIADOT and the BIA ARE.


<R05>
Sec. 661.51  Could bridge maintenance be performed with these funds?

    No. Bridge maintenance repairs would not be within the scope of 
funding, e.g., guard rail repair, deck repairs, repair of traffic 
control devices, striping, cleaning scuppers, deck sweeping, snow and 
debris removal, etc. There are maintenance funds available through 
annual Department of the Interior appropriations for use on BIA owned 
bridges. The Department of the Interior maintenance funds would be the 
appropriate funding source for bridge maintenance.

                           PART 667 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 668_EMERGENCY RELIEF PROGRAM--Table of Contents




              Subpart A_Procedures for Federal-Aid Highways

Sec.
668.101 Purpose.
668.103 Definitions.
668.105 Policy.
668.107 Federal share payable.
668.109 Eligibility.
668.111 Application procedures.
668.113 Program and project procedures.

       Subpart B_Procedures for Federal Agencies for Federal Roads

668.201 Purpose.
668.203 Definitions.
668.205 Policy.
668.207 Federal share payable from emergency fund.
668.209 Eligibility of work.
668.211 Notification, damage assessment, and finding.
668.213 Application procedures.
668.215 Programming and project procedures.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101, 120(e), 125 and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).


<R04>
              Subpart A_Procedures for Federal-Aid Highways

    Source: 52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 668.101  Purpose.

    To establish policy and provide program guidance for the 
administration of emergency funds for the repair or reconstruction of 
Federal-aid highways, which are found to have suffered serious damage by 
natural diasters over a wide area or serious damage from catastrophic 
failures. Guidance for application by Federal agencies for 
reconstruction of Federal roads that are not part of the Federal-aid 
highways is contained in 23 CFR part 668, subpart B.

[52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, as amended at 61 FR 67212, Dec. 20, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 668.103  Definitions.

    In addition to others contained in 23 U.S.C. 101(a), the following 
definitions shall apply as used in this regulation:
    Applicant. The State highway agency is the applicant for Federal 
assistance under 23 U.S.C. 125 for State highways and local roads and 
streets which are a part of the Federal-aid highways.
    Betterments. Added protective features, such as rebuilding of 
roadways at a higher elevation or the lengthening of bridges, or changes 
which modify the function or character of a highway facility from what 
existed prior to the disaster or catastrophic failure, such as 
additional lanes or added access control.
    Catastrophic failure. The sudden failure of a major element or 
segment of

[[Page 328]]

the highway system due to an external cause. The failure must not be 
primarily attributable to gradual and progressive deterioration or lack 
of proper maintenance. The closure of a facility because of imminent 
danger of collapse is not in itself a sudden failure.
    Emergency repairs. Those repairs including temporary traffic 
operations undertaken during or immediately following the disaster 
occurrence for the purpose of:
    (1) Minimizing the extent of the damage,
    (2) Protecting remaining facilities, or
    (3) Restoring essential traffic.
    External cause. An outside force or phenomenon which is separate 
from the damaged element and not primarily the result of existing 
conditions.
    Heavy maintenance. Work usually done by highway agencies in 
repairing damage normally expected from seasonal and occasionally 
unusual natural conditions or occurrences. It includes work at a site 
required as a direct result of a disaster which can reasonably be 
accommodated by a State or local road authority's maintenance, emergency 
or contingency program.
    Natural disaster. A sudden and unusual natural occurrence, including 
but not limited to intense rainfall, floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, 
tidal waves, landslides, volcanoes or earthquakes which cause serious 
damage.
    Proclamation. A declaration of emergency by the Governor of the 
affected State.
    Serious damage. Heavy, major or unusual damage to a highway which 
severely impairs the safety or usefulness of the highway or results in 
road closure. Serious damage must be beyond the scope of heavy 
maintenance.
    State. Any one of the United States, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa or Commonwealth 
of the Northern Mariana Islands.

[52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, as amended at 61 FR 67212, Dec. 20, 1996; 
65 FR 25444, May 2, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 668.105  Policy.

    (a) The Emergency Relief (ER) program is intended to aid States in 
repairing road facilities which have suffered widespread serious damage 
resulting from a natural disaster over a wide area or serious damage 
from a catastrophic failure.
    (b) ER funds are not intended to supplant other funds for correction 
of preexisting, nondisaster related deficiencies.
    (c) The expenditure of ER funds for emergency repair shall be in 
such a manner so as to reduce, to the greatest extent feasible, the cost 
of permanent restoration work.
    (d) The approval to use available ER funds to repair or restore 
highways damaged by a natural disaster shall be based on the combination 
of the extraordinary character of the natural disturbance and the wide 
area of impact as well as the seriousness of the damage. Storms of 
unusual intensity occurring over a small area may not meet the above 
conditions.
    (e) ER funds shall not duplicate assistance under another Federal 
program or compensation from insurance or any other source. Partial 
compensation for a loss by other sources will not preclude emergency 
fund assistance for the part of such loss not compensated otherwise. Any 
compensation for damages or insurance proceeds including interest 
recovered by the State or political subdivision or by a toll authority 
for repair of the highway facility must be used upon receipt to reduce 
ER fund liability on the project.
    (f) Prompt and diligent efforts shall be made by the State to 
recover repair costs from the legally responsible parties to reduce the 
project costs particularly where catastrophic damages are caused by 
ships, barge tows, highway vehicles, or vehicles with illegal loads or 
where damage is increased by improperly controlled objects or events.
    (g) The processing of ER requests shall be given prompt attention 
and shall be given priority over non-emergency work.
    (h) ER projects shall be promptly constructed. Any project that has 
not advanced to the construction obligation stage by the end of the 
second fiscal year following the disaster occurrence will not be 
advanced unless suitable justification to warrant retention is furnished 
to the FHWA.

[[Page 329]]

    (i) Permanent repair and reconstruction work, not accomplished as 
emergency repairs, shall be done by the contract method unless the State 
Highway agency adequately demonstrates that some other method is more 
cost effective as described in 23 CFR 635.204. Emergency repair work may 
be accomplished by the contract, negotiated contract or highway agency 
force account methods as determined by the Highway agency as best suited 
to protect the public health and safety.
    (j) ER program funding is only to be used to repair highways which 
have been seriously damaged and is not intended to fund heavy 
maintenance or routine emergency repair activities which should normally 
be funded as contingency items in the State and local road programs. An 
application for ER funds in the range of $700,000 or less must be 
accompanied by a showing as to why the damage repair involved is 
considered to be beyond the scope of heavy maintenance or routine 
emergency repair. As a general rule, widespread nominal road damages in 
this range would not be considered to be of a significant nature 
justifying approval by the FHWA Division Administrator for ER funding.

[52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, as amended at 61 FR 67212, Dec. 20, 1996; 
65 FR 25444, May 2, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 668.107  Federal share payable.

    (a) The Federal share payable on account of any repair or 
reconstruction provided for by funds made available under 23 U.S.C. 125 
of this title on account of any project on a Federal-aid highway system, 
including the Interstate System, shall not exceed the Federal share 
payable on a project on such system as provided in 23 U.S.C. 120; except 
that the Federal share payable for eligible emergency repairs to 
minimize damage, protect facilities, or restore essential traffic 
accomplished within 180 days after the actual occurrence of the natural 
disaster or catastrophic failure may amount to 100 percent of the costs 
thereof.
    (b) Total obligations of ER funds in any State, excluding the Virgin 
Islands, Guam, American Samoa or Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, for all projects (including projects on both the Federal-aid 
systems and those on Federal roads under 23 CFR part 668, subpart B), 
resulting from a single natural disaster or a single catastrophic 
failure, shall not exceed $100 million per disaster or catastrophic 
failure. The total obligations for ER projects in any fiscal year in the 
Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa and the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands shall not exceed $20 million.

[52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, as amended at 52 FR 32540, Aug. 28, 1987; 
61 FR 67212, Dec. 20, 1996; 65 FR 25444, May 2, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 668.109  Eligibility.

    (a) The eligibility of all work is contingent upon approval by the 
FHWA Division Administrator of an application for ER and inclusion of 
the work in an approved program of projects.
    (1) Prior FHWA approval or authorization is not required for 
emergency repairs and preliminary engineering (PE).
    (2) Permanent repairs or restoration must have prior FHWA program 
approval and authorization, unless done as part of the emergency 
repairs.
    (b) ER funds may participate in:
    (1) Repair to or reconstruction of seriously damaged highway 
elements as necessary to restore the facility to pre-disaster 
conditions, including necessary clearance of debris and other deposits 
in drainage courses within the right-of way (ROW);
    (2) Restoration of stream channels outside the highway ROW when:
    (i) The public highway agency has responsibility for the maintenance 
and proper operation of the stream channel section, and
    (ii) The work is necessary for satisfactory operation of the highway 
system involved;
    (3) Actual PE and construction engineering costs on approved 
projects;
    (4) Emergency repairs;
    (5) Temporary operations, including emergency traffic services such 
as flagging traffic through inundated sections of highways, undertaken 
by the applicant during or immediately following the disaster;

[[Page 330]]

    (6) Betterments, only where clearly economically justified to 
prevent future recurring damage. Economic justification must weigh the 
cost of betterment against the risk of eligible recurring damage and the 
cost of future repair;
    (7) Temporary work to maintain essential traffic, such as raising 
roadway grade during a period of flooding by placing fill and temporary 
surface material;
    (8) Raising the grades of critical Federal-aid highways faced with 
long-term loss of use due to basin flooding as defined by an 
unprecedented rise in basin water level both in magnitude and time 
frame. Such grade raises are not considered to be a betterment for the 
purpose of 23 CFR 668.109(b)(6); and
    (9) Repair of toll facilities when the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 129 
are met. If a toll facility does not have an executed toll agreement 
with the FHWA at the time of the disaster, a toll agreement may be 
executed after the disaster to qualify for that disaster.
    (c) ER funds may not participate in:
    (1) Heavy maintenance such as repair of minor damages consisting 
primarily of eroded shoulders, filled ditches and culverts, pavement 
settlement, mud and debris deposits off the traveled way, slope 
sloughing, slides, and slip-outs in cut or fill slopes. In order to 
simplify the inspection and estimating process, heavy maintenance may be 
defined using dollar guidelines developed by the States and Divisions 
with Regional concurrence;
    (2) Repair of surface damage caused by traffic whether or not the 
damage was aggravated by saturated subgrade or inundation, except ER 
funds may participate in:
    (i) Repair of surface damage to any public road caused by traffic 
making repairs to Federal-aid highways.
    (ii) Repair of surface damage to designated detours (which may lie 
on both Federal-aid and non-Federal-aid routes) caused by traffic that 
has been detoured from a damaged Federal-aid highway; and
    (iii) Repair of surface damage to Federal-aid highways caused by 
vehicles responding to a disaster; provided the surface damage has 
occurred during the first 60 days after a disaster occurrence, unless 
otherwise approved by the FHWA Division Administrator.
    (3) Repair of damage not directly related to, and isolated away 
from, the pattern of the disaster;
    (4) Routine maintenance of detour routes, not related to the 
increased traffic volumes, such as mowing, maintaining drainage, 
pavement signing, snow plowing, etc.;
    (5) Replacement of damaged or lost material not incorporated into 
the highway such as stockpiled materials or items awaiting installation;
    (6) Repair or reconstruction of facilities affected by long-term, 
pre-existing conditions or predictable developing situations, such as, 
gradual, long-term rises in water levels in basins or slow moving 
slides, except for raising grades as noted in Sec. 668.109(b)(8);
    (7) Permanent repair or replacement of deficient bridges scheduled 
for replacement with other funds. A project is considered scheduled if 
the construction phase is included in the FHWA approved Statewide 
Transportation Improvement Program (STIP);
    (8) Other normal maintenance and operation functions on the highway 
system including snow and ice removal; and
    (9) Reimbursing loss of toll revenue.
    (d) Replacement of a highway facility at its existing location is 
appropriate when it is not technically and economically feasible to 
repair or restore a seriously damaged element to its predisaster 
condition and is limited in ER reimbursement to the cost of a new 
facility to current design standards of comparable capacity and 
character to the destroyed facility. With respect to a bridge, a 
comparable facility is one which meets current geometric and 
construction standards for the type and volume of traffic it will carry 
during its design life. Where it is neither practical nor feasible to 
replace a damaged highway facility in kind at its existing location, an 
alternative selected through the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) process, if of comparable function and character to the destroyed 
facility, is eligible for ER reimbursement.
    (e) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b)(6) of this 
section, the total cost of a project eligible for ER

[[Page 331]]

funding may not exceed the cost of repair or reconstruction of a 
comparable facility. ER funds may participate to the extent of eligible 
repair costs when proposed projects contain unjustified betterments or 
other work not eligible for ER funds.

[52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, as amended at 61 FR 67212, Dec. 20, 1996; 
65 FR 25444, May 2, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 668.111  Application procedures.

    (a) Notification. As soon as possible after the disaster, the 
applicant shall notify the FHWA Division Administrator of its intent to 
apply for ER funds.
    (b) Damage survey. As soon as practical after occurrence, the State 
will make a preliminary field survey, working cooperatively with the 
FHWA Division Administrator and other governmental agencies with 
jurisdiction over eligible highways. The preliminary field survey should 
be coordinated with the Federal Emergency Management Agency work, if 
applicable, to eliminate duplication of effort. The purpose of this 
survey is to determine the general nature and extent of damage to 
eligible highways.
    (1) A damage survey summary report is to be prepared by the State. 
The purpose of the damage survey summary report is to provide a factual 
basis for the FHWA Division Administrator's finding that serious damage 
to Federal-aid highways has been caused by a natural disaster over a 
wide area or a catastrophe. The damage survey summary report should 
include by political subdivision or other generally recognized 
administrative or geographic boundaries, a description of the types and 
extent of damage to highways and a preliminary estimate of cost of 
restoration or reconstruction for damaged Federal-aid highways in each 
jurisdiction. Pictures showing the kinds and extent of damage and sketch 
maps detailing the damaged areas should be included, as appropriate, in 
the damage survey summary report.
    (2) Unless very unusual circumstances prevail, the damage survey 
summary report should be prepared within 6 weeks following the 
applicant's notification.
    (3) For large disasters where extensive damage to Federal-aid 
highways is readily evident, the FHWA Division Administrator may approve 
an application under Sec. 668.111(d) prior to submission of the damage 
survey summary report. In these cases, an abbreviated damage survey 
summary report, summarizing eligible repair costs by jurisdiction, is to 
be prepared and submitted to the FHWA Division Administrator after the 
damage inspections have been completed.
    (c) Application. Before funds can be made available, an application 
for ER must be made to, and approved by the FHWA Division Administrator. 
The application shall include:
    (1) A copy of the Governor's proclamation, request for a 
Presidential declaration, or a Presidential declaration; and
    (2) A copy of the damage survey summary report, as appropriate.
    (d) Approval of application. The FHWA Division Administrator's 
approval of the application constitutes the finding of eligibility under 
23 U.S.C. 125 and shall constitute approval of the application.

[65 FR 25444, May 2, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 668.113  Program and project procedures.

    (a) Immediately after approval of an application, the FHWA Division 
Administrator will notify the applicant to proceed with preparation of a 
program which defines the work needed to restore or replace the damaged 
facilities. It should be submitted to the FHWA Division Administrator 
within 3 months of receipt of this notification. The FHWA field office 
will assist the applicant and other affected agencies in preparation of 
the program. This work may involve joint site inspections to view damage 
and reach tentative agreement on type of permanent corrective work to be 
undertaken. Program data should be kept to a minimum, but should be 
sufficient to identify the approved disaster or catastrophe and to 
permit a determination of the eligibility and propriety of proposed 
work. If the damage survey summary report is determined by the FHWA 
Division Administrator to be of sufficient detail to meet these 
criteria,

[[Page 332]]

additional program support data need not be submitted.
    (b) Project procedures. (1) Projects for permanent repairs shall be 
processed in accordance with regular Federal-aid procedures. In those 
cases where a regular Federal-aid project in a State similar to the ER 
project would be handled under the project oversight exceptions found in 
title 23, United States Code, the ER project can be handled in a similar 
fashion subject to the following two conditions:
    (i) Any betterment to be incorporated into the project and for which 
ER funding is requested must receive prior FHWA approval; and
    (ii) The FHWA reserves the right to conduct final inspections on all 
ER projects. The FHWA Division Administrator has the discretion to 
undertake final inspections on ER projects as deemed appropriate.
    (2) Simplified procedures, including abbreviated plans should be 
used where appropriate.
    (3) Emergency repair meets the criteria for categorical exclusions 
pursuant to 23 CFR 771.117 and normally does not require any further 
NEPA approvals.

[52 FR 21948, June 10, 1987, as amended at 61 FR 67212, Dec. 20, 1996; 
65 FR 25445, May 2, 2000]


<R04>
       Subpart B_Procedures for Federal Agencies for Federal Roads


<R05>
Sec. 668.201  Purpose.

    To establish policy, procedures, and program guidance for the 
administration of emergency relief to Federal agencies for the repair or 
reconstruction of Federal roads which are found to have suffered serious 
damage by a natural disaster over a wide area or by catastrophic 
failure.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 668.203  Definitions.

    (a) Applicant. Any Federal agency which submits an application for 
emergency relief and which has authority to repair or reconstruct 
Federal roads.
    (b) Betterments. Added protective features, such as, the relocation 
or rebuilding of roadways at a higher elevation or the extension, 
replacement or raising of bridges, and added facilities not existing 
prior to the natural disaster or catastrophic failure such as additional 
lanes, upgraded surfacing, or structures.
    (c) Catastrophic failure. The sudden failure of a major element or 
segment of a Federal road which is not primarily attributable to gradual 
and progressive deterioration or lack of proper maintenance. The closure 
of a facility because of imminent danger of collapse is not in itself a 
sudden failure.
    (d) Emergency repairs. Those repairs, including necessary 
preliminary engineering (PE), construction engineering (CE), and 
temporary traffic operations, undertaken during or immediately after a 
natural disaster or catastrophic failure (1) to restore essential 
travel, (2) to protect remaining facilities, or (3) to minimize the 
extent of damage.
    (e) Federal roads. Forest highways, forest development roads and 
trails, park roads and trails, parkways, public lands highways, public 
lands development roads and trails, and Indian reservation roads as 
defined under 23 U.S.C. 101(a).
    (f) Finding. A letter or other official correspondence issued by the 
Direct Federal Division Engineer (DFDE) to a Federal agency giving 
notification that pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 125, Federal roads have 
(Affirmative Finding) or have not (Negative Finding) been found to have 
suffered serious damage as the result of (1) a natural disaster over a 
wide area, or (2) a catastrophic failure.
    (g) Natural disaster. An unusual natural occurrence such as a flood, 
hurricane, severe storm, tidal wave, earthquake, or landslide which 
causes serious damage.
    (h) Permanent work. Repair or reconstruction to pre-disaster or 
other allowed geometric and construction standards and related PE and 
CE.
    (i) Direct Federal Division Engineer. Director of one of the Direct 
Federal field offices located in Vancouver, WA; Denver, CO; and 
Arlington, VA.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 10529, Mar. 11, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 668.205  Policy.

    (a) This emergency relief program is intended to pay the unusually 
heavy

[[Page 333]]

expenses in the repair and reconstruction of Federal roads resulting 
from damage caused by natural disasters over a wide area or catastrophic 
failures.
    (b) Emergency relief work shall be given prompt attention and 
priority over non-emergency work.
    (c) Permanent work shall be done by contract awarded by competitive 
bidding through formal advertising, where feasible.
    (d) It is in the public interest to perform emergency repairs 
immediately and prior approval or authorization from the DFDE is not 
required. Emergency repairs may be performed by the method of 
contracting (advertised contract, negotiated contract, or force account) 
which the applicant or the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) (where 
FHWA performs the work) determines to be most suited for this work.
    (e) Emergency relief projects shall be promptly constructed. 
Projects not under construction by the end of the second fiscal year 
following the year in which the disaster occurred will be reevaluated by 
the DFDE and will be withdrawn from the approved program of projects 
unless suitable justification is provided by the applicant to warrant 
retention.
    (f) The Finding for natural disasters will be based on both the 
extraordinary character of the natural disturbance and the wide area of 
impact. Storms of unusual intensity occurring over a small area do not 
meet these conditions.
    (g) Diligent efforts shall be made to recover repair costs from the 
legally responsible parties to reduce the project costs where highway 
damages are caused by ships, barge tows, highway vehicles, vehicles with 
illegal loads, and similar improperly controlled objects or events.
    (h) Emergency funds shall not duplicate assistance under another 
Federal program or compensation from insurance or any other source. 
Where other funding compensates for only part of an eligible cost, 
emergency relief funding can be used to pay the remaining costs.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 10529, Mar. 11, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 668.207  Federal share payable from emergency fund.

    The Federal share payable under this program is 100 percent of the 
cost.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 668.209  Eligibility of work.

    (a) Permanent work must have prior program approval in accordance 
with paragraph (a) of Sec. 668.215 unless such work is performed as 
emergency repairs.
    (b) Emergency repairs, including permanent work performed incidental 
to emergency repairs, and all PE may begin immediately and do not need 
prior program approval. Reimbursement shall be contingent upon the work 
ultimately being approved in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 668.215.
    (c) To qualify for emergency relief, the damaged or destroyed road 
or trail shall be designated as a Federal road.
    (d) Replacement highway facilities are appropriate when it is not 
practical and economically feasible to repair or restore a damaged 
element to its preexisting condition. Emergency relief is limited to the 
cost of a new facility constructed to current design standards of 
comparable capacity and character to the destroyed facility. With 
respect to a bridge, a comparable facility is one which meets current 
geometric and construction standards for the type and volume of traffic 
it will carry during its design life.
    (e) Emergency relief funds may participate to the extent of eligible 
repair costs when proposed projects contain betterments or other work 
not eligible for emergency funds.
    (f) Work may include:
    (1) Repair to, or reconstruction of, seriously damaged highway 
elements for a distance which would be within normal highway right-of-
way limits, including necessary clearance of debris and other deposits 
in drainage courses, where such work would not be classed as heavy 
maintenance.
    (2) Restoration of stream channels when the work is necessary for 
the satisfactory operation of the Federal road. The applicant must have 
responsibility and authority for maintenance and

[[Page 334]]

proper operation of stream channels restored.
    (3) Betterments where clearly economically justified to prevent 
future recurring damage. Economic justification acceptable to the DFDE 
must weigh the cost of such betterments against the risk of eligible 
recurring damage and the cost of future repair.
    (4) Actual PE and CE costs on approved projects.
    (5) Emergency repairs.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 10529, Mar. 11, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 668.211  Notification, damage assessment, and finding.

    (a) Notification. During or as soon as possible after a natural 
disaster or catastrophic failure, each applicant will notify the DFDE of 
its tentative intent to apply for emergency relief and request that a 
Finding be made.
    (b) Acknowledgment. The DFDE will promptly acknowledge the 
notification and briefly describe subsequent damage assessment, Finding, 
and application procedures.
    (c) Field report. The applicant shall cooperate with the DFDE to 
promptly make a field survey of overall damage and in the preparation of 
a field report.
    (d) Finding. Using the field report and other information deemed 
appropriate, the DFDE will promptly issue a Finding and if an 
Affirmative Finding is made, establish the date after which repair or 
reconstruction will be considered for emergency relief, and note the 
dates of the extraordinary natural occurrence or catastrophic event 
responsible for the damage or destruction.
    (e) Detailed site inspections. (1) If an Affirmative Finding is 
made, the applicant shall cooperate with the DFDE to make a detailed 
inspection of each damage site.
    (2) If it appears certain an Affirmative Finding will be made, the 
DFDE may elect to make these site inspections at the time damage is 
initially assessed pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.
    (f) The applicant shall make available to FHWA personnel conducting 
damage survey and estimate work maps depicting designated Federal roads 
in the affected area.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 10529, Mar. 11, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 668.213  Application procedures.

    (a) Based on the detailed site inspections and damage estimates 
prepared pursuant to paragraph (e) of Sec. 668.211, the applicant will 
submit an application in the form of a letter to the DFDE which shall 
include a list of projects for which emergency relief is requested. The 
application shall be submitted within 3 months after an Affirmative 
Finding.
    (b) The list of projects shall include emergency repairs, PE, and 
permanent work, and provide for each project a location, length, project 
number, type of damage, description of work with a separate breakdown 
for betterments including a justification for those intended for 
emergency relief funding, proposed method of construction, estimated 
cost, and any other information requested by the DFDE.
    (c) If the initial list of projects is incomplete, a subsequent 
list(s) of projects shall be forwarded to the DFDE for approval 
consideration as soon as possible.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 10529, Mar. 11, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 668.215  Programming and project procedures.

    (a) The DFDE will advise the applicant in writing which projects in 
the application, or in any subsequent submittals pursuant to paragraph 
(c) of Sec. 668.213 are approved including any approval conditions. 
Approved projects shall constitute the approved program of projects 
(program).
    (b) Plans, specifications, and estimates (PS&E) shall be developed 
based on work identified in the approved program.
    (c) The DFDE will approve PS&E's, concur in the award of contracts 
or the rejection of bids, determine that construction by the force 
account method is in the public interest, and accept completed work in 
accordance with interagency procedures established by the DFDE.

[[Page 335]]

    (d) The applicant shall notify the DFDE in writing of the semi-
annual status and completion of each emergency relief project 
constructed by applicant forces.

[43 FR 59485, Dec. 21, 1978, as amended at 47 FR 10529, Mar. 11, 1982]


<R03>
PART 669_ENFORCEMENT OF HEAVY VEHICLE USE TAX--Table of Contents




Sec.
669.1 Scope and purpose.
669.3 Policy.
669.5 Objective.
669.7 Certification requirement.
669.9 Certification content.
669.11 Certification submittal.
669.13 Effect of failure to certify or to adequately obtain proof of 
          payment.
669.15 Procedure for the reduction of funds.
669.17 Compliance finding.
669.19 Reservation and reapportionment of funds.
669.21 Procedure for evaluating state compliance.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 141(d) and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 51 FR 25364, July 14, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 669.1  Scope and purpose.

    To prescribe requirements for certification by the states that 
evidence of proof of payment is obtained either before vehicles subject 
to the Federal heavy vehicle use tax are lawfully registered or within 4 
months after being lawfully registered if a suspension registration 
system is implemented.


<R05>
Sec. 669.3  Policy.

    It is the policy of the FHWA that each state require registrants of 
heavy trucks as described in 26 CFR part 41 to provide proof of payment 
of the vehicle use tax either before lawfully registering or within 4 
months after lawfully registering such vehicles as provided for under a 
suspension registration system.


<R05>
Sec. 669.5  Objective.

    The objective of this regulation is to establish realistic and 
workable procedures for an annual certification process to provide 
suitable evidence that an effective program is being conducted by the 
states and to ensure that the states are not registering vehicles which 
have not been accounted for under the tax collection procedures 
instituted by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).


<R05>
Sec. 669.7  Certification requirement.

    The Governor of each state, or his or her designee, shall certify to 
the FHWA before July 1 of each year that it is obtaining proof of 
payment of the heavy vehicle use tax as a condition of registration in 
accordance with 23 U.S.C. 141(d). The certification shall cover the 12-
month period (8 months for the initial certification period) ending May 
31.


<R05>
Sec. 669.9  Certification content.

    The certification shall consist of the following elements:
    (a) A statement by the Governor of the state or a state official 
designated by the Governor, that evidence of payment of the heavy 
vehicle use tax is being obtained as a condition of registration for all 
vehicles subject to such tax. The statement shall include the inclusive 
dates of the period during which payment of the heavy vehicle use tax 
was verified as a condition of registration.
    (b) The certifying statement required by paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be worded as follows:

    I (name of certifying official), (position, title), of the State of 
( ), do hereby certify that evidence of payment of the heavy vehicle use 
tax pursuant to section 4481 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as 
amended, is being obtained as a condition of registration for vehicles 
subject to such tax in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 141(d) and applicable 
IRS rules. This certification is for the period ( ) to ( ).

    (c) For the initial certification, submit a copy of any state law or 
regulation pertaining to the implementation of 23 U.S.C. 141(d); for 
subsequent certifications, submit a copy of any new or revised laws and 
regulations pertaining to the implementation of 23 U.S.C. 141(d).


<R05>
Sec. 669.11  Certification submittal.

    The Governor or an official designated by the Governor, shall each 
year submit the certification, including the supporting material 
specified

[[Page 336]]

in Sec. 669.9 to the FHWA Division Administrator prior to July 1.


<R05>
Sec. 669.13  Effect of failure to certify or to adequately obtain proof 
of payment.

    Beginning July 1, 1986, if a state fails to certify as required by 
this regulation or if the Secretary of Transportation determines that a 
state is not adequately obtaining proof of payment of the heavy vehicle 
use tax as a condition of registration notwithstanding the state's 
certification, Federal-aid highway funds apportioned to the state under 
23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5) for the next fiscal year shall be reduced in an 
amount up to 25 percent as determined by the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 669.15  Procedure for the reduction of funds.

    (a) If it appears to the Federal Highway Administrator that a state 
has not submitted a certification conforming to the requirements of this 
regulation or that the state is not adequately obtaining proof of 
payment of the heavy vehicle use tax under 23 U.S.C. 141(d), the Federal 
Highway Administrator shall make in writing a proposed determination of 
nonconformity, and shall notify the Governor of the state of the 
proposed determination by certified mail. The notice shall state the 
reasons for the proposed determination and inform the state that it may, 
within 30 days from the date of the notice, request a conference to show 
cause why it should not be found in nonconformity.
    (b) The conference will be informal in nature and conducted by the 
Administrator, or his/her designee. In all instances where the state 
proceeds on this basis, a transcript will be made and furnished to the 
state by FHWA. The state may offer any information which it considers 
helpful to a resolution of the matter, and the scope of review at the 
conference shall include, but not be limited to, state legislative 
actions (including those proposed to remedy deficiencies), budgetary 
considerations, judicial actions, and proposals for specific actions 
which will be implemented to bring the state into compliance.
    (c) The state has the option to request such a conference, or it may 
submit such information in writing to the Administrator, who will make a 
determination on the basis of such materials and other available 
information.


<R05>
Sec. 669.17  Compliance finding.

    (a) If, following the conference or review of submitted materials 
described in Sec. 669.15, the Administrator concludes that the state is 
in compliance, the Administrator shall issue a decision which is the 
final decision, and the matter shall be concluded.
    (b) If, following the conference or review of information submitted 
under Sec. 669.15, the Administrator, with the concurrence of the 
Secretary, concludes that the state is in noncompliance, the 
Administrator shall issue a decision, which is the final decision, and 
the matter be concluded. The decision will be served on the Governor, or 
his/her designee.


<R05>
Sec. 669.19  Reservation and reapportionment of funds.

    (a) The Administrator may reserve from obligation up to 25 percent 
of a state's apportionment of funds under 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5), pending a 
final determination.
    (b) Funds withheld pursuant to a final administrative determination 
under this regulation shall be reapportioned to all other eligible 
states pursuant to the formulas of 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(5) and the 
apportionment factors in effect at the time of the original 
apportionments, unless the Secretary determines, on the basis of 
information submitted by the state, that the state has come into 
conformity with this regulation prior to the final determination. If the 
Secretary determines that the state has come into conformity, the 
withheld funds shall be released to the state subject to the 
availability of such funds under 23 U.S.C. 118(b).
    (c) The reapportionment of funds under paragraph (b) of this section 
shall be stayed during the pendency of any judicial review of the 
Secretary's final determination of nonconformity.

[[Page 337]]


<R05>
Sec. 669.21  Procedure for evaluating state compliance.

    The FHWA shall periodically review the state's procedures for 
complying with 23 U.S.C. 141(d), including an inspection of supporting 
documentation and records. The state shall retain a copy of the 
receipted IRS Schedule 1 (Form 2290), or an acceptable substitute 
prescribed by 26 CFR part 41, Sec. 41.6001-2, for a period of 1 year 
for purposes of evaluating state compliance with 23 U.S.C. 141(d) by the 
FHWA. In lieu of retention of Schedule 1, states may make an appropriate 
entry in an automated file or on registration documents retained by the 
state or retain a microfilm or microfiche copy of Schedule 1 or of the 
automated file as evidence that proof of payment has been received 
before vehicles subject to the Federal heavy vehicle use tax are 
registered.

[[Page 338]]


<R03>
                SUBCHAPTER H_RIGHT-OF-WAY AND ENVIRONMENT




<R03>
PART 710_RIGHT-OF-WAY AND REAL ESTATE--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
710.101 Purpose.
710.103 Applicability.
710.105 Definitions.

                    Subpart B_Program Administration

710.201 State responsibilities.
710.203 Funding and reimbursement.

                      Subpart C_Project Development

710.301 General.
710.303 Planning.
710.305 Environmental analysis.
710.307 Project agreement.
710.309 Acquisition.
710.311 Construction advertising.
710.313 Design-build projects.

                   Subpart D_Real Property Management

710.401 General.
710.403 Management.
710.405 Air rights on the Interstate.
710.407 Leasing.
710.409 Disposals.

               Subpart E_Property Acquisition Alternatives

710.501 Early acquisition.
710.503 Protective buying and hardship acquisition.
710.505 Real property donations.
710.507 State and local contributions.
710.509 Functional replacement of real property in public ownership.
710.511 Transportation enhancements.
710.513 Environmental mitigation.

                  Subpart F_Federal Assistance Programs

710.601 Federal land transfer.
710.603 Direct Federal acquisition.

    Authority: Sec. 1307, Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107; 23 U.S.C. 
101(a), 107, 108, 111, 114, 133, 142(f), 156, 204, 210, 308, 315, 317, 
and 323; 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq., 4633, 4651-4655; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and 
(cc), 18.31, and parts 21 and 24; 23 CFR 1.32.

    Source: 64 FR 71290, Dec. 21, 1999, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 710.101  Purpose.

    The primary purpose of the requirements in this part is to ensure 
the prudent use of Federal funds under title 23 of the United States 
Code in the acquisition, management, and disposal of real property. In 
addition to the requirements of this part, other real property related 
provisions apply and are found at 49 CFR part 24.


<R05>
Sec. 710.103  Applicability.

    This part applies whenever Federal assistance under title 23 of the 
United States Code is used. The part applies to programs administered by 
the Federal Highway Administration. Where Federal funds are transferred 
to other Federal agencies to administer, those agencies' procedures may 
be utilized. Additional guidance is available electronically at the FHWA 
Real Estate services website: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/realestate/
index.htm


<R05>
Sec. 710.105  Definitions.

    (a) Terms defined in 49 CFR part 24, and 23 CFR part 1 have the same 
meaning where used in this part, except as modified in this section.
    (b) The following terms where used in this part have the following 
meaning:
    Access rights means the right of ingress to and egress from a 
property that abuts a street or highway.
    Acquiring agency means a State agency, other entity, or person 
acquiring real property for title 23 of the United States Code purposes.
    Acquisition means activities to obtain an interest in, and 
possession of, real property.
    Air rights means real property interests defined by agreement, and 
conveyed by deed, lease, or permit for the use of airspace.
    Airspace means that space located above and/or below a highway or 
other transportation facility's established grade line, lying within the 
horizontal limits of the approved right-of-way or project boundaries.

[[Page 339]]

    Damages means the loss in value attributable to remainder property 
due to severance or consequential damages, as limited by State law, that 
arise when only part of an owner's property is acquired.
    Disposal means the sale of real property or rights therein, 
including access or air rights, when no longer needed for highway right-
of-way or other uses eligible for funding under title 23 of the United 
States Code.
    Donation means the voluntary transfer of privately owned real 
property for the benefit of a public transportation project without 
compensation or with compensation at less than fair market value.
    Early acquisition means acquisition of real property by State or 
local governments in advance of Federal authorization or agreement.
    Easement means an interest in real property that conveys a right to 
use a portion of an owner's property or a portion of an owner's rights 
in the property.
    NHS means the National Highway System as defined in 23 U.S.C. 
103(b).
    Oversight agreement means the project approval and agreement 
concluded between the State and the FHWA to outline which projects will 
be monitored at the plans, specifications, and estimate stage by FHWA as 
required by 23 U.S.C. 106(c)(3).
    Real property means land and any improvements thereto, including but 
not limited to, fee interests, easements, air or access rights, and the 
rights to control use, leasehold, and leased fee interests.
    Relinquishment means the conveyance of a portion of a highway right-
of-way or facility by a State highway department to another government 
agency for continued transportation use. (See 23 CFR part 620, subpart 
B.)
    Right-of-way means real property and rights therein used for the 
construction, operation, or maintenance of a transportation or related 
facility funded under title 23 of the United States Code.
    Settlement means the result of negotiations based on fair market 
value in which the amount of just compensation is agreed upon for the 
purchase of real property or an interest therein. This term includes the 
following:
    (1) An administrative settlement is a settlement reached prior to 
filing a condemnation proceeding based on value related evidence, 
administrative consideration, or other factors approved by an authorized 
agency official.
    (2) A legal settlement is a settlement reached by a responsible 
State legal representative after filing a condemnation proceeding, 
including stipulated settlements approved by the court in which the 
condemnation action had been filed.
    (3) A court settlement or court award is any decision by a court 
that follows a contested trial or hearing before a jury, commission, 
judge, or other legal entity having the authority to establish the 
amount of compensation for a taking under the laws of eminent domain.
    State agency means a department, agency, or instrumentality of a 
State or of a political subdivision of a State; any department, agency, 
or instrumentality of two or more States or of two or more political 
subdivisions of a State or States; or any person who has the authority 
to acquire property by eminent domain, for public purposes, under State 
law.
    State transportation department (STD) means the State highway 
department, transportation department, or other State transportation 
agency or commission to which title 23 of the United States Code funds 
are apportioned.
    Uneconomic remnant means a remainder property which the acquiring 
agency has determined has little or no utility or value to the owner.
    Uniform Act means the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended (Public Law 91-
646, 84 Stat. 1894), and the implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.


<R04>
                    Subpart B_Program Administration


<R05>
Sec. 710.201  State responsibilities.

    (a) Organization. Each STD shall be adequately staffed, equipped, 
and organized to discharge its real property-related responsibilities.

[[Page 340]]

    (b) Program oversight. The STD shall have overall responsibility for 
the acquisition, management, and disposal of real property on Federal-
aid projects. This responsibility shall include assuring that 
acquisitions and disposals by a State agency are made in compliance with 
legal requirements of State and Federal laws and regulations.
    (c) Right-of-way (ROW) operations manual. Each STD which receives 
funding from the highway trust fund shall maintain a manual describing 
its right-of-way organization, policies, and procedures. The manual 
shall describe functions and procedures for all phases of the real 
estate program, including appraisal and appraisal review, negotiation 
and eminent domain, property management, and relocation assistance. The 
manual shall also specify procedures to prevent conflict of interest and 
avoid fraud, waste, and abuse. The manual shall be in sufficient detail 
and depth to guide State employees and others involved in acquiring and 
managing real property. The State manuals should be developed and 
updated, as a minimum, to meet the following schedule:
    (1) The STD shall prepare and submit for approval by FHWA an up-to-
date Right-of-Way Operations Manual by no later than January 1, 2001.
    (2) Every five years thereafter, the chief administrative officer of 
the STD shall certify to the FHWA that the current ROW operations manual 
conforms to existing practices and contains necessary procedures to 
ensure compliance with Federal and State real estate law and regulation.
    (3) The STD shall update the manual periodically to reflect changes 
in operations and submit the updated materials for approval by the FHWA.
    (d) Compliance responsibility. The STD is responsible for complying 
with current FHWA requirements whether or not its manual reflects those 
requirements.
    (e) Adequacy of real property interest. The real property interest 
acquired for all Federal-aid projects funded pursuant to title 23 of the 
United States Code shall be adequate for the construction, operation, 
and maintenance of the resulting facility and for the protection of both 
the facility and the traveling public.
    (f) Recordkeeping. The acquiring agency shall maintain adequate 
records of its acquisition and property management activities.
    (1) Acquisition records, including records related to owner or 
tenant displacements, and property inventories of improvements acquired 
shall be in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with this part 
and 49 CFR part 24. These records shall be retained at least 3 years 
from either:
    (i) The date the State receives Federal reimbursement of the final 
payment made to each owner of a property and to each person displaced 
from a property, or
    (ii) The date a credit toward the Federal share of a project is 
approved based on early acquisition activities of the State.
    (2) Property management records shall include inventories of real 
property considered excess to project needs, all authorized uses of 
airspace, and other leases or agreements for use of real property 
managed by the STD.
    (g) Procurement. Contracting for all activities required in support 
of State right-of-way programs through use of private consultants and 
other services shall conform to 49 CFR 18.36.
    (h) Use of other public land acquisition organizations or private 
consultants. The STD may enter into written agreements with other State, 
county, municipal, or local public land acquisition organizations or 
with private consultants to carry out its authorities under paragraph 
(b) of this section. Such organizations, firms, or individuals must 
comply with the policies and practices of the STD. The STD shall monitor 
any such real property acquisition activities to assure compliance with 
State and Federal law and requirements and is responsible for informing 
such organizations of all such requirements and for imposing sanctions 
in cases of material non-compliance.
    (i) Approval actions. Except for the Interstate system, the STD and 
the FHWA will agree on the scope of property related oversight and 
approval actions that the FHWA will be responsible for under this part. 
The content of the most recent oversight agreement

[[Page 341]]

shall be reflected in the State right-of-way operations manual. The 
oversight agreement, and thus the manual, will indicate for which non-
Interstate Federal-aid project submission of materials for review and 
approval are required.
    (j) Approval of just compensation. The amount determined to be just 
compensation shall be approved by a responsible official of the 
acquiring agency.
    (k) Description of acquisition process. The STD shall provide 
persons affected by projects or acquisitions advanced under title 23 of 
the United States Code with a written description of its real property 
acquisition process under State law and of the owner's rights, 
privileges, and obligations. The description shall be written in clear, 
non-technical language and, where appropriate, be available in a 
language other than English.


<R05>
Sec. 710.203  Funding and reimbursement.

    (a) General conditions. The following conditions are a prerequisite 
to Federal participation in the costs of acquiring real property except 
as provided in Sec. 710.501 for early acquisition:
    (1) The project for which the real property is acquired is included 
in an approved Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP);
    (2) The State has executed a project agreement;
    (3) Preliminary acquisition activities, including a title search and 
preliminary property map preparation necessary for the completion of the 
environmental process, can be advanced under preliminary engineering 
prior to National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321 et 
seq.) clearance, while other work involving contact with affected 
property owners must normally be deferred until after NEPA approval, 
except as provided in 23 CFR 710.503 for protective buying and hardship 
acquisition; and in 23 CFR 710.501, early acquisition. Appraisal 
completion may be authorized as preliminary right-of-way activity prior 
to completion of the environmental document; and
    (4) Costs have been incurred in conformance with State and Federal 
law requirements.
    (b) Direct eligible costs. Federal participation in real property 
costs is limited to the costs of property incorporated into the final 
project and the associated direct costs of acquisition, unless provided 
otherwise. Participation is provided for:
    (1) Real property acquisition. Usual costs and disbursements 
associated with real property acquisition required under the laws of the 
State, including the following:
    (i) The cost of contracting for private acquisition services or the 
cost associated with the use of local public agencies.
    (ii) The cost of acquisition activities, such as, appraisal, 
appraisal review, cost estimates, relocation planning, right-of-way plan 
preparation, title work, and similar necessary right-of-way related 
work.
    (iii) The cost to acquire real property, including incidental 
expenses.
    (iv) The cost of administrative settlements in accordance with 49 
CFR 24.102(i), legal settlements, court awards, and costs incidental to 
the condemnation process.
    (v) The cost of minimum payments and appraisal waiver amounts 
included in the State approved manual.
    (2) Relocation assistance and payments. Usual costs and 
disbursements associated with the following:
    (i) Relocation assistance and payments required under 49 CFR part 
24, and
    (ii) Relocation assistance and payments provided under the laws of 
the State that may exceed the requirements of 49 CFR part 24, except for 
relocation assistance and payments provided to aliens not lawfully 
present in the United States.
    (3) Damages. The cost of severance and/or consequential damages to 
remaining real property resulting from a partial acquisition, actual or 
constructive, of real property for a project based on elements 
compensable under applicable State law.
    (4) Property management. The net cost of managing real property 
prior to and during construction to provide for maintenance, protection, 
and the clearance and disposal of improvements until final project 
acceptance.

[[Page 342]]

    (5) Payroll-related expenses and technical guidance. Salary and 
related expenses of employees of an acquiring agency are eligible costs 
in accordance with OMB Circular A-87 (available at http://
www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars). This includes State costs incurred 
for managing or providing technical guidance, consultation or oversight 
on projects where right-of-way services are performed by a political 
subdivision or others.
    (6) Property not incorporated into a project funded under title 23 
of the United States Code. The cost of property not incorporated into a 
project may be eligible for reimbursement in the following 
circumstances:
    (i) General. Costs for construction material sites, property 
acquisitions to a logical boundary, or for eligible transportation 
enhancement, sites for disposal of hazardous materials, environmental 
mitigation, environmental banking activities, or last resort housing.
    (ii) Easements not incorporated into the right-of-way. The cost of 
acquiring easements outside the right-of-way for permanent or temporary 
use.
    (7) Uneconomic remnants. The cost of uneconomic remnants purchased 
in connection with the acquisition of a partial taking for the project 
as required by the Uniform Act.
    (8) Access rights. Payment for full or partial control of access on 
an existing highway (i.e., one not on a new location), based on elements 
compensable under applicable State law. Participation does not depend on 
another real property interest being acquired or on further construction 
of the highway facility.
    (9) Utility and railroad property. (i) The cost to replace operating 
real property owned by a displaced utility or railroad and conveyed to 
an STD for a highway project, as provided in 23 CFR part 140, subpart I, 
Reimbursement for Railroad Work, and 23 CFR part 645, Subpart A, Utility 
Relocations, Adjustments and Reimbursement, and 23 CFR part 646, Subpart 
B, Railroad-Highway Projects.
    (ii) Participation in the cost of acquiring non-operating utility or 
railroad real property shall be in the same manner as that used in the 
acquisition of other privately owned property.
    (c) Withholding payment. The FHWA may withhold payment under the 
conditions in 23 CFR 1.36 where the State fails to comply with Federal 
law or regulation, State law, or under circumstances of waste, fraud, 
and abuse.
    (d) Indirect costs. Indirect costs may be claimed under the 
provisions of OMB Circular A-87. Indirect costs may be included on 
Federal-aid billings after the indirect cost rate has been approved by 
FHWA.

[64 FR 71290, Dec. 21, 1999, as amended at 67 FR 12863, Mar. 20, 2002]


<R04>
                      Subpart C_Project Development


<R05>
Sec. 710.301  General.

    The project development process typically follows a sequence of 
actions and approvals in order to qualify for funding. The key steps in 
this process are provided in this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 710.303  Planning.

    State and local governments conduct metropolitan and statewide 
planning to develop coordinated, financially constrained system plans to 
meet transportation needs for local and statewide systems, under FHWA's 
planning regulations contained in 23 CFR part 450. In addition, air 
quality non-attainment areas must meet the requirements of the U.S. EPA 
Transportation conformity regulations (40 CFR parts 51 and 93). Projects 
must be included in an approved State Transportation Improvement Program 
(STIP) in order to be eligible for Federal-aid funding.


<R05>
Sec. 710.305  Environmental analysis.

    The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process, as described 
in FHWA's NEPA regulations in 23 CFR part 771, normally must be 
conducted and concluded with a record of decision (ROD) or equivalent 
before Federal funds can be placed under agreement for acquisition of 
right-of-way. Where applicable, a State also must complete Clean Air Act 
(42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.) project level conformity analysis. In

[[Page 343]]

areas in which the Clean Air Act conformity determination has lapsed, 
acquiring agencies must coordinate with Federal Highway Administration 
for special instructions prior to initiating new projects or continuing 
activity on existing projects. At the time of processing an 
environmental document, a State may request reimbursement of costs 
incurred for early acquisition, provided conditions prescribed in 23 
U.S.C. 108(c) and 23 CFR 710.501, are satisfied.


<R05>
Sec. 710.307  Project agreement.

    As a condition of Federal-aid, the STD shall obtain FHWA 
authorization in writing or electronically before proceeding with any 
real property acquisitions, including hardship acquisition and 
protective buying (see 23 CFR 710.503). The STD must prepare a project 
agreement in accordance with 23 CFR part 630, subpart C. The agreement 
shall be based on an acceptable estimate for the cost of acquisition. On 
projects where the initial project agreement was executed after June 9, 
1998, a State may request credit toward the non-Federal share, for early 
acquisitions, donations, or other contributions applied to the project 
provided conditions in 23 U.S.C. 323 and 23 CFR 710.501, are satisfied.


<R05>
Sec. 710.309  Acquisition.

    The process of acquiring real property includes appraisal, appraisal 
review, establishing just compensation, negotiations, administrative and 
legal settlements, and condemnation. The State shall conduct acquisition 
and related relocation activities in accordance with 49 CFR part 24.


<R05>
Sec. 710.311  Construction advertising.

    The State must manage real property acquired for a project until it 
is required for construction. Clearance of improvements can be scheduled 
during the acquisition phase of the project using sale/removal 
agreements, separate demolition contracts, or be included as a work item 
in the construction contract. On Interstate projects, prior to 
advertising for construction, the State shall develop ROW availability 
statements and certifications related to project acquisitions as 
required by 23 CFR 635.309. For non-Interstate projects, the oversight 
agreement must specify responsibility for the review and approval of the 
ROW availability statements and certifications. Generally, for non-NHS 
projects, the State has full responsibility for determining that right-
of-way is available for construction.


<R05>
Sec. 710.313  Design-build projects.

    (a) In the case of a design-build project, right-of-way must be 
acquired and cleared in accordance with the Uniform Relocation 
Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as 
amended, and STD right-of-way procedures. The STD shall submit a right-
of-way certification in accordance with 23 CFR 635.309(p) when 
requesting FHWA's authorization. If the right-of-way services are 
included in the Request for Proposal document, the STD shall ensure that 
right-of-way is available prior to the start of physical construction on 
individual properties.
    (b) The decision to advance a right-of-way segment to the 
construction stage shall not impair the safety or in anyway be coercive 
in the context of 49 CFR 24.102(h) with respect to unacquired or 
occupied properties on the same or adjacent segments of project right-
of-way.
    (c) Certain right-of-way acquisition and clearance services may be 
incorporated into the design-build contract if allowed under State law. 
The contract may include language that provides that construction will 
not commence until all property is acquired and relocations have been 
completed; or, the construction could be phased or segmented to allow 
right-of-way activities to be completed on individual properties or a 
group of properties, thereby allowing certification in a manner 
satisfactory to the STD for each phase or segment.
    (d) If the STD elects to include right-of-way services in the 
design-build contract, the following provisions must be addressed in the 
request for proposals document:
    (1)(i) The design-builder must submit written acquisition and 
relocation procedures to the STD for approval prior to commencing right-
of-way activities.

[[Page 344]]

These procedures should contain a prioritized appraisal, acquisition, 
and relocation strategy as well as check points for STD approval, such 
as approval of just compensation, replacement housing payment 
calculations, replacement housing payment and moving cost claims, 
appraisals, administrative and stipulated settlements that exceed 
determined thresholds based on a risk management analysis, etc. STD's 
which have an FHWA approved procedures manual, in accordance with 23 CFR 
710.201(c), may comply with this section by requiring the design-builder 
to execute a certification in its proposal that it has received the 
approved right-of-way manual and will comply with the procedures.
    (ii) The written relocation plan must provide reasonable time frames 
for the orderly relocation of residents and businesses on the project as 
provided at 49 CFR 24.205. It should be understood that these time 
frames will be based on best estimates of the time it will take to 
acquire the right-of-way and relocate families in accordance with 
certain legal requirements and time frames which may not be violated. 
Accordingly, the time frames estimated for right-of-way acquisition will 
not be compressed in the event other necessary actions preceding right-
of-way acquisition miss their assigned due dates.
    (2)(i) The design-builder must establish a project tracking system 
and quality control system. This system must show the appraisal, 
acquisition and relocation status of all parcels.
    (ii) The quality control system may be administered by an 
independent consultant with the necessary expertise in appraisal, 
acquisition and relocation policies and procedures, who can make 
periodic reviews and reports to the design-builder and the STD.
    (3) The STD may consider the establishment of a hold off zone around 
all occupied properties to ensure compliance with right-of-way 
procedures prior to starting construction activities in affected areas. 
The limits of this zone should be established by the STD prior to the 
design-builder entering on the property. There should be no construction 
related activity within the hold off zone until the property is vacated. 
The design-builder must have written notification of vacancy from the 
right-of-way quality control consultant or STD prior to entering the 
hold off zone.
    (4) Adequate access shall be provided to all occupied properties to 
insure emergency and personal vehicle access.
    (5) Utility service must be available to all occupied properties at 
all times prior to and until relocation is completed.
    (6) Open burning should not occur within 305 meters (1,000 feet) of 
an occupied dwelling.
    (7) The STD will provide a right-of-way project manager who will 
serve as the first point of contact for all right-of-way issues.
    (e) If the STD elects to perform all right-of-way services relating 
to the design-build contract, the provisions in Sec. 710.311 will 
apply. The STD will notify potential offerors of the status of all 
right-of-way issues in the request for proposal document.

[67 FR 75935, Dec. 10, 2002]


<R04>
                   Subpart D_Real Property Management


<R05>
Sec. 710.401  General.

    This subpart describes the acquiring agency's responsibilities to 
control the use of real property required for a project in which Federal 
funds participated in any phase of the project. Prior to allowing any 
change in access control or other use or occupancy of acquired property 
along the Interstate, the STD shall secure an approval from the FHWA for 
such change or use. The STD shall specify in the State's ROW operations 
manual, procedures for the rental, leasing, maintenance, and disposal of 
real property acquired with title 23 of the United States Code funds. 
The State shall assure that local agencies follow the State's approved 
procedures, or the local agencies own procedures if approved for use by 
the STD.


<R05>
Sec. 710.403  Management.

    (a) The STD must assure that all real property within the boundaries 
of a

[[Page 345]]

federally-aided facility is devoted exclusively to the purposes of that 
facility and is preserved free of all other public or private 
alternative uses, unless such alternative uses are permitted by Federal 
regulation or the FHWA. An alternative use must be consistent with the 
continued operation, maintenance, and safety of the facility, and such 
use shall not result in the exposure of the facility's users or others 
to hazards.
    (b) The STD shall specify procedures in the State manual for 
determining when a real property interest is no longer needed. These 
procedures must provide for coordination among relevant STD 
organizational units, including maintenance, safety, design, planning, 
right-of-way, environment, access management, and traffic operations.
    (c) The STD shall evaluate the environmental effects of disposal and 
leasing actions requiring FHWA approval as provided in 23 CFR part 771.
    (d) Acquiring agencies shall charge current fair market value or 
rent for the use or disposal of real property interests, including 
access control, if those real property interests were obtained with 
title 23 of the United States Code funding, except as provided in 
paragraphs (d) (1) through (5) of this section. Since property no longer 
needed for a project was acquired with public funding, the principle 
guiding disposal would normally be to sell the property at fair market 
value and use the funds for transportation purposes. The term fair 
market value as used for acquisition and disposal purposes is as defined 
by State statute and/or State court decisions. Exceptions to the general 
requirement for charging fair market value may be approved in the 
following situations:
    (1) With FHWA approval, when the STD clearly shows that an exception 
is in the overall public interest for social, environmental, or economic 
purposes; nonproprietary governmental use; or uses under 23 U.S.C. 
142(f), Public Transportation. The STD manual may include criteria for 
evaluating disposals at less than fair market value. Disposal for public 
purposes may also be at fair market value. The STD shall submit requests 
for such exceptions to the FHWA in writing.
    (2) Use by public utilities in accordance with 23 CFR part 645.
    (3) Use by Railroads in accordance with 23 CFR part 646.
    (4) Use for Bikeways and pedestrian walkways in accordance with 23 
CFR part 652.
    (5) Use for transportation projects eligible for assistance under 
title 23 of the United States Code.
    (e) The Federal share of net income from the sale or lease of excess 
real property shall be used by the STD for activities eligible for 
funding under title 23 of the United States Code. Where project income 
derived from the sale or lease of excess property is used for subsequent 
title 23 projects, use of the income does not create a Federal-aid 
project.
    (f) No FHWA approval is required for disposal of property which is 
located outside of the limits of the right-of-way if Federal funds did 
not participate in the acquisition cost of the property.
    (g) Highway facilities in which Federal funds participated in either 
the right-of-way or construction may be relinquished to another 
governmental agency for continued highway use under the provisions of 23 
CFR 620, subpart B.


<R05>
Sec. 710.405  Air rights on the Interstate.

    (a) The FHWA policies relating to management of airspace on the 
Interstate for non-highway purposes are included in this section. 
Although this section deals specifically with approval actions on the 
Interstate, any use of airspace contemplated by a STD must assure that 
such occupancy, use, or reservation is in the public interest and does 
not impair the highway or interfere with the free and safe flow of 
traffic as provided in 23 CFR 1.23.
    (1) This subpart applies to Interstate facilities which received 
title 23 of the United States Code assistance in any way.
    (2) This subpart does not apply to the following:
    (i) Non-Interstate highways.
    (ii) Railroads and public utilities which cross or otherwise occupy 
Federal-aid highway right-of-way.

[[Page 346]]

    (iii) Relocations of railroads or utilities for which reimbursement 
is claimed under 23 CFR part 140, subparts E and H.
    (iv) Bikeways and pedestrian walkways as covered in 23 CFR part 652.
    (b) A STD may grant rights for temporary or permanent occupancy or 
use of Interstate system airspace if the STD has acquired sufficient 
legal right, title, and interest in the right-of-way of a federally 
assisted highway to permit the use of certain airspace for non-highway 
purposes; and where such airspace is not required presently or in the 
foreseeable future for the safe and proper operation and maintenance of 
the highway facility. The STD must obtain prior FHWA approval, except 
for paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) An STD may make lands and rights-of-way available without charge 
to a publicly owned mass transit authority for public transit purposes 
whenever the public interest will be served, and where this can be 
accomplished without impairing automotive safety or future highway 
improvements
    (d) An individual, company, organization, or public agency desiring 
to use airspace shall submit a written request to the STD. If the STD 
recommends approval, it shall forward an application together with its 
recommendation and any necessary supplemental information including the 
proposed airspace agreement to the FHWA. The submission shall 
affirmatively provide for adherence to all policy requirements contained 
in this subpart and conform to the provisions in the FHWA's Airspace 
Guidelines at: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/realestate/index.htm.


<R05>
Sec. 710.407  Leasing.

    (a) Leasing of real property acquired with title 23 of the United 
States Code, funds shall be covered by an agreement between the STD and 
lessee which contains provisions to insure the safety and integrity of 
the federally funded facility. It shall also include provisions 
governing lease revocation, removal of improvements at no cost to the 
FHWA, adequate insurance to hold the State and the FHWA harmless, 
nondiscrimination, access by the STD and the FHWA for inspection, 
maintenance, and reconstruction of the facility.
    (b) Where a proposed use requires changes in the existing 
transportation facility, such changes shall be provided without cost to 
Federal funds unless otherwise specifically agreed to by the STD and the 
FHWA.
    (c) Proposed uses of real property shall conform to the current 
design standards and safety criteria of the Federal Highway 
Administration for the functional classification of the highway facility 
in which the property is located.


<R05>
Sec. 710.409  Disposals.

    (a) Real property interests determined to be excess to 
transportation needs may be sold or conveyed to a public entity or to a 
private party in accordance with Sec. 710.403(d).
    (b) Federal, State, and local agencies shall be afforded the 
opportunity to acquire real property interests considered for disposal 
when such real property interests have potential use for parks, 
conservation, recreation, or related purposes, and when such a transfer 
is allowed by State law. When this potential exists, the STD shall 
notify the appropriate resource agencies of its intentions to dispose of 
the real property interests. The notifications can be accomplished by 
placing the appropriate agencies on the States' disposal notification 
listing.
    (c) Real property interests may be retained by the STD to restore, 
preserve, or improve the scenic beauty and environmental quality 
adjacent to the transportation facility.
    (d) Where the transfer of properties to other agencies at less than 
fair market value for continued public use is clearly justified as in 
the public interest and approved by the FHWA, the deed shall provide for 
reversion of the property for failure to continue public ownership and 
use. Where property is sold at fair market value no reversion clause is 
required. Disposal actions described in 23 CFR 710.403(d)(1) for less 
than fair market value require a public interest determination and FHWA 
approval, consistent with that section.

[64 FR 71290, Dec. 21, 1999, as amended at 67 FR 12863, Mar. 20, 2002]

[[Page 347]]


<R04>
               Subpart E_Property Acquisition Alternatives


<R05>
Sec. 710.501  Early acquisition.

    (a) Real property acquisition. The State may initiate acquisition of 
real property at any time it has the legal authority to do so based on 
program or project considerations. The State may undertake early 
acquisition for corridor preservation, access management, or other 
purposes.
    (b) Eligible costs. Acquisition costs incurred by a State agency 
prior to executing a project agreement with the FHWA are not eligible 
for Federal-aid reimbursement. However, such costs may become eligible 
for use as a credit towards the State's share of a Federal-aid project 
if the following conditions are met:
    (1) The property was lawfully obtained by the State;
    (2) The property was not land described in 23 U.S.C. 138;
    (3) The property was acquired in accordance with the provisions of 
49 CFR part 24;
    (4) The State complied with the requirements of title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4);
    (5) The State determined and the FHWA concurs that the action taken 
did not influence the environmental assessment for the project, 
including:
    (i) The decision on need to construct the project;
    (ii) The consideration of alternatives; and
    (iii) The selection of the design or location; and
    (6) The property will be incorporated into a Federal-aid project.
    (7) The original project agreement covering the project was executed 
on or after June 9, 1998.
    (c) Reimbursement. In addition to meeting all provisions in 
paragraph (b) of this section, the FHWA approval for reimbursement for 
early acquisition costs, including costs associated with displacement of 
owners or tenants, requires the STD to demonstrate that:
    (1) Prior to acquisition, the STD made the certifications and 
determinations required by 23 U.S.C. 108(c)(2)(C) and (D); and
    (2) The STD obtained concurrence from the Environmental Protection 
Agency in the findings made under paragraph (b)(5) of this section 
regarding the NEPA process.


<R05>
Sec. 710.503  Protective buying and hardship acquisition.

    (a) General conditions. Prior to the STD obtaining final 
environmental approval, the STD may request FHWA agreement to provide 
reimbursement for advance acquisition of a particular parcel or a 
limited number of parcels, to prevent imminent development and increased 
costs on the preferred location (Protective Buying), or to alleviate 
hardship to a property owner or owners on the preferred location 
(Hardship Acquisition), provided the following conditions are met:
    (1) The project is included in the currently approved STIP;
    (2) The STD has complied with applicable public involvement 
requirements in 23 CFR parts 450 and 771;
    (3) A determination has been completed for any property subject to 
the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 138; and
    (4) Procedures of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation are 
completed for properties subject to 16 U.S.C. 470(f) (historic 
properties).
    (b) Protective buying. The STD must clearly demonstrate that 
development of the property is imminent and such development would limit 
future transportation choices. A significant increase in cost may be 
considered as an element justifying a protective purchase.
    (c) Hardship acquisitions. The STD must accept and concur in a 
request for a hardship acquisition based on a property owner's written 
submission that:
    (1) Supports the hardship acquisition by providing justification, on 
the basis of health, safety or financial reasons, that remaining in the 
property poses an undue hardship compared to others; and
    (2) Documents an inability to sell the property because of the 
impending project, at fair market value, within a time period that is 
typical for properties not impacted by the impending project.
    (d) Environmental decisions. Acquisition of property under this 
section

[[Page 348]]

shall not influence the environmental assessment of a project, including 
the decision relative to the need to construct the project or the 
selection of a specific location.


<R05>
Sec. 710.505  Real property donations.

    (a) Donations of property being acquired. A non-governmental owner 
whose real property is required for a Federal-aid project may donate the 
property to the STD. Prior to accepting the property, the owner must be 
informed by the agency of his/her right to receive just compensation for 
the property. The owner shall also be informed of his/her right to an 
appraisal of the property by a qualified appraiser, unless the STD 
determines that an appraisal is unnecessary because the valuation 
problem is uncomplicated and the fair market value is estimated at no 
more than $2500, or the State appraisal waiver limit approved by the 
FHWA, whichever is greater. All donations of property received prior to 
the approval of the NEPA document must meet environmental requirements 
as specified in 23 U.S.C. 323(d).
    (b) Credit for donations. Donations of real property may be credited 
to the State's matching share of the project. Credit to the State's 
matching share for donated property shall be based on fair market value 
established on the earlier of the following: either the date on which 
the donation becomes effective, or the date on which equitable title to 
the property vests in the State. The fair market value shall not include 
increases or decreases in value caused by the project. Donations may be 
made at anytime during the development of a project. The STD shall 
develop sufficient documentation to indicate compliance with paragraph 
(a) of this section and to support the amount of credit applied. The 
total credit cannot exceed the State's pro-rata share under the project 
agreement to which it is applied.
    (c) Donations and conveyances in exchange for construction features 
or services. A property owner may donate property in exchange for 
construction features or services. The value of the donation is limited 
to the fair market value of property donated less the cost of the 
construction features or services. If the value of the donated property 
exceeds the cost of the construction features or services, the 
difference may be eligible for a credit to the State's share of project 
costs.


<R05>
Sec. 710.507  State and local contributions.

    (a) General. Real property owned by State and local governments 
incorporated within a federally funded project can be used as a credit 
toward the State matching share of total project cost. A credit cannot 
exceed the State's matching share required by the project agreement.
    (b) Effective date. Credits can be applied to projects where the 
initial project agreement is executed after June 9, 1998.
    (c) Exemptions. Credits are not available for lands acquired with 
any form of Federal financial assistance, or for lands already 
incorporated and used for transportation purposes.
    (d) State contributions. Real property acquired with State funds and 
required for federally-assisted projects may support a credit toward the 
non-Federal share of project costs. The STD must prepare documentation 
supporting all credits including:
    (1) A certification that the acquisition satisfied the conditions in 
23 CFR 710.501(b); and
    (2) Justification of the value of credit applied. Acquisition costs 
incurred by the State to acquire title can be used as justification for 
the value of the real property.
    (e) Credit for local government contributions. A contribution by a 
unit of local government of real property which is offered for credit, 
in connection with a project eligible for assistance under this title, 
shall be credited against the State share of the project at fair market 
value of the real property. Property may also be presented for project 
use with the understanding that no credit for its use is sought. The STD 
shall assure that the acquisition satisfied the conditions in 23 CFR 
710.501(b), and that documentation justifies the amount of the credit.

[[Page 349]]


<R05>
Sec. 710.509  Functional replacement of real property in public ownership.

    (a) General. When publicly owned real property, including land and/
or facilities, is to be acquired for a Federal-aid highway project, in 
lieu of paying the fair market value for the real property, the State 
may provide compensation by functionally replacing the publicly owned 
real property with another facility which will provide equivalent 
utility.
    (b) Federal participation. Federal-aid funds may participate in 
functional replacement costs only if:
    (1) Functional replacement is permitted under State law and the STD 
elects to provide it.
    (2) The property in question is in public ownership and use.
    (3) The replacement facility will be in public ownership and will 
continue the public use function of the acquired facility.
    (4) The State has informed the agency owning the property of its 
right to an estimate of just compensation based on an appraisal of fair 
market value and of the option to choose either just compensation or 
functional replacement.
    (5) The FHWA concurs in the STD determination that functional 
replacement is in the public interest.
    (6) The real property is not owned by a utility or railroad.
    (c) Federal land transfers. Use of this section for functional 
replacement of real property in Federal ownership shall be in accordance 
with Federal land transfer provisions in subpart F of this part.
    (d) Limits upon participation. Federal-aid participation in the 
costs of functional replacement are limited to costs which are actually 
incurred in the replacement of the acquired land and/or facility and 
are:
    (1) Costs for facilities which do not represent increases in 
capacity or betterments, except for those necessary to replace 
utilities, to meet legal, regulatory, or similar requirements, or to 
meet reasonable prevailing standards; and
    (2) Costs for land to provide a site for the replacement facility.
    (e) Procedures. When a State determines that payments providing for 
functional replacement of public facilities are allowable under State 
law, the State will incorporate within the State's ROW operating manual 
full procedures covering review and oversight that will be applied to 
such cases.


<R05>
Sec. 710.511  Transportation enhancements.

    (a) General. Section 133(b) (8) of title 23 of the United States 
Code authorizes the expenditure of surface transportation funds for 
transportation enhancement activities (TEA). Transportation enhancement 
activities which involve the acquisition, management, and disposition of 
real property, and the relocation of families, individuals, and 
businesses, are governed by the general requirements of the Federal-aid 
program found in titles 23 and 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR), except as specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (b) Requirements. (1) Displacements for TEA are subject to the 
Uniform Act.
    (2) Acquisitions for TEA are subject to the Uniform Act except as 
provided in paragraphs (b)(3), (b)(4), and (b)(5) of this section.
    (3) Entities acquiring real property for TEA who lack the power of 
eminent domain may comply with the Uniform Act by meeting the limited 
requirements under 49 CFR 24.101(a)(2).
    (4) The requirements of the Uniform Act do not apply when real 
property acquired for a TEA was purchased from a third party by a 
qualified conservation organization, and--
    (i) The conservation organization is not acting on behalf of the 
agency receiving TEA or other Federal-aid funds, and
    (ii) There was no Federal approval of property acquisition prior to 
the involvement of the conservation organization. [``Federal approval of 
property acquisition'' means the date of the approval of the 
environmental document or project authorization/agreement, whichever is 
earlier. ``Involvement of the conservation organization'' means the date 
the organization makes a legally binding offer to acquire a real 
property interest, including an option to purchase, in the property.]

[[Page 350]]

    (5) When a qualified conservation organization acquires real 
property for a project receiving Federal-aid highway funds on behalf of 
an agency with eminent domain authority, the requirements of the Uniform 
Act apply as if the agency had acquired the property itself.
    (6) When, subsequent to Federal approval of property acquisition, a 
qualified conservation organization acquires real property for a project 
receiving Federal-aid highway funds, and there will be no use or 
recourse to the power of eminent domain, the limited requirements of 49 
CFR 24.101(a)(2) apply.
    (c) Property management. Real property acquired with TEA funds shall 
be managed in accordance with the property management requirements 
provided in subpart D of this part. Any use of the property for purposes 
other than that for which the TEA funds were provided must be consistent 
with the continuation of the original use. When the original use of the 
real property is converted by sale or lease to another use inconsistent 
with the original use, the STD shall assure that the fair market value 
or rent is charged and the proceeds reapplied to projects eligible under 
title 23 of the United States Code.


<R05>
Sec. 710.513  Environmental mitigation.

    (a) The acquisition and maintenance of land for wetlands mitigation, 
wetlands banking, natural habitat, or other appropriate environmental 
mitigation is an eligible cost under the Federal-aid program. FHWA 
participation in wetland mitigation sites and other mitigation banks is 
governed by 23 CFR part 777.
    (b) Environmental acquisitions or displacements by both public 
agencies and private parties are covered by the Uniform Act when they 
are the result of a program or project undertaken by a Federal agency or 
one that receives Federal financial assistance. This includes real 
property acquired for a wetland bank, or other environmentally related 
purpose, if it is to be used to mitigate impacts created by a Federal-
aid highway project.


<R04>
                  Subpart F_Federal Assistance Programs


<R05>
Sec. 710.601  Federal land transfer.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart apply to any project undertaken 
with funds for the National Highway System. When the FHWA determines 
that a strong Federal transportation interest exists, these provisions 
may also be applied to highway projects that are eligible for Federal-
aid under Chapters 1 and 2 of title 23, of the United States Code, and 
to highway-related transfers that are requested by a State in 
conjunction with a military base closure under the Defense Base Closure 
and Realignment Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-510, 104 Stat. 1808, as 
amended).
    (b) Sections 107(d) and 317 of title 23, of the United States Code 
provide for the transfer of lands or interests in lands owned by the 
United States to an STD or its nominee for highway purposes.
    (c) The STD may file an application with the FHWA, or can make 
application directly to the land-owning agency if the land-owning agency 
has its own authority for granting interests in land.
    (d) Applications under this section shall include the following 
information:
    (1) The purpose for which the lands are to be used;
    (2) The estate or interest in the land required for the project;
    (3) The Federal-aid project number or other appropriate references;
    (4) The name of the Federal agency exercising jurisdiction over the 
land and identity of the installation or activity in possession of the 
land;
    (5) A map showing the survey of the lands to be acquired;
    (6) A legal description of the lands desired; and
    (7) A statement of compliance with the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332, et seq.) and any other applicable Federal 
environmental laws, including the National Historic Preservation Act (16 
U.S.C. 470(f)), and 23 U.S.C. 138.
    (e) If the FHWA concurs in the need for the transfer, the land-
owning agency will be notified and a right-of-entry requested. The land-
owning agency

[[Page 351]]

shall have a period of four months in which to designate conditions 
necessary for the adequate protection and utilization of the reserve or 
to certify that the proposed appropriation is contrary to the public 
interest or inconsistent with the purposes for which such land or 
materials have been reserved. The FHWA may extend the four-month reply 
period at the timely request of the land-owning agency for good cause.
    (f) Deeds for conveyance of lands or interests in lands owned by the 
United States shall be prepared by the STD and certified by an attorney 
licensed within the State as being legally sufficient. Such deeds shall 
contain the clauses required by the FHWA and 49 CFR 21.7(a)(2). After 
the STD prepares the deed, it will submit the proposed deed with the 
certification to the FHWA for review and execution.
    (g) Following execution, the STD shall record the deed in the 
appropriate land record office and so advise the FHWA and the concerned 
agency.
    (h) When the need for the interest acquired under this subpart no 
longer exists, the STD must restore the land to the condition which 
existed prior to the transfer and must give notice to the FHWA and to 
the concerned Federal agency that such interest will immediately revert 
to the control of the Federal agency from which it was appropriated or 
to its assigns. Alternative arrangements may be made for the sale or 
reversion or restoration of the lands no longer required as part of a 
memorandum of understanding or separate agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 710.603  Direct Federal acquisition.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to any land and or 
improvements needed in connection with any project on the Interstate 
System, defense access roads, public lands highways, park roads, 
parkways, Indian reservation roads, and projects performed by the FHWA 
in cooperation with Federal and State agencies. For projects on the 
Interstate System and defense access roads, the provisions of this part 
are applicable only where the State is unable to acquire the required 
right-of-way or is unable to obtain possession with sufficient 
promptness.
    (b) To enable the FHWA to make the necessary finding to proceed with 
the acquisition of the rights-of-way, the STDs written application for 
Federal acquisition shall include:
    (1) Justification for the Federal acquisition of the lands or 
interests in lands;
    (2) The date the FHWA authorized the STD to commence right-of-way 
acquisition, the date of the project agreement and a statement that the 
agreement contains the provisions required by 25 U.S.C. 111;
    (3) The necessity for acquisition of the particular lands under 
request;
    (4) A statement of the specific interests in lands to be acquired, 
including the proposed treatment of control of access;
    (5) The STDs intentions with respect to the acquisition, 
subordination, or exclusion of outstanding interests, such as minerals 
and utility easements, in connection with the proposed acquisition;
    (6) A statement on compliance with the provisions of part 771 of 
this chapter;
    (7) Adequate legal descriptions, plats, appraisals, and title data;
    (8) An outline of the negotiations which have been conducted by the 
STD with landowners;
    (9) An agreement that the STD will pay its pro rata share of costs 
incurred in the acquisition of, or the attempt to acquire rights-of-way; 
and
    (10) A statement that assures compliance with the applicable 
provisions of the Uniform Act. (42 U.S.C. 4601, et seq.)
    (c) If the landowner tenders a right-of-entry or other right of 
possession document required by State law any time before the FHWA makes 
a determination that the STD is unable to acquire the rights-of-way with 
sufficient promptness, the STD is legally obligated to accept such 
tender and the FHWA may not proceed with Federal acquisition.
    (d) If the STD obtains title to a parcel prior to the filing of the 
Declaration of Taking, it shall notify the FHWA and immediately furnish 
the appropriate U.S. Attorney with a disclaimer together with a request 
that the action against the landowner be

[[Page 352]]

dismissed (ex parte) from the proceeding and the estimated just 
compensation deposited into the registry of the court for the affected 
parcel be withdrawn after the appropriate motions are approved by the 
court.
    (e) When the United States obtains a court order granting possession 
of the real property, the FHWA shall authorize the STD to take over 
supervision of the property. The authorization shall include, but need 
not be limited to, the following:
    (1) The right to take possession of unoccupied properties;
    (2) The right to give 90 days notice to owners to vacate occupied 
properties and the right to take possession of such properties when 
vacated;
    (3) The right to permit continued occupancy of a property until it 
is required for construction and, in those instances where such 
occupancy is to be for a substantial period of time, the right to enter 
into rental agreements, as appropriate, to protect the public interest;
    (4) The right to request assistance from the U.S. Attorney in 
obtaining physical possession where an owner declines to comply with the 
court order of possession;
    (5) The right to clear improvements and other obstructions;
    (6) Instructions that the U.S. Attorney be notified prior to actual 
clearing, so as to afford him an opportunity to view the lands and 
improvements, to obtain appropriate photographs, and to secure 
appraisals in connection with the preparation of the case for trial;
    (7) The requirement for appropriate credits to the United States for 
any net salvage or net rentals obtained by the State, as in the case of 
right-of-way acquired by the State for Federal-aid projects; and
    (8) Instructions that the authority granted to the STD is not 
intended to preclude the U.S. Attorney from taking action, before the 
STD has made arrangements for removal, to reach a settlement with the 
former owner which would include provision for removal.
    (f) If the Federal Government initiates condemnation proceedings 
against the owner of real property in a Federal court and the final 
judgment is that the Federal agency cannot acquire the real property by 
condemnation, or the proceeding is abandoned, the court is required by 
law to award such a sum to the owner of the real property that in the 
opinion of the court provides reimbursement for the owner's reasonable 
costs, disbursements, and expenses, including reasonable attorney, 
appraisal, and engineering fees, actually incurred because of the 
condemnation proceedings.
    (g) As soon as practicable after the date of payment of the purchase 
price or the date of deposit in court of funds to satisfy the award of 
the compensation in a Federal condemnation, the FHWA shall reimburse the 
owner to the extent deemed fair and reasonable, the following costs:
    (1) Recording fees, transfer taxes, and similar expenses incidental 
to conveying such real property to the United States;
    (2) Penalty costs for prepayment of any preexisting recorded 
mortgage entered into in good faith encumbering such real property; and
    (3) The pro rata portion of real property taxes paid which are 
allocable to a period subsequent to the date of vesting title in the 
United States or the effective date of possession, whichever is the 
earlier.
    (h) The lands or interests in lands, acquired under this section, 
will be conveyed to the State or the appropriate political subdivision 
thereof, upon agreement by the STD, or said subdivision to:
    (1) Maintain control of access where applicable;
    (2) Accept title thereto;
    (3) Maintain the project constructed thereon;
    (4) Abide by any conditions which may set forth in the deed; and
    (5) Notify the FHWA at the appropriate time that all the conditions 
have been performed by the State.
    (i) The deed from the United States to the State, or to the 
appropriate political subdivision thereof, shall include the conditions 
required by 49 CFR part 21. The deed shall be recorded by the grantee in 
the appropriate land record office, and the FHWA shall be advised of the 
recording date.

[[Page 353]]


<R03>
PART 750_HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION--Table of Contents




    Subpart A_National Standards for Regulation by States of Outdoor 
   Advertising Adjacent to the Interstate System Under the 1958 Bonus 
                                 Program

Sec.
750.101 Purpose.
750.102 Definitions.
750.103 Measurements of distance.
750.104 Signs that may not be permitted in protected areas.
750.105 Signs that may be permitted in protected areas.
750.106 Class 3 and 4 signs within informational sites.
750.107 Class 3 and 4 signs outside informational sites.
750.108 General provisions.
750.109 Exclusions.
750.110 State regulations.

     Subpart B_National Standards for Directional and Official Signs

750.151 Purpose.
750.152 Application.
750.153 Definitions.
750.154 Standards for directional signs.
750.155 State standards.

Subpart C [Reserved]

 Subpart D_Outdoor Advertising (Acquisition of Rights of Sign and Sign 
                              Site Owners)

750.301 Purpose.
750.302 Policy.
750.303 Definitions.
750.304 State policies and procedures.
750.305 Federal participation.
750.306 Documentation for Federal participation.
750.307 FHWA project approval.
750.308 Reports.

          Subpart E_Signs Exempt From Removal in Defined Areas

750.501 Purpose.
750.502 Applicability.
750.503 Exemptions.

Subpart F [Reserved]

                  Subpart G_Outdoor Advertising Control

750.701 Purpose.
750.702 Applicability.
750.703 Definitions.
750.704 Statutory requirements.
750.705 Effective control.
750.706 Sign control in zoned and unzoned commercial and industrial 
          areas.
750.707 Nonconforming signs.
750.708 Acceptance of state zoning.
750.709 On-property or on-premise advertising.
750.710 Landmark signs.
750.711 Structures which have never displayed advertising material.
750.712 Reclassification of signs.
750.713 Bonus provisions.

    Source: 38 FR 16044, June 20, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
    Subpart A_National Standards for Regulation by States of Outdoor 
   Advertising Adjacent to the Interstate System Under the 1958 Bonus 
                                 Program

    Authority: Sec. 12, Pub. L. 85-381, 72 Stat. 95, as amended; 23 
U.S.C. 131; delegation of authority in 49 CFR 1.48(b).


<R05>
Sec. 750.101  Purpose.

    (a) In section 12 of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958, Pub. L. 
85-381, 72 Stat. 95, hereinafter called the act, the Congress declared 
that:
    (1) To promote the safety, convenience, and enjoyment of public 
travel and the free flow of interstate commerce and to protect the 
public investment in the National System of Interstate and Defense 
Highways, hereinafter called the Interstate System, it is in the public 
interest to encourage and assist the States to control the use of and to 
improve areas adjacent to such system by controlling the erection and 
maintenance of outdoor advertising signs, displays, and devices adjacent 
to that system.
    (2) It is a national policy that the erection and maintenance of 
outdoor advertising signs, displays, or devices within 660 feet of the 
edge of the right-of-way and visible from the main-traveled way of all 
portions of the Interstate System constructed upon any part of right-of-
way, the entire width of which is acquired subsequent to July 1, 1956, 
should be regulated, consistent with national standards to be prepared 
and promulgated by the Secretary of Transportation.

[[Page 354]]

    (b) The standards in this part are hereby promulgated as provided in 
the act.

[38 FR 16044, June 20, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 28629, Aug. 9, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 750.102  Definitions.

    The following terms when used in the standards in this part have the 
following meanings:
    (a) Acquired for right-of-way means acquired for right-of-way for 
any public road by the Federal Government, a State, or a county, city, 
or other political subdivision of a State, by donation, dedication, 
purchase, condemnation, use, or otherwise. The date of acquisition shall 
be the date upon which title (whether fee title or a lesser interest) 
vested in the public for right-of-way purposes under applicable Federal 
or State law.
    (b) Centerline of the highway means a line equidistant from the 
edges of the median separating the main-traveled ways of a divided 
Interstate Highway, or the centerline of the main-traveled way of a 
nondivided Interstate Highway.
    (c) Controlled portion of the Interstate System means any portion 
which:
    (1) Is constructed upon any part of right-of-way, the entire width 
of which is acquired for right-of-way subsequent to July 1, 1956 (a 
portion shall be deemed so constructed if, within such portion, no line 
normal or perpendicular to the centerline of the highway and extending 
to both edges of the right-of-way will intersect any right-of-way 
acquired for right-of-way on or before July 1, 1956);
    (2) Lies within a State, the highway department of which has entered 
into an agreement with the Secretary of Transportation as provided in 
the act; and
    (3) Is not excluded under the terms of the act which provide that 
agreements entered into between the Secretary of Transportation and the 
State highway department shall not apply to those segments of the 
Interstate System which traverse commercial or industrial zones within 
the boundaries of incorporated municipalities, as such boundaries 
existed on September 21, 1959, wherein the use of real property adjacent 
to the Interstate System is subject to municipal regulation or control, 
or which traverse other areas where the land use as of September 21, 
1959, was clearly established by State law as industrial or commercial.
    (d) Entrance roadway means any public road or turning roadway, 
including acceleration lanes, by which traffic may enter the main-
traveled way of an Interstate Highway from the general road system 
within a State, irrespective of whether traffic may also leave the main-
traveled way by such road or turning roadway.
    (e) Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, 
attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or 
establish.
    (f) Exit roadway means any public road or turning roadway including 
deceleration lanes, by which traffic may leave the main-traveled way of 
an Interstate Highway to reach the general road system within a State, 
irrespective of whether traffic may also enter the main-traveled way by 
such road or turning roadway.
    (g) Informational site means an area or site established and 
maintained within or adjacent to the right-of-way of a highway on the 
Interstate System by or under the supervision or control of a State 
highway department, wherein panels for the display of advertising and 
informational signs may be erected and maintained.
    (h) Legible means capable of being read without visual aid by a 
person of normal visual acuity.
    (i) Maintain means to allow to exist.
    (j) Main-traveled way means the traveled way of an Interstate 
Highway on which through traffic is carried. In the case of a divided 
highway, the traveled way of each of the separated roadways for traffic 
in opposite directions is a main-traveled way. It does not include such 
facilities as frontage roads, turning roadways, or parking areas.
    (k) Protected areas means all areas inside the boundaries of a State 
which are adjacent to and within 660 feet of the edge of the right-of-
way of all controlled portions of the Interstate System within that 
State. Where a controlled portion of the Interstate System terminates at 
a State boundary which is not perpendicular or normal

[[Page 355]]

to the centerline of the highway, protected areas also means all areas 
inside the boundary of such State which are within 660 feet of the edge 
of the right-of-way of the Interstate Highway in the adjoining State.
    (l) Scenic area means any public park or area of particular scenic 
beauty or historical significance designated by or pursuant to State law 
as a scenic area.
    (m) Sign means any outdoor sign, display, device, figure, painting, 
drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or other thing which is 
designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform, any part of the 
advertising or informative contents of which is visible from any place 
on the main-traveled way of a controlled portion of the Interstate 
System.
    (n) State means the District of Columbia and any State of the United 
States within the boundaries of which a portion of the Interstate System 
is located.
    (o) State law means a State constitutional provision or statute, or 
an ordinance, rule, or regulation enacted or adopted by a State agency 
or political subdivision of a State pursuant to State constitution or 
statute.
    (p) Trade name shall include brand name, trademark, distinctive 
symbol, or other similar device or thing used to identify particular 
products or services.
    (q) Traveled way means the portion of a roadway for the movement of 
vehicles, exclusive of shoulders.
    (r) Turning roadway means a connecting roadway for traffic turning 
between two intersection legs of an interchange.
    (s) Visible means capable of being seen (whether or not legible) 
without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity.


<R05>
Sec. 750.103  Measurements of distance.

    (a) Distance from the edge of a right-of-way shall be measured 
horizontally along a line normal or perpendicular to the centerline of 
the highway.
    (b) All distances under Sec. 750.107 (a)(2) and (b) shall be 
measured along the centerline of the highway between two vertical planes 
which are normal or perpendicular to and intersect the centerline of the 
highway, and which pass through the termini of the measured distance.

[38 FR 16044, June 20, 1973, as amended at 41 FR 9321, Mar. 4, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 750.104  Signs that may not be permitted in protected areas.

    Erection or maintenance of the following signs may not be permitted 
in protected areas:
    (a) Signs advertising activities that are illegal under State or 
Federal laws or regulations in effect at the location of such signs or 
at the location of such activities.
    (b) Obsolete signs.
    (c) Signs that are not clean and in good repair.
    (d) Signs that are not securely affixed to a substantial structure, 
and
    (e) Signs that are not consistent with the standards in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 750.105  Signs that may be permitted in protected areas.

    (a) Erection or maintenance of the following signs may be permitted 
in protected areas:

    Class 1--Official signs. Directional or other official signs or 
notices erected and maintained by public officers or agencies pursuant 
to and in accordance with direction or authorization contained in State 
of Federal law, for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or 
responsibility.
    Class 2--On-premise signs. Signs not prohibited by State law which 
are consistent with the applicable provisions of this section and Sec. 
750.108 and which advertise the sale or lease of, or activities being 
conducted upon, the real property where the signs are located.
    Not more than one such sign advertising the sale or lease of the 
same property may be permitted under this class in such manner as to be 
visible to traffic proceeding in any one direction on any one Interstate 
Highway.
    Not more than one such sign, visible to traffic proceeding in any 
one direction on any one Interstate Highway and advertising activities 
being conducted upon the real property where the sign is located, may be 
permitted under this class more than 50 feet from the advertised 
activity.
    Class 3--Signs within 12 miles of advertised activities. Signs not 
prohibited by State law which are consistent with the applicable 
provisions of this section and Sec. Sec. 750.106, 750.107, and 750.108 
and which advertise activities being conducted within 12 air miles of 
such signs.

[[Page 356]]

    Class 4--Signs in the specific interest of the traveling public. 
Signs authorized to be erected or maintained by State law which are 
consistent with the applicable provisions of this section and Sec. Sec. 
750.106, 750.107, and 750.108 and which are designed to give information 
in the specific interest of the traveling public.

    (b) A Class 2 or 3 sign, except a Class 2 sign not more than 50 feet 
from the advertised activity, that displays any trade name which refers 
to or identifies any service rendered or product sold, used, or 
otherwise handled more than 12 air miles from such sign may not be 
permitted unless the name of the advertised activity which is within 12 
air miles of such sign is displayed as conspicuously as such trade name.
    (c) Only information about public places operated by Federal, State, 
or local governments, natural phenomena, historic sites, areas of 
natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for outdoor recreation and 
places for camping, lodging, eating, and vehicle service and repair is 
deemed to be in the specific interest of the traveling public. For the 
purposes of the standards in this part, a trade name is deemed to be 
information in the specific interest of the traveling public only if it 
identifies or characterizes such a place or identifies vehicle service, 
equipment, parts, accessories, fuels, oils, or lubricants being offered 
for sale at such a place. Signs displaying any other trade name may not 
be permitted under Class 4.
    (d) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, 
Class 2 or Class 3 signs which also qualify as Class 4 signs may display 
trade names in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this 
section.


<R05>
Sec. 750.106  Class 3 and 4 signs within informational sites.

    (a) Informational sites for the erection and maintenance of Class 3 
and 4 advertising and informational signs may be established in 
accordance with Sec. 1.35 of this chapter. The location and frequency 
of such sites shall be as determined by agreements between the Secretary 
of Transportation and the State highway departments.
    (b) Class 3 and 4 signs may be permitted within such informational 
sites in protected areas in a manner consistent with the following 
provisions:
    (1) No sign may be permitted which is not placed upon a panel.
    (2) No panel may be permitted to exceed 13 feet in height or 25 feet 
in length, including border and trim, but excluding supports.
    (3) No sign may be permitted to exceed 12 square feet in area, and 
nothing on such sign may be permitted to be legible from any place on 
the main-traveled way or a turning roadway.
    (4) Not more than one sign concerning a single activity or place may 
be permitted within any one informational site.
    (5) Signs concerning a single activity or place may be permitted 
within more than one informational site, but no Class 3 sign which does 
not also qualify as a Class 4 sign may be permitted within any 
informational site more than 12 air miles from the advertised activity.
    (6) No sign may be permitted which moves or has any animated or 
moving parts.
    (7) Illumination of panels by other than white lights may not be 
permitted, and no sign placed on any panel may be permitted to contain, 
include, or be illuminated by any other lights, or any flashing, 
intermittent, or moving lights.
    (8) No lighting may be permitted to be used in any way in connection 
with any panel unless it is so effectively shielded as to prevent beams 
or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the main-traveled 
way of the Interstate System, or is of such low intensity or brilliance 
as not to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor 
vehicle, or to otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a 
motor vehicle.

[23 FR 8793, Nov. 13, 1958, as amended at 35 FR 18719, Dec. 10, 1970; 41 
FR 9321, Mar. 4, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 750.107  Class 3 and 4 signs outside informational sites.

    (a) The erection or maintenance of the following signs may be 
permitted within protected areas, outside informational sites:
    (1) Class 3 signs which are visible only to Interstate highway 
traffic not served by an informational site within 12 air miles of the 
advertised activity;

[[Page 357]]

    (2) Class 4 signs which are more than 12 miles from the nearest 
panel within an informational site serving Interstate highway traffic to 
which such signs are visible.
    (3) Signs that qualify both as Class 3 and 4 signs may be permitted 
in accordance with either paragraph (a)(1) or (2) of this section.
    (b) The erection or maintenance of signs permitted under paragraph 
(a) of this section may not be permitted in any manner inconsistent with 
the following:
    (1) In protected areas in advance of an intersection of the main-
traveled way of an Interstate highway and an exit roadway, such signs 
visible to Interstate highway traffic approaching such intersection may 
not be permitted to exceed the following number:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Distance from intersection                Number of signs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0-2 miles................................  0.
2-5 miles................................  6.
More than 5 miles........................  Average of one sign per mile.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


The specified distances shall be measured to the nearest point of the 
intersection of the traveled way of the exit roadway and the main-
traveled way of the Interstate highway.
    (2) Subject to the other provisions of this paragraph, not more than 
two such signs may be permitted within any mile distance measured from 
any point, and no such signs may be permitted to be less than 1,000 feet 
apart.
    (3) Such signs may not be permitted in protected areas adjacent to 
any Interstate highway right-of-way upon any part of the width of which 
is constructed an entrance or exit roadway.
    (4) Such signs visible to Interstate highway traffic which is 
approaching or has passed an entrance roadway may not be permitted in 
protected areas for 1,000 feet beyond the furthest point of the 
intersection between the traveled way of such entrance roadway and the 
main-traveled way of the Interstate highway.
    (5) No such signs may be permitted in scenic areas.
    (6) Not more than one such sign advertising activities being 
conducted as a single enterprise or giving information about a single 
place may be permitted to be erected or maintained in such manner as to 
be visible to traffic moving in any one direction on any one Interstate 
highway.
    (c) No Class 3 or 4 signs other than those permitted by this section 
may be permitted to be erected or maintained within protected areas, 
outside informational sites.


<R05>
Sec. 750.108  General provisions.

    No Class 3 or 4 signs may be permitted to be erected or maintained 
pursuant to Sec. 750.107, and no Class 2 sign may be permitted to be 
erected or maintained, in any manner inconsistent with the following:
    (a) No sign may be permitted which attempts or appears to attempt to 
direct the movement of traffic or which interferes with, imitates or 
resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device.
    (b) No sign may be permitted which prevents the driver of a vehicle 
from having a clear and unobstructed view of official signs and 
approaching or merging traffic.
    (c) No sign may be permitted which contains, includes, or is 
illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights.
    (d) No lighting may be permitted to be used in any way in connection 
with any sign unless it is so effectively shielded as to prevent beams 
or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the main-traveled 
way of the Interstate System, or is of such low intensity or brilliance 
as not to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor 
vehicle, or to otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a 
motor vehicle.
    (e) No sign may be permitted which moves or has any animated or 
moving parts.
    (f) No sign may be permitted to be erected or maintained upon trees 
or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features.
    (g) No sign may be permitted to exceed 20 feet in length, width or 
height, or 150 square feet in area, including border and trim but 
excluding supports, except Class 2 signs not more than 50 feet from, and 
advertising activities being conducted upon, the real property where the 
sign is located.

[[Page 358]]


<R05>
Sec. 750.109  Exclusions.

    The standards in this part shall not apply to markers, signs and 
plaques in appreciation of sites of historical significance for the 
erection of which provisions are made in an agreement between a State 
and the Secretary of Transportation, as provided in the Act, unless such 
agreement expressly makes all or any part of the standards applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 750.110  State regulations.

    A State may elect to prohibit signs permissible under the standards 
in this part without forfeiting its rights to any benefits provided for 
in the act.


<R04>
     Subpart B_National Standards for Directional and Official Signs

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 131, 315, 49 U.S.C. 1651; 49 CFR 1.48(b).


<R05>
Sec. 750.151  Purpose.

    (a) In section 131 of title 23 U.S.C., Congress has declared that:
    (1) The erection and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs, 
displays, and devices in areas adjacent to the Interstate System and the 
primary system should be controlled in order to protect the public 
investment in such highways, to promote safety and recreational value of 
public travel, and to preserve natural beauty.
    (2) Directional and official signs and notices, which signs and 
notices shall include, but not be limited to, signs and notices 
pertaining to natural wonders, scenic and historical attractions, which 
are required or authorized by law, shall conform to national standards 
authorized to be promulgated by the Secretary, which standards shall 
contain provisions concerning the lighting, size, number and spacing of 
signs, and such other requirements as may be appropriate to implement 
the section.
    (b) The standards in this part are issued as provided in section 131 
of title 23 U.S.C.

[38 FR 16044, June 30, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 21934, May 20, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 750.152  Application.

    The following standards apply to directional and official signs and 
notices located within six hundred and sixty (660) feet of the right-of-
way of the Interstate and Federal-aid primary systems and to those 
located beyond six hundred and sixty (660) feet of the right-of-way of 
such systems, outside of urban areas, visible from the main traveled way 
of such systems and erected with the purpose of their message being read 
from such main traveled way. These standards do not apply to directional 
and official signs erected on the highway right-of-way.

[40 FR 21934, May 20, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 750.153  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part:
    (a) Sign means an outdoor sign, light, display, device, figure, 
painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or other thing 
which is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform, any part of 
the advertising or informative contents of which is visible from any 
place on the main traveled way of the Interstate or Federal-aid primary 
highway.
    (b) Main traveled way means the through traffic lanes of the 
highway, exclusive of frontage roads, auxiliary lanes, and ramps.
    (c) Interstate System means the National System of Interstate and 
Defence Highways described in section 103(d) of title 23 U.S.C.
    (d) Primary system means the Federal-aid highway system described in 
section 103(b) of title 23 U.S.C.
    (e) Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, 
attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or 
establish.
    (f) Maintain means to allow to exist.
    (g) Scenic area means any area of particular scenic beauty or 
historical significance as determined by the Federal, State, or local 
officials having jurisdiction thereof, and includes interests in land 
which have been acquired for the restoration, preservation, and 
enhancement of scenic beauty.
    (h) Parkland means any publicly owned land which is designated or 
used as a public park, recreation area, wildlife or waterfowl refuge or 
historic site.

[[Page 359]]

    (i) Federal or State law means a Federal or State constitutional 
provision or statute, or an ordinance, rule, or regulation enacted or 
adopted by a State or Federal agency or a political subdivision of a 
State pursuant to a Federal or State constitution or statute.
    (j) Visible means capable of being seen (whether or not legible) 
without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity.
    (k) Freeway means a divided arterial highway for through traffic 
with full control of access.
    (l) Rest area means an area or site established and maintained 
within or adjacent to the highway right-of-way by or under public 
supervision or control for the convenience of the traveling public.
    (m) Directional and official signs and notices includes only 
official signs and notices, public utility signs, service club and 
religious notices, public service signs, and directional signs.
    (n) Official signs and notices means signs and notices erected and 
maintained by public officers or public agencies within their 
territorial or zoning jurisdiction and pursuant to and in accordance 
with direction or authorization contained in Federal, State, or local 
law for the purposes of carrying out an official duty or responsibility. 
Historical markers authorized by State law and erected by State or local 
government agencies or nonprofit historical societies may be considered 
official signs.
    (o) Public utility signs means warning signs, informational signs, 
notices, or markers which are customarily erected and maintained by 
publicly or privately owned public utilities, as essential to their 
operations.
    (p) Service club and religious notices means signs and notices, 
whose erection is authorized by law, relating to meetings of nonprofit 
service clubs or charitable associations, or religious services, which 
signs do not exceed 8 square feet in area.
    (q) Public service signs means signs located on school bus stop 
shelters, which signs:
    (1) Identify the donor, sponsor, or contributor of said shelters;
    (2) Contain public service messages, which shall occupy not less 
than 50 percent of the area of the sign;
    (3) Contain no other message;
    (4) Are located on schoolbus shelters which are authorized or 
approved by city, county, or State law, regulation, or ordinance, and at 
places approved by the city, county, or State agency controlling the 
highway involved; and
    (5) May not exceed 32 square feet in area. Not more than one sign on 
each shelter shall face in any one direction.
    (r) Directional signs means signs containing directional information 
about public places owned or operated by Federal, State, or local 
governments or their agencies; publicly or privately owned natural 
phenomena, historic, cultural, scientific, educational, and religious 
sites; and areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for 
outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the traveling 
public.
    (s) State means any one of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.
    (t) Urban area means an urbanized area or, in the case of an 
urbanized area encompassing more than one State, that part of the 
urbanized areas in each such State, or an urban place as designated by 
the Bureau of the Census having a population of five thousand or more 
and not within any urbanized area, within boundaries to be fixed by 
responsible State and local officials in cooperation with each other, 
subject to approval by the Secretary. Such boundaries shall, as a 
minimum, encompass the entire urban place designated by the Bureau of 
the Census.

[38 FR 16044, June 30, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 21934, May 20, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 750.154  Standards for directional signs.

    The following apply only to directional signs:
    (a) General. The following signs are prohibited:
    (1) Signs advertising activities that are illegal under Federal or 
State laws or regulations in effect at the location of those signs or at 
the location of those activities.
    (2) Signs located in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise 
interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic

[[Page 360]]

sign, signal, or device, or obstruct or interfere with the driver's view 
of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
    (3) Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or 
drawn upon rocks or other natural features.
    (4) Obsolete signs.
    (5) Signs which are structurally unsafe or in disrepair.
    (6) Signs which move or have any animated or moving parts.
    (7) Signs located in rest areas, parklands or scenic areas.
    (b) Size. (1) No sign shall exceed the following limits:
    (i) Maximum area--150 square feet.
    (ii) Maximum height--20 feet.
    (iii) Maximum length--20 feet.
    (2) All dimensions include border and trim, but exclude supports.
    (c) Lighting. Signs may be illuminated, subject to the following:
    (1) Signs which contain, include, or are illuminated by any 
flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights are prohibited.
    (2) Signs which are not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams 
or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way 
of an Interstate or primary highway or which are of such intensity or 
brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of 
any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's 
operation of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
    (3) No sign may be so illuminated as to interfere with the 
effectiveness of or obscure an official traffic sign, device, or signal.
    (d) Spacing. (1) Each location of a directional sign must be 
approved by the State highway department.
    (2) No directional sign may be located within 2,000 feet of an 
interchange, or intersection at grade along the Interstate System or 
other freeways (measured along the Interstate or freeway from the 
nearest point of the beginning or ending of pavement widening at the 
exit from or entrance to the main traveled way).
    (3) No directional sign may be located within 2,000 feet of a rest 
area, parkland, or scenic area.
    (4)(i) No two directional signs facing the same direction of travel 
shall be spaced less than 1 mile apart;
    (ii) Not more than three directional signs pertaining to the same 
activity and facing the same direction of travel may be erected along a 
single route approaching the activity;
    (iii) Signs located adjacent to the Interstate System shall be 
within 75 air miles of the activity; and
    (iv) Signs located adjacent to the primary system shall be within 50 
air miles of the activity.
    (e) Message content. The message on directional signs shall be 
limited to the identification of the attraction or activity and 
directional information useful to the traveler in locating the 
attraction, such as mileage, route numbers, or exit numbers. Descriptive 
words or phrases, and pictorial or photographic representations of the 
activity or its environs are prohibited.
    (f) Selection method and criteria. (1) Privately owned activities or 
attractions eligible for directional signing are limited to the 
following: natural phenomena; scenic attractions; historic, educational, 
cultural, scientific, and religious sites; and outdoor recreational 
areas.
    (2) To be eligible, privately owned attractions or activities must 
be nationally or regionally known, and of outstanding interest to the 
traveling public.
    (3) Each State shall develop specific selection methods and criteria 
to be used in determining whether or not an activity qualifies for this 
type of signing. A statement as to selection methods and criteria shall 
be furnished to the Secretary of Transportation before the State permits 
the erection of any such signs under section 131(c) of title 23 U.S.C., 
and this part.


<R05>
Sec. 750.155  State standards.

    This part does not prohibit a State from establishing and 
maintaining standards which are more restrictive with respect to 
directional and official signs and notices along the Federal-aid highway 
systems than these national standards.

[38 FR 16044, June 20, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 21934, May 20, 1975]

[[Page 361]]

Subpart C [Reserved]


<R04>
 Subpart D_Outdoor Advertising (Acquisition of Rights of Sign and Sign 
                              Site Owners)

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 131 and 315; 23 CFR 1.32 and 1.48(b).

    Source: 39 FR 27436, July 29, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 750.301  Purpose.

    To prescribe the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) policies 
relating to Federal participation in the costs of acquiring the property 
interests necessary for removal of nonconforming advertising signs, 
displays and devices on the Federal-aid Primary and Interstate Systems, 
including toll sections on such systems, regardless of whether Federal 
funds participated in the construction thereof. This regulation should 
not be construed to authorize any additional rights in eminent domain 
not already existing under State law or under 23 U.S.C. 131(g).


<R05>
Sec. 750.302  Policy.

    (a) Just compensation shall be paid for the rights and interests of 
the sign and site owner in those outdoor advertising signs, displays, or 
devices which are lawfully existing under State law, in conformance with 
the terms of 23 U.S.C. 131.
    (b)(1) Federal reimbursement will be made on the basis of 75 percent 
of the acquisition, removal and incidental costs legally incurred or 
obligated by the State.
    (2) Federal funds will participate in 100 percent of the costs of 
removal of those signs which were removed prior to January 4, 1975, by 
relocation, pursuant to the provisions of 23 CFR Sec. 750.305(a)(2), 
and which are required to be removed as a result of the amendments made 
to 23 U.S.C. 131 by the Federal-Aid Highway Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 
93-643, section 109, January 4, 1975. Such signs must have been 
relocated to a legal site, must have been legally maintained since the 
relocation, and must not have been substantially changed, as defined by 
the State maintenance standards, issued pursuant to 23 CFR 750.707(b).
    (c) Title III of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4651, et seq.) applies 
except where complete conformity would defeat the purposes set forth in 
42 U.S.C. 4651, would impede the expeditious implementation of the sign 
removal program or would increase administrative costs out of proportion 
to the cost of the interests being acquired or extinguished.
    (d) Projects for the removal of outdoor advertising signs including 
hardship acquisitions should be programed and authorized in accordance 
with normal program procedures for right-of-way projects.

[39 FR 27436, July 29, 1974; 39 FR 30349, Aug. 22, 1974, as amended at 
41 FR 31198, July 27, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 750.303  Definitions.

    (a) Sign. An outdoor sign, light, display, device, figure, painting, 
drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or other thing which is 
designed, intended of the advertising or informative contents of which 
is visible from any place on the main-traveled way of the Interstate or 
Primary Systems, whether the same be permanent or portable installation.
    (b) Lease (license, permit, agreement, contract or easement). An 
agreement, oral or in writing, by which possession or use of land or 
interests therein is given by the owner or other person to another 
person for a specified purpose.
    (c) Leasehold value. The leasehold value is the present worth of the 
difference between the contractual rent and the current market rent at 
the time of the appraisal.
    (d) Illegal sign. One which was erected and/or maintained in 
violation of State law.
    (e) Nonconforming sign. One which was lawfully erected, but which 
does not comply with the provisions of State law or State regulations 
passed at a later date or which later fails to comply with State law or 
State regulations due to changed conditions. Illegally erected or 
maintained signs are not nonconforming signs.
    (f) 1966 inventory. The record of the survey of advertising signs 
and junk yards compiled by the State highway department.

[[Page 362]]

    (g) Abandoned sign. One in which no one has an interest, or as 
defined by State law.


<R05>
Sec. 750.304  State policies and procedures.

    The State's written policies and operating procedures for 
implementing its sign removal program under State law and complying with 
23 U.S.C. 131 and its proposed time schedule for sign removal and 
procedure for reporting its accomplishments shall be submitted to the 
FHWA for approval within 90 days of the date of this regulation. This 
statement should be supported by the State's regulations implementing 
its program. Revisions to the State's policies and procedures shall be 
submitted to the FHWA for approval. The statement should contain 
provisions for the review of its policies and procedure to meet changing 
conditions, adoption of improved procedures, and for internal review to 
assure compliance. The statement shall include as a minimum the 
following:
    (a) Project priorities. The following order of priorities is 
recommended.
    (1) Illegal and abandoned signs.
    (2) Hardship situations.
    (3) Nominal value signs.
    (4) Signs in areas which have been designated as scenic under 
authority of State law.
    (5) Product advertising on:
    (i) Rural interstate highway.
    (ii) Rural primary highway.
    (iii) Urban areas.
    (6) Nontourist-oriented directional advertising.
    (7) Tourist-oriented directional advertising.
    (b) Programing. (1) A sign removal project may consist of any group 
of proposed sign removals. The signs may be those belonging to one 
company or those located along a single route, all of the signs in a 
single county or other locality, hardship situations, individually or 
grouped, such as those involving vandalized signs, or all of a sign 
owner's signs in a given State or area, or any similar grouping.
    (2) A project for sign removal on other than a Federal-aid primary 
route basis e.g., a countywide project or a project involving only signs 
owned by one company, should be identified as CAF-000B( ), continuing 
the numbering sequence which began with the sign inventory project in 
1966.
    (3) Where it would not interfere with the State's operations, the 
State should program sign removal projects to minimize disruption of 
business.
    (c) Valuation and review methods--(1) Schedules--formulas. 
Schedules, formulas or other methods to simplify valuation of signs and 
sites are recommended for the purpose of minimizing administrative and 
legal expenses necessarily involved in determining just compensation by 
individual appraisals and litigation. They do not purport to be a basis 
for the determination of just compensation under eminent domain.
    (2) Appraisals. Where appropriate, the State may use its approved 
appraisal report forms including those for abbreviated or short form 
appraisals. Where a sign or site owner does not accept the amount 
computed under an approved schedule, formula, or other simplified 
method, an appraisal shall be utilized.
    (3) Leaseholds. When outdoor advertising signs and sign sites 
involve a leasehold value, the State's procedures should provide for 
determining value in the same manner as any other real estate leasehold 
that has value to the lessee.
    (4) Severance damages. The State has the responsibility of 
justifying the recognition of severance damages pursuant to 23 CFR 
710.304(h), and the law of the State before Federal participation will 
be allowed. Generally, Federal participation will not be allowed in the 
payment of severance damages to remaining signs, or other property of a 
sign company alleged to be due to the taking of certain of the company's 
signs. Unity of use of the separate properties, as required by 
applicable principles of eminent domain law, must be shown to exist 
before participation in severance damages will be allowed. Moreover, the 
value of the remaining signs or other real property must be diminished 
by virtue of the taking of such signs. Payments for severance damages to 
economic plants or loss of business profits are not compensable. 
Severance damage cases must be submitted to the FHWA for prior 
concurrence, together with complete legal

[[Page 363]]

and appraisal justification for payment of these damages. To assist the 
FHWA in its evaluation, the following data will accompany any submission 
regarding severance:
    (i) One copy of each appraisal in which this was analyzed. One copy 
of the State's review appraiser analysis and determination of market 
value.
    (ii) A plan or map showing the location of each sign.
    (iii) An opinion by the State highway department's chief legal 
officer that severance is appropriate in accordance with State law 
together with a legal opinion that, in the instant case, the damages 
constitute severance as opposed to consequential damage as a matter of 
law. The opinion shall include a determination, and the basis therefor, 
that the specific taking of some of an outdoor advertiser's signs 
constitutes a distinct economic unit, and that unity of use of the 
separate properties in conformity with applicable principles of eminent 
domain law had been satisfactorily established. A legal memorandum must 
be furnished citing and discussing cases and other authorities 
supporting the State's position.
    (5) Review of value estimates. All estimates of value shall be 
reviewed by a person other than the one who made the estimate. Appraisal 
reports shall be reviewed and approved prior to initiation of 
negotiations. All other estimates shall be reviewed before the agreement 
becomes final.
    (d) Nominal value plan. (1) This plan may provide for the removal 
costs of eligible nominal value signs and for payments up to $250 for 
each nonconforming sign, and up to $100 for each nonconforming sign 
site.
    (2) The State's procedures may provide for negotiations for sign 
sites and sign removals to be accomplished simultaneously without prior 
review.
    (3) Releases or agreements executed by the sign and/or site owner 
should include the identification of the sign, statement of ownership, 
price to be paid, interest acquired, and removal rights.
    (4) It is not expected that salvage value will be a consideration in 
most acquisitions; however, the State's procedures may provide that the 
sign may be turned over to the sign owner, site owner, contractor, or 
individual as all or a part of the consideration for its removal, 
without any project credits.
    (5) Programing and authorizations will be in accord with Sec. 
750.308 of this regulation. A detailed estimate of value of each 
individual sign is not necessary. The project may be programed and 
authorized as one project.
    (e) Sign removal. The State's procedural statement should include 
provision for:
    (1) Owner retention.
    (2) Salvage value.
    (3) State removal.

[39 FR 27436, July 29, 1974; 42 FR 30835, June 17, 1977, as amended at 
50 FR 34093, Aug. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 750.305  Federal participation.

    (a) Federal funds may participate in:
    (1) Payments made to a sign owner for his right, title and interest 
in a sign, and where applicable, his leasehold value in a sign site, and 
to a site owner for his right and interest in a site, which is his right 
to erect and maintain the existing nonconforming sign on such site.
    (2) The cost of relocating a sign to the extent of the cost to 
acquire the sign, less salvage value if any.
    (3) A duplicate payment for the site owner's interest of $2,500 or 
less because of a bona fide error in ownership, provided the State has 
followed its title search procedures as set forth in its policy and 
procedure submission.
    (4) The cost of removal of signs, partially completed sign 
structures, supporting poles, abandoned signs and those which are 
illegal under State law within the controlled areas, provided such costs 
are incurred in accordance with State law. Removal may be by State 
personnel on a force account basis or by contract. Documentation for 
Federal participation in such removal projects should be in accord with 
the State's normal force account and contractual reimbursement 
procedures. The State should maintain a record of the number of signs 
removed. These data should be retained in project records and reported 
on the periodic report required under Sec. 750.308 of this regulation.

[[Page 364]]

    (5) Signs materially damaged by vandals. Federal funds shall be 
limited to the Federal pro-rata share of the fair market value of the 
sign immediately before the vandalism occurred minus the estimated cost 
of repairing and reerecting the sign. If the State chooses, it may use 
its FHWA approved nominal value plan procedure to acquire these signs.
    (6) The cost of acquiring and removing completed sign structures 
which have been blank or painted out beyond the period of time 
established by the State for normal maintenance and change of message, 
provided the sign owner can establish that his nonconforming use was not 
abandoned or discontinued, and provided such costs are incurred in 
accordance with State law, or regulation. The evidence considered by the 
State as acceptable for establishing or showing that the nonconforming 
use has not been abandoned or voluntarily discontinued shall be set 
forth in the State's policy and procedures.
    (7) In the event a sign was omitted in the 1966 inventory, and the 
State supports a determination that the sign was in existence prior to 
October 22, 1965, the costs are eligible for Federal participation.
    (b) Federal funds may not participate in:
    (1) Cost of title certificates, title insurance, title opinion or 
similar evidence or proof of title in connection with the acquisition of 
a landowner's right to erect and maintain a sign or signs when the 
amount of payment to the landowner for his interest is $2,500 or less, 
unless required by State law. However, Federal funds may participate in 
the costs of securing some lesser evidence or proof of title such as 
searches and investigations by State highway department personnel to the 
extent necessary to determine ownership, affidavit of ownership by the 
owner, bill of sale, etc. The State's procedure for determining evidence 
of title should be set forth in the State's policy and procedure 
submission.
    (2) Payments to a sign owner where the sign was erected without 
permission of the property owner unless the sign owner can establish his 
legal right to erect and maintain the sign. However, such signs may be 
removed by State personnel on a force account basis or by contract with 
Federal participation except where the sign owner reimburses the State 
for removal.
    (3) Acquisition costs paid for abandoned or illegal signs, potential 
sign sites, or signs which were built during a period of time which 
makes them ineligible for compensation under 23 U.S.C. 131, or for 
rights in sites on which signs have been abandoned or illegally erected 
by a sign owner.
    (4) The acquisition cost of supporting poles or partially completed 
sign structures in nonconforming areas which do not have advertising or 
informative content thereon unless the owner can show to the State's 
satisfaction he has not abandoned the structure. When the State has 
determined the sign structure has not been abandoned, Federal funds will 
participate in the acquisition of the structure, provided the cost are 
incurred in accordance with State law.


<R05>
Sec. 750.306  Documentation for Federal participation.

    The following information concerning each sign must be available in 
the State's files to be eligible for Federal participation.
    (a) Payment to sign owner. (1) A photograph of the sign in place. 
Exceptions may be made in cases where in one transaction the State has 
acquired a number of a company's nominal value signs similar in size, 
condition and shape. In such cases, only a sample of representative 
photographs need be provided to document the type and condition of the 
signs.
    (2) Evidence showing the sign was nonconforming as of the date of 
taking.
    (3) Value documentation and proof of obligation of funds.
    (4) Satisfactory indication of ownership of the sign and compensable 
interest therein (e.g., lease or other agreement with the property 
owner, or an affidavit, certification, or other such evidence of 
ownership).
    (5) Evidence that the sign falls within one of the three categories 
shown in Sec. 750.302 of this regulation. The specific category should 
be identified.
    (6) Evidence that the right, title, or interest pertaining to the 
sign has

[[Page 365]]

passed to the State, or that the sign has been removed.
    (b) Payment to the site owner. (1) Evidence that an agreement has 
been reached between the State and owner.
    (2) Value documentation and proof of obligation of funds.
    (3) Satisfactory indication of ownership or compensable interest.
    (c) In those cases where Federal funds participate in 100 percent of 
the cost of removal, the State file shall contain the records of the 
relocation made prior to January 4, 1975.

[39 FR 27436, July 29, 1974, as amended at 41 FR 31198, July 27, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 750.307  FHWA project approval.

    Authorization to proceed with acquisitions on a sign removal project 
shall not be issued until such time as the State has submitted to FHWA 
the following:
    (a) A general description of the proj ect.
    (b) The total number of signs to be acquired.
    (c) The total estimated cost of the sign removal project, including 
a breakdown of incidental, acquisition and removal costs.


<R05>
Sec. 750.308  Reports.

    Periodic reports on site acquisitions and actual sign removals shall 
be submitted on FHWA Form 1424 and as prescribed. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Forms are available at FHWA Division Offices located in each 
State.

[39 FR 27436, July 29, 1974, as amended at 41 FR 9321, Mar. 4, 1976]


<R04>
          Subpart E_Signs Exempt From Removal in Defined Areas

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 131 and 315, 49 CFR 1.48, 23 CFR 1.32.

    Source: 41 FR 45827, Oct. 18, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 750.501  Purpose.

    This subpart sets forth the procedures pursuant to which a State 
may, if it desires, seek an exemption from the acquisition requirements 
of 23 U.S.C. 131 for signs giving directional information about goods 
and services in the interest of the traveling public in defined areas 
which would suffer substantial economic hardship if such signs were 
removed. This exemption may be granted pursuant to the provisions of 23 
U.S.C. 131(o).


<R05>
Sec. 750.502  Applicability.

    The provisions of this subpart apply to signs adjacent to the 
Interstate and primary systems which are required to be controlled under 
23 U.S.C. 131.


<R05>
Sec. 750.503  Exemptions.

    (a) The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) may approve a State's 
request to exempt certain nonconforming signs, displays, and devices 
(hereinafter called signs) within a defined area from being acquired 
under the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 131 upon a showing that removal would 
work a substantial economic hardship throughout that area. A defined 
area is an area with clearly established geographical boundaries defined 
by the State which the State can evaluate as an economic entity. Neither 
the States nor FHWA shall rely on individual claims of economic 
hardship. Exempted signs must:
    (1) Have been lawfully erected prior to May 5, 1976, and must 
continue to be lawfully maintained.
    (2) Continue to provide the directional information to goods and 
services offered at the same enterprise in the defined area in the 
interest of the traveling public that was provided on May 5, 1976. 
Repair and maintenance of these signs shall conform with the State's 
approved maintenance standards as required by subpart G of this part.
    (b) To obtain the exemption permitted by 23 U.S.C. 131(o), the State 
shall establish:
    (1) Its requirements for the directional content of signs to qualify 
the signs as directional signs to goods and services in the defined 
area.
    (2) A method of economic analysis clearly showing that the removal 
of signs would work a substantial economic hardship throughout the 
defined area.
    (c) In support of its request for exemption, the State shall submit 
to the FHWA:

[[Page 366]]

    (1) Its requirements and method (see Sec. 750.503(b)).
    (2) The limits of the defined area(s) requested for exemption, a 
listing of signs to be exempted, their location, and the name of the 
enterprise advertised on May 5, 1976.
    (3) The application of the requirements and method to the defined 
areas, demonstrating that the signs provide directional information to 
goods and services of interest to the traveling public in the defined 
area, and that removal would work a substantial economic hardship in the 
defined area(s).
    (4) A statement that signs in the defined area(s) not meeting the 
exemption requirements will be removed in accordance with State law.
    (5) A statement that the defined area will be reviewed and evaluated 
at least every three (3) years to determine if an exemption is still 
warranted.
    (d) The FHWA, upon receipt of a State's request for exemption, shall 
prior to approval:
    (1) Review the State's requirements and methods for compliance with 
the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 131 and this subpart.
    (2) Review the State's request and the proposed exempted area for 
compliance with State requirements and methods.
    (e) Nothing herein shall prohibit the State from acquiring signs in 
the defined area at the request of the sign owner.
    (f) Nothing herein shall prohibit the State from imposing or 
maintaining stricter requirements.

Subpart F [Reserved]


<R04>
                  Subpart G_Outdoor Advertising Control

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 131 and 315; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 40 FR 42844, Sept. 16, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 750.701  Purpose.

    This subpart prescribes the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 
policies and requirements relating to the effective control of outdoor 
advertising under 23 U.S.C. 131. The purpose of these policies and 
requirements is to assure that there is effective State control of 
outdoor advertising in areas adjacent to Interstate and Federal-aid 
primary highways. Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to prevent 
a State from establishing more stringent outdoor advertising control 
requirements along Interstate and Primary Systems than provided herein.


<R05>
Sec. 750.702  Applicability.

    The provisions of this subpart are applicable to all areas adjacent 
to the Federal-aid Interstate and Primary Systems, including toll 
sections thereof, except that within urban areas, these provisions apply 
only within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way. These 
provisions apply regardless of whether Federal funds participated in the 
costs of such highways. The provisions of this subpart do not apply to 
the Federal-aid Secondary or Urban Highway System.


<R05>
Sec. 750.703  Definitions.

    The terms as used in this subpart are defined as follows:
    (a) Commercial and industrial zones are those districts established 
by the zoning authorities as being most appropriate for commerce, 
industry, or trade, regardless of how labeled. They are commonly 
categorized as commercial, industrial, business, manufacturing, highway 
service or highway business (when these latter are intended for highway-
oriented business), retail, trade, warehouse, and similar 
classifications.
    (b) Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, 
attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or 
establish.
    (c) Federal-aid Primary Highway means any highway on the system 
designated pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 103(b).
    (d) Interstate Highway means any highway on the system defined in 
and designated, pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 103(e).
    (e) Illegal sign means one which was erected or maintained in 
violation of State law or local law or ordinance.
    (f) Lease means an agreement, license, permit, or easement, oral or 
in writing, by which possession or use of land or interests therein is 
given for a

[[Page 367]]

specified purpose, and which is a valid contract under the laws of a 
State.
    (g) Maintain means to allow to exist.
    (h) Main-traveled way means the traveled way of a highway on which 
through traffic is carried. In the case of a divided highway, the 
traveled way of each of the separate roadways for traffic in opposite 
directions is a main-traveled way. It does not include such facilities 
as frontage roads, turning roadways, or parking areas.
    (i) Sign, display or device, hereinafter referred to as ``sign,'' 
means an outdoor advertising sign, light, display, device, figure, 
painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or other thing 
which is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform, any part of 
the advertising or informative contents of which is visible from any 
place on the main-traveled way of the Interstate or Primary Systems, 
whether the same be permanent or portable installation.
    (j) State law means a State constitutional provision or statute, or 
an ordinance, rule or regulation, enacted or adopted by a State.
    (k) Unzoned area means an area where there is no zoning in effect. 
It does not include areas which have a rural zoning classification or 
land uses established by zoning variances or special exceptions.
    (l) Unzoned commercial or industrial areas are unzoned areas 
actually used for commercial or industrial purposes as defined in the 
agreements made between the Secretary, U.S. Department of Transportation 
(Secretary), and each State pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 131(d).
    (m) Urban area is as defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a).
    (n) Visible means capable of being seen, wehter or not readable, 
without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity.


<R05>
Sec. 750.704  Statutory requirements.

    (a) 23 U.S.C. 131 provides that signs adjacent to the Interstate and 
Federal-aid Primary Systems which are visible from the main-traveled way 
and within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way, and those 
additional signs beyond 660 feet outside of urban areas which are 
visible from the main-traveled way and erected with the purpose of their 
message being read from such main-traveled way, shall be limited to the 
following:
    (1) Directional and official signs and notice which shall conform to 
national standards promulgated by the Secretary in subpart B, part 750, 
chapter I, 23 CFR, National Standards for Directional and Official 
Signs;
    (2) Signs advertising the sale or lease of property upon which they 
are located;
    (3) Signs advertising activities conducted on the property on which 
they are located;
    (4) Signs within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way 
within areas adjacent to the Interstate and Federal-aid Primary Systems 
which are zoned industrial or commercial under the authority of State 
law;
    (5) Signs within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way 
within areas adjacent to the Interstate and Federal-aid Primary Systems 
which are unzoned commercial or industrial areas, which areas are 
determined by agreement between the State and the Secretary; and
    (6) Signs lawfully in existence on October 22, 1965, which are 
determined to be landmark signs.
    (b) 23 U.S.C. 131(d) provides that signs in Sec. 750.704(a) (4) and 
(5) must comply with size, lighting, and spacing requirements, to be 
determined by agreement between the State and the Secretary.
    (c) 23 U.S.C. 131 does not permit signs to be located within zoned 
or unzoned commercial or industrial areas beyond 660 feet of the right-
of-way adjacent to the Interstate or Federal-aid Primary System, outside 
of urban areas.
    (d) 23 U.S.C. 131 provides that signs not permitted under Sec. 
750.704 of this regulation must be removed by the State.


<R05>
Sec. 750.705  Effective control.

    In order to provide effective control of outdoor advertising, the 
State must:
    (a) Prohibit the erection of new signs other than those which fall 
under Sec. 750.704(a)(1) through (6);
    (b) Assure that signs erected under Sec. 750.704(a)(4) and (5) 
comply, at a minimum, with size, lighting, and spacing criteria 
contained in the agreement between the Secretary and the State;

[[Page 368]]

    (c) Assure that signs erected under Sec. 750.704(a)(1) comply with 
the national standards contained in subpart B, part 750, chapter I, 23 
CFR;
    (d) Remove illegal signs expeditiously;
    (e) Remove nonconforming signs with just compensation within the 
time period set by 23 U.S.C. 131 (subpart D, part 750, chapter I, 23 
CFR, sets forth policies for the acquisition and compensation for such 
signs);
    (f) Assure that signs erected under Sec. 750.704(a)(6) comply with 
Sec. 750.710, Landmark Signs, if landmark signs are allowed;
    (g) Establish criteria for determining which signs have been erected 
with the purpose of their message being read from the main-traveled way 
of an Interstate or primary highway, except where State law makes such 
criteria unnecessary. Where a sign is erected with the purpose of its 
message being read from two or more highways, one or more of which is a 
controlled highway, the more stringent of applicable control 
requirements will apply;
    (h) Develop laws, regulations, and procedures to accomplish the 
requirements of this subpart;
    (i) Establish enforcement procedures sufficient to discover 
illegally erected or maintained signs shortly after such occurrence and 
cause their prompt removal; and
    (j) Submit regulations and enforcement procedures to FHWA for 
approval.

[40 FR 42844, Sept. 16, 1975; 40 FR 49777, Oct. 24, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 750.706  Sign control in zoned and unzoned commercial and 
industrial areas.

    The following requirements apply to signs located in zoned and 
unzoned commercial and industrial areas within 660 feet of the nearest 
edge of the right-of-way adjacent to the Interstate and Federal-aid 
primary highways.
    (a) The State by law or regulation shall, in conformity with its 
agreement with the Secretary, set criteria for size, lighting, and 
spacing of outdoor advertising signs located in commercial or industrial 
zoned or unzoned areas, as defined in the agreement, adjacent to 
Interstate and Federal-aid primary highways. If the agreement between 
the Secretary and the State includes a grandfather clause, the criteria 
for size, lighting, and spacing will govern only those signs erected 
subsequent to the date specified in the agreement. The States may adopt 
more restrictive criteria than are presently contained in agreements 
with the Secretary.
    (b) Agreement criteria which permit multiple sign structures to be 
considered as one sign for spacing purposes must limit multiple sign 
structures to signs which are physically contiguous, or connected by the 
same structure or cross-bracing, or located not more than 15 feet apart 
at their nearest point in the case of back-to-back or ``V'' type signs.
    (c) Where the agreement and State law permits control by local 
zoning authorities, these controls may govern in lieu of the size, 
lighting, and spacing controls set forth in the agreement, subject to 
the following:
    (1) The local zoning authority's controls must include the 
regulation of size, of lighting and of spacing of outdoor advertising 
signs, in all commercial and industrial zones.
    (2) The regulations established by local zoning authority may be 
either more restrictive or less restrictive than the criteria contained 
in the agreement, unless State law or regulations require equivalent or 
more restrictive local controls.
    (3) If the zoning authority has been delegated, extraterritorial, 
jurisdiction under State law, and exercises control of outdoor 
advertising in commercial and industrial zones within this 
extraterritorial jurisdiction, control by the zoning authority may be 
accepted in lieu of agreement controls in such areas.
    (4) The State shall notify the FHWA in writing of those zoning 
jurisdictions wherein local control applies. It will not be necessary to 
furnish a copy of the zoning ordinance. The State shall periodically 
assure itself that the size, lighting, and spacing control provisions of 
zoning ordinances accepted under this section are actually being 
enforced by the local authorities.
    (5) Nothing contained herein shall relieve the State of the 
responsibility of

[[Page 369]]

limiting signs within controlled areas to commercial and industrial 
zones.


<R05>
Sec. 750.707  Nonconforming signs.

    (a) General. The provisions of Sec. 750.707 apply to nonconforming 
signs which must be removed under State laws and regulations 
implementing 23 U.S.C. 131. These provisions also apply to nonconforming 
signs located in commercial and industrial areas within 660 feet of the 
nearest edge of the right-of-way which come under the so-called 
grandfather clause contained in State-Federal agreements. These 
provisions do not apply to conforming signs regardless of when or where 
they are erected.
    (b) Nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign is a sign which was 
lawfully erected but does not comply with the provisions of State law or 
State regulations passed at a later date or later fails to comply with 
State law or State regulations due to changed conditions. Changed 
conditions include, for example, signs lawfully in existence in 
commercial areas which at a later date become noncommercial, or signs 
lawfully erected on a secondary highway later classified as a primary 
highway.
    (c) Grandfather clause. At the option of the State, the agreement 
may contain a grandfather clause under which criteria relative to size, 
lighting, and spacing of signs in zoned and unzoned commercial and 
industrial areas within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way 
apply only to new signs to be erected after the date specified in the 
agreement. Any sign lawfully in existence in a commercial or industrial 
area on such date may remain even though it may not comply with the 
size, lighting, or spacing criteria. This clause only allows an 
individual sign at its particular location for the duration of its 
normal life subject to customary maintenance. Preexisting signs covered 
by a grandfather clause, which do not comply with the agreement criteria 
have the status of nonconforming signs.
    (d) Maintenance and continuance. In order to maintain and continue a 
nonconforming sign, the following conditions apply:
    (1) The sign must have been actually in existence at the time the 
applicable State law or regulations became effective as distinguished 
from a contemplated use such as a lease or agreement with the property 
owner. There are two exceptions to actual existence as follows:
    (i) Where a permit or similar specific State governmental action was 
granted for the construction of a sign prior to the effective date of 
the State law or regulations and the sign owner acted in good faith and 
expended sums in reliance thereon. This exception shall not apply in 
instances where large numbers of permits were applied for and issued to 
a single sign owner, obviously in anticipation of the passage of a State 
control law.
    (ii) Where the State outdoor advertising control law or the Federal-
State agreement provides that signs in commercial and industrial areas 
may be erected within six (6) months after the effective date of the law 
or agreement provided a lease dated prior to such effective date was 
filed with the State and recorded within thirty (30) days following such 
effective date.
    (2) There must be existing property rights in the sign affected by 
the State law or regulations. For example, paper signs nailed to trees, 
abandoned signs and the like are not protected.
    (3) The sign may be sold, leased, or otherwise transferred without 
affecting its status, but its location may not be changed. A 
nonconforming sign removed as a result of a right-of-way taking or for 
any other reason may be relocated to a conforming area but cannot be 
reestablished at a new location as a nonconforming use.
    (4) The sign must have been lawful on the effective date of the 
State law or regulations, and must continue to be lawfully maintained.
    (5) The sign must remain substantially the same as it was on the 
effective date of the State law or regulations. Reasonable repair and 
maintenance of the sign, including a change of advertising message, is 
not a change which would terminate nonconforming rights. Each State 
shall develop its own criteria to determine when customary maintenance 
ceases and a substantial change has occurred which would terminate 
nonconforming rights.

[[Page 370]]

    (6) The sign may continue as long as it is not destroyed, abandoned, 
or discontinued. If permitted by State law and reerected in kind, 
exception may be made for signs destroyed due to vandalism and other 
criminal or tortious acts.
    (i) Each state shall develop criteria to define destruction, 
abandonment and discontinuance. These criteria may provide that a sign 
which for a designated period of time has obsolete advertising matter or 
is without advertising matter or is in need of substantial repair may 
constitute abandonment or discontinuance. Similarly, a sign damaged in 
excess of a certain percentage of its replacement cost may be considered 
destroyed.
    (ii) Where an existing nonconforming sign ceases to display 
advertising matter, a reasonable period of time to replace advertising 
content must be established by each State. Where new content is not put 
on a structure within the established period, the use of the structure 
as a nonconforming outdoor advertising sign is terminated and shall 
constitute an abandonment or discontinuance. Where a State establishes a 
period of more than one (1) year as a reasonable period for change of 
message, it shall justify that period as a customary enforcement 
practice within the State. This established period may be waived for an 
involuntary discontinuance such as the closing of a highway for repair 
in front of the sign.
    (e) Just compensation. The States are required to pay just 
compensation for the removal of nonconforming lawfully existing signs in 
accordance with the terms of 23 U.S.C. 131 and the provisions of subpart 
D, part 750, chapter I, 23 CFR. The conditions which establish a right 
to maintain a nonconforming sign and therefore the right to compensation 
must pertain at the time it is acquired or removed.


<R05>
Sec. 750.708  Acceptance of state zoning.

    (a) 23 U.S.C. 131(d) provide that signs ``may be erected and 
maintained within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way 
within areas . . . which are zoned industrial or commercial under 
authority of State law.'' Section 131(d) further provides, ``The States 
shall have full authority under their own zoning laws to zone areas for 
commercial or industrial purposes, and the actions of the States in this 
regard will be accepted for the purposes of this Act.''
    (b) State and local zoning actions must be taken pursuant to the 
State's zoning enabling statute or constitutional authority and in 
accordance therewith. Action which is not a part of comprehensive zoning 
and is created primarily to permit outdoor advertising structures, is 
not recognized as zoning for outdoor advertising control purposes.
    (c) Where a unit of government has not zoned in accordance with 
statutory authority or is not authorized to zone, the definition of an 
unzoned commercial or industrial area in the State-Federal agreement 
will apply within that political subdivision or area.
    (d) A zone in which limited commercial or industrial activities are 
permitted as an incident to other primary land uses is not considered to 
be a commercial or industrial zone for outdoor advertising control 
purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 750.709  On-property or on-premise advertising.

    (a) A sign which consists solely of the name of the establishment or 
which identifies the establishment's principal or accessory products or 
services offered on the property is an on-property sign.
    (b) When a sign consists principally of brand name or trade name 
advertising and the product or service advertised is only incidental to 
the principal activity, or if it brings rental income to the property 
owner, it shall be considered the business of outdoor advertising and 
not an on-property sign.
    (c) A sale or lease sign which also advertises any product or 
service not conducted upon and unrelated to the business or selling or 
leasing the land on which the sign is located is not an on-property 
sign.
    (d) Signs are exempt from control under 23 U.S.C. 131 if they solely 
advertise the sale or lease of property on which they are located or 
advertise activities conducted on the property on which they are 
located. These signs are subject to regulation (subpart A, part 750, 
chapter I, 23 CFR) in those States

[[Page 371]]

which have executed a bonus agreement, 23 U.S.C. 131(j). State laws or 
regulations shall contain criteria for determining exemptions. These 
criteria may include:
    (1) A property test for determining whether a sign is located on the 
same property as the activity or property advertised; and
    (2) A purpose test for determining whether a sign has as its sole 
purpose the identification of the activity located on the property or 
its products or services, or the sale or lease of the property on which 
the sign is located.
    (3) The criteria must be sufficiently specific to curb attempts to 
improperly qualify outdoor advertising as ``on-property'' signs, such as 
signs on narrow strips of land contiguous to the advertised activity 
when the purpose is clearly to circumvent 23 U.S.C. 131.


<R05>
Sec. 750.710  Landmark signs.

    (a) 23 U.S.C. 131(c) permits the existence of signs lawfully in 
existence on October 22, 1965, determined by the State, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary, to be landmark signs, including signs on farm 
structures or natural surfaces, of historic or artistic significance, 
the preservation of which is consistent with the purpose of 23 U.S.C. 
131.
    (b) States electing to permit landmark signs under 23 U.S.C. 131(c) 
shall submit a one-time list to the Federal Highway Administration for 
approval. The list should identify each sign as being in the original 
1966 inventory. In the event a sign was omitted in the 1966 inventory, 
the State may submit other evidence to support a determination that the 
sign was in existence on October 22, 1965.
    (c) Reasonable maintenance, repair, and restoration of a landmark 
sign is permitted. Substantial change in size, lighting, or message 
content will terminate its exempt status.


<R05>
Sec. 750.711  Structures which have never displayed advertising material.

    Structures, including poles, which have never displayed advertising 
or informative content are subject to control or removal when 
advertising content visible from the main-traveled way is added or 
affixed. When this is done, an ``outdoor advertising sign'' has then 
been erected which must comply with the State law in effect on that 
date.


<R05>
Sec. 750.712  Reclassification of signs.

    Any sign lawfully erected after the effective date of a State 
outdoor advertising control law which is reclassified from legal-
conforming to nonconforming and subject to removal under revised State 
statutes or regulations and policy pursuant to this regulation is 
eligible for Federal participation in just compensation payments and 
other eligible costs.


<R05>
Sec. 750.713  Bonus provisions.

    23 U.S.C. 131(j) specifically provides that any State which had 
entered into a bonus agreement before June 30, 1965, will be entitled to 
remain eligible to receive bonus payments provided it continues to carry 
out its bonus agreement. Bonus States are not exempt from the other 
provisions of 23 U.S.C. 131. If a State elects to comply with both 
programs, it must extend controls to the Primary System, and continue to 
carry out its bonus agreement along the Interstate System except where 
23 U.S.C. 131, as amended, imposes more stringent requirements.


<R03>
PART 751_JUNKYARD CONTROL AND ACQUISITION--Table of Contents




Sec.
751.1 Purpose.
751.3 Applicability.
751.5 Policy.
751.7 Definitions.
751.9 Effective control.
751.11 Nonconforming junkyards.
751.13 Control measures.
751.15 Just compensation.
751.17 Federal participation.
751.19 Documentation for Federal participation.
751.21 Relocation assistance.
751.23 Concurrent junkyard control and right-of-way projects.
751.25 Programming and authorization.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 136 and 315, 42 U.S.C. 4321-4347 and 4601-4655, 
23 CFR 1.32, 49 CFR 1.48, unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 40 FR 8551, Feb. 28, 1975, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 372]]


<R05>
Sec. 751.1  Purpose.

    Pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 136, this part prescribes Federal Highway 
Administration [FHWA] policies and procedures relating to the exercise 
of effective control by the States of junkyards in areas adjacent to the 
Interstate and Federal-aid primary systems. Nothing in this part shall 
be construed to prevent a State from establishing more stringent 
junkyard control requirements than provided herein.

[40 FR 12260, Mar. 18, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 751.3  Applicability.

    The provisions of this part are applicable to all areas within 1,000 
feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way and visible from the main 
traveled way of all Federal-aid Primary and Interstate Systems 
regardless of whether Federal funds participated in the construction 
thereof, including toll sections of such highways. This part does not 
apply to the Urban System.


<R05>
Sec. 751.5  Policy.

    In carrying out the purposes of this part:
    (a) Emphasis should be placed on encouraging recycling of scrap and 
junk where practicable, in accordance with the National Environmental 
Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321, et seq.);
    (b) Every effort should be made to screen nonconforming junkyards 
which are to continue as ongoing businesses; and
    (c) Nonconforming junkyards should be relocated only as a last 
resort.


<R05>
Sec. 751.7  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part, the following definitions shall apply:
    (a) Junkyard. (1) A Junkyard is an establishment or place of 
business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, 
buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an 
automobile graveyard. This definition includes scrap metal processors, 
auto-wrecking yards, salvage yards, scrap yards, autorecycling yards, 
used auto parts yards and temporary storage of automobile bodies and 
parts awaiting disposal as a normal part of a business operation when 
the business will continually have like materials located on the 
premises. The definition includes garbage dumps and sanitary landfills. 
The definition does not include litter, trash, and other debris 
scattered along or upon the highway, or temporary operations and outdoor 
storage of limited duration.
    (2) An Automobile Graveyard is an establishment or place of business 
which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or 
selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor 
vehicle parts. Ten or more such vehicles will constitute an automobile 
graveyard.
    (3) An Illegal Junkyard is one which was established or is 
maintained in violation of State law.
    (4) A Nonconforming Junkyard is one which was lawfully established, 
but which does not comply with the provisions of State law or State 
regulations passed at a later date or which later fails to comply with 
State regulations due to changed conditions. Illegally established 
junkyards are not nonconforming junkyards.
    (b) Junk. Old or scrap metal, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, 
rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or 
parts thereof.
    (c) Main traveled way. The traveled way of a highway on which 
through traffic is carried. In the case of a divided highway, the 
traveled way of each of the separated roadways for traffic in opposite 
directions is a main traveled way. It does not include such facilities 
as frontage roads, turning roadways, or parking areas.
    (d) Industrial zones. Those districts established by zoning 
authorities as being most appropriate for industry or manufacturing. A 
zone which simply permits certain industrial activities as an incident 
to the primary land use designation is not considered to be an 
industrial zone. The provisions of part 750, subpart G of this chapter 
relative to Outdoor Advertising Control shall apply insofar as 
industrial zones are concerned.
    (e) Unzoned industrial areas. An area where there is no zoning in 
effect and which is used primarily for industrial purposes as determined 
by the State and approved by the FHWA. An unzoned area cannot include 
areas which may have a rural zoning classification

[[Page 373]]

or land uses established by zoning variances or special exceptions.

[40 FR 8551, Feb. 28, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 9321, Mar. 4, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 751.9  Effective control.

    (a) In order to provide effective control of junkyards located 
within 1,000 feet of Interstate and Federal-aid primary highways, the 
State must:
    (1) Require such junkyards located outside of zoned and unzoned 
industrial areas to be screened or located so as not to be visible from 
the main traveled way, or be removed from sight.
    (2) Require the screening or removal of nonconforming junkyards 
within a reasonable time, but no later than 5 years after the date the 
junkyard becomes nonconforming unless Federal funds are not available in 
adequate amounts to participate in the cost of such screening or removal 
as provided in 23 U.S.C. 136(j).
    (3) Prohibit the establishment of new junkyards unless they comply 
with the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (4) Expeditiously require junkyards which are illegally established 
or maintained to conform to the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section.
    (b) Sanitary landfills as described herein need not be screened to 
satisfy requirements of Title 23, U.S.C., but landscaping should be 
required when the fill has been completed and operations have ceased, 
unless the landfill area is to be used for immediate development 
purposes. A sanitary landfill, for the purposes of this part, is a 
method of disposing of refuse on land without creating a nuisance or 
hazards to public health or safety by utilizing the principles of 
engineering to confine the refuse to the smallest practical area, to 
reduce it to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a layer 
of earth at the conclusion of each day's operation or at such more 
frequent intervals as may be necessary.
    (c) The State shall have laws, rules, and procedures sufficient to 
provide effective control, to discover illegally established or 
maintained junkyards shortly after such occurrence, and to cause the 
compliance or removal of same promptly in accordance with State legal 
procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 751.11  Nonconforming junkyards.

    Subject to the provisions of Sec. 751.9 of this part, the following 
requirements for the maintenance and continuance of a nonconforming 
junkyard apply:
    (a) The junkyard must have been actually in existence at the time 
the State law or regulations became effective as distinguished from a 
contemplated use, except where a permit or similar specific State 
governmental action was granted for the establishment of a junkyard 
prior to the effective date of the State law or regulations, and the 
junkyard owner acted in good faith and expended sums in reliance 
thereon.
    (b) There must be existing property rights in the junkyard or junk 
affected by the State law or regulation. Abandoned junk and junkyards, 
worthless junk, and the like are not similarly protected.
    (c) If the location of a nonconforming junkyard is changed as a 
result of a right-of-way taking or for any other reason, it ceases to be 
a nonconforming junkyard, and shall be treated as a new junkyard at a 
new location.
    (d) The nonconforming junkyard must have been lawful on the 
effective date of the State law or regulations and must continue to be 
lawfully maintained.
    (e) The nonconforming junkyard may continue as long as it is not 
extended, enlarged, or changed in use. Once a junkyard has been made 
conforming, the placement of junk so that it may be seen above or beyond 
a screen, or otherwise becomes visible, shall be treated the same as the 
establishment of a new junkyard.
    (f) The nonconforming junkyard may continue as long as it is not 
abandoned, destroyed, or voluntarily discontinued. Each State should 
develop criteria to define these terms.


<R05>
Sec. 751.13  Control measures.

    (a) Consistent with the goals of the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321), recycling of junk and scrap is to be 
encouraged to the greatest extent practicable in the implementation of 
the junkyard control

[[Page 374]]

program. Recycling should be considered in conjunction with other 
control measures. To facilitate recycling, junk or scrap should be moved 
to an automobile wrecker, or a scrap processor, or put to some other 
useful purpose.
    (b) Every effort shall be made to screen where the junkyard is to 
continue as an ongoing business. Screening may be accomplished by use of 
natural objects, landscaping plantings, fences, and other appropriate 
means, including relocating inventory on site to utilize an existing 
natural screen or a screenable portion of the site.
    (c) Where screening is used, it must, upon completion of the 
screening proj ect, effectively screen the junkyard from the main 
traveled way of the highway on a year-round basis, and be compatible 
with the surroundings. Each State shall establish criteria governing the 
location, design, construction, maintenance, and materials used in 
fencing or screening.
    (d) A junkyard should be relocated only when other control measures 
are not feasible. Junkyards should be relocated to a site not visible 
from the highway or to an industrial area, and should not be relocated 
to residential, commercial, or other areas where foreseeable 
environmental problems may develop.
    (e) The State may develop and use other methods of operation to 
carry out the purposes of this directive, subject to prior FHWA 
approval.


<R05>
Sec. 751.15  Just compensation.

    (a) Just compensation shall be paid the owner for the relocation, 
removal, or disposal of junkyards lawfully established under State law, 
which are required to be removed, relocated, or disposed of pursuant to 
23 U.S.C. 136.
    (b) No rights to compensation accrue until a taking or removal has 
occurred. The conditions which establish a right to maintain and 
continue a nonconforming junkyard as provided in Sec. 751.11 must 
pertain at the time of the taking or removal in order to establish a 
right to just compensation.


<R05>
Sec. 751.17  Federal participation.

    (a) Federal funds may participate in 75 percent of the costs of 
control measures incurred in carrying out the provisions of this part 
including necessary studies for particular projects, and the employment 
of fee landscape architects and other qualified consultants.
    (b) Where State control standards are more stringent than Federal 
control requirements along Interstate and primary highways, the FHWA may 
approve Federal participation in the costs of applying the State 
standards on a statewide basis. Where State standards require control of 
junkyards in zoned or unzoned industrial areas, Federal funds may 
participate only if such action will make an effective contribution to 
the character of the area as a whole and the cost is reasonable, but 
such projects should be deferred until the work in the areas where 
control is required has progressed well toward completion.
    (c) Generally, only costs associated with the acquisition of minimal 
real property interests, such as easements or temporary rights of entry, 
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this part are eligible for 
Federal participation. The State may request, on a case-by-case basis, 
participation in costs of other interests beyond the minimum necessary, 
including fee title.
    (d) Federal funds may participate in costs to correct the 
inadequacies of screening in prior control projects where the inadequacy 
is due to higher screening standards established in this part or due to 
changed conditions.
    (e) Federal funds may participate in the costs of moving junk or 
scrap to a recycling place of business, or in the case of junk with 
little or no recycling potential, to a site for permanent disposal. In 
the latter case, reasonable land rehabilitation costs or fees connected 
with the use of such a disposal site are also eligible. In a case where 
the acquisition of a permanent disposal site by the State would be the 
most economical method of disposal, Federal funds may participate in the 
net cost (cost of acquisition less a credit after disposal) of a site 
obtained for this purpose.
    (f) Federal funds may participate in control measure costs involved 
in any

[[Page 375]]

junkyard lawfully established or maintained under State law which is 
reclassified from conforming to nonconforming under revised State 
regulations and policy pursuant to this part.
    (g) Federal funds may participate in the costs of acquisition of a 
dwelling in exceptional cases where such acquisition is found necessary 
and in the public interest, and where acquisition of the dwelling can be 
accomplished without resort to eminent domain.
    (h) Federal funds shall not participate in:
    (1) Costs associated with the control of illegal junkyards except 
for removal by State personnel on a force account basis or by contract, 
or in costs of controlling junkyards established after the effective 
date of the State's compliance law except where a conforming junkyard 
later becomes nonconforming due to changed conditions;
    (2) Any costs associated with the acquisition of any dwelling or its 
related buildings if acquired through eminent domain in connection with 
the junk yard control program;
    (3) Costs of acquisition of interests or rights as a measure for 
prohibition or control of the establishment of future junkyards;
    (4) Costs of maintaining screening devices after they have been 
erected; or
    (5) Costs of screening junk which has been or will be removed as a 
part of a junkyard control project.


<R05>
Sec. 751.19  Documentation for Federal participation.

    The following information concerning each eligible junkyard must be 
available in the States' files to be eligible for Federal participation 
in the costs thereof:
    (a) Satisfactory evidence of ownership of the junk or junkyard or 
both.
    (b) Value or cost documentation (including separate interests if 
applicable) including proof of obligation or payment of funds.
    (c) Evidence that the necessary property interests have passed to 
the State and that the junk has been screened, relocated, removed or 
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this part.
    (d) If a dwelling has been acquired by condemnation, evidence that 
the costs involved are not included in the State's claim for 
participation.

[40 FR 8551, Feb. 28, 1975; 40 FR 12260, Mar. 18, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 751.21  Relocation assistance.

    Relocation assistance benefits pursuant to 49 CFR part 24 are 
available for:
    (a) The actual reasonable moving expenses of the junk, actual direct 
loss of tangible personal property and actual reasonable expenses in 
searching for a replacement business or, if the eligibility requirements 
are met, a payment in lieu of such expenses.
    (b) Relocation assistance in locating a replacement business.
    (c) Moving costs of personal property from a dwelling and relocation 
assistance in locating a replacement dwelling, provided the acquisition 
of the real property used for the business causes a person to vacate a 
dwelling.
    (d) Replacement housing payments if the acquisition of the dwelling 
is found by FHWA to be necessary for the federally assisted junkyard 
control project.

[40 FR 8551, Feb. 28, 1975, as amended at 50 FR 34094, Aug. 23, 1985; 54 
FR 47076, Nov. 9, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 751.23  Concurrent junkyard control and right-of-way projects.

    The State is encouraged to coordinate junkyard control and highway 
right-of-way projects. Expenses incurred in furtherance of concurrent 
projects shall be prorated between projects.


<R05>
Sec. 751.25  Programming and authorization.

    (a) Junkyard control projects shall be programmed in accordance with 
the provisions of part 630, subpart A of this chapter. Such projects may 
include one or more junkyards.
    (b) Authorization to proceed with a junkyard control project may be 
given when the State submits a written request to FHWA which includes 
the following:
    (1) The zoning and validation of the legal status of each junkyard 
on the project;

[[Page 376]]

    (2) The control measures proposed for each junkyard including, where 
applicable, information relative to permanent disposal sites to be 
acquired by the State;
    (3) The real property interest to be acquired in order to implement 
the control measures;
    (4) Plans or graphic displays indicating the location of the 
junkyard relative to the highway, the 1,000 foot control lines, property 
ownership boundaries, the general location of the junk or scrap 
material, and any buildings, structures, or improvement involved; and
    (5) Where screening is to be utilized, the type of screening, and 
adequately detailed plans and cross sections, or other adequate graphic 
displays which illustrate the relationship of the motorist, the screen, 
and the material to be screened at critical points of view.

[40 FR 8551, Feb. 28, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 9321, Mar. 4, 1976]


<R03>
PART 752_LANDSCAPE AND ROADSIDE DEVELOPMENT--Table of Contents




Sec.
752.1 Purpose.
752.2 Policy.
752.3 Definitions.
752.4 Landscape development.
752.5 Safety rest areas.
752.6 Scenic overlooks.
752.7 Information centers and systems.
752.8 Privately operated information centers and systems.
752.9 Scenic lands.
752.10 Abandoned vehicles.
752.11 Federal participation.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 131, 315, 319; 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.; 49 CFR 
1.48(b), unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 43 FR 19390, May 5, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 752.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to furnish guidelines and prescribe 
policies regarding landscaping and scenic enhancement programs, safety 
rest areas, and scenic overlooks under 23 U.S.C. 319; information 
centers and systems under 23 U.S.C. 131(i); and vending machines in 
safety rest areas under 23 U.S.C. 111.

[48 FR 38610, Aug. 25, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 752.2  Policy.

    (a) Highway esthetics is a most important consideration in the 
Federal-aid highway program. Highways must not only blend with our 
natural social, and cultural environment, but also provide pleasure and 
satisfaction in their use.
    (b) The FHWA will cooperate with State and local agencies and 
organizations to provide opportunities for the display of original works 
of art within the highway rights-of-way.
    (c) The development of the roadside to include landscape 
development, safety rest areas, and the preservation of valuable 
adjacent scenic lands is a necessary component of highway development. 
Planning and development of the roadside should be concurrent with or 
closely follow that of the highway. Further, the development of travel 
information centers and systems is encouraged as an effective method of 
providing necessary information to the traveling public.


<R05>
Sec. 752.3  Definitions.

    (a) Safety rest area. A roadside facility safely removed from the 
traveled way with parking and such facilities for the motorist deemed 
necessary for his rest, relaxation, comfort and information needs. The 
term is synonymous with ``rest and recreation areas.''
    (b) Scenic overlook. A roadside improvement for parking and other 
facilities to provide the motorist with a safe opportunity to stop and 
enjoy a view.
    (c) Information centers. Facilities located at safety rest areas 
which provide information of interest to the traveling public.
    (d) Information systems. Facilities located within the right-of-way 
which provide information of interest to the traveling public. An 
information system is not a sign, display or device otherwise permitted 
under 23 U.S.C. 131 or prohibited by any local, State or Federal law or 
regulation.
    (e) Landscape project. Any action taken as part of a highway 
construction project or as a separate action to enhance the esthetics of 
a highway through the placement of plant materials consistent with a 
landscape design plan. Seeding undertaken for erosion control and 
planting vegetation

[[Page 377]]

for screening purposes shall not constitute a landscaping project.

[43 FR 19390, May 5, 1978, as amended at 52 FR 34638, Sept. 14, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 752.4  Landscape development.

    (a) Landscape development, which includes landscaping projects and 
other highway planting programs within the right-of-way of all federally 
funded highways or on adjoining scenic lands, shall be in general 
comformity with accepted concepts and principles of highway landscaping 
and environmental design.
    (b) Landscape development should have provisions for plant 
establishment periods of a duration sufficient for expected survival in 
the highway environment. Normal 1-year plant establishment periods may 
be extended to 3-year periods where survival is considered essential to 
their function, such as junkyard screening or urban landscaping 
projects.
    (c) In urban areas new and major reconstructed highways and 
completed Interstate and expressway sections are to be landscaped as 
appropriate for the adjacent existing or planned environment.
    (d) In rural areas new and major reconstructed highways should be 
landscaped as appropriate for the adjacent environment. Planning should 
include the opportunity for natural regeneration of native growth and 
the management of that growth.
    (e) Landscaping projects shall include the planting of native 
wildflower seeds or seedlings or both, unless a waiver is granted as 
provided in Sec. 752.11(b).

[43 FR 19390, May 5, 1978, as amended at 52 FR 34638, Sept. 14, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 752.5  Safety rest areas.

    (a) Safety rest areas should provide facilities reasonably necessary 
for the comfort, convenience, relaxation, and information needs of the 
motorist. Caretakers' quarters may be provided in conjunction with a 
safety rest area at such locations where accommodations are deemed 
necessary. All facilities within the rest area are to provide full 
consideration and accommodation for the handicapped.
    (b) The State may permit the placement of vending machines in 
existing or new safety rest areas located on the rights-of-way of the 
Interstate system for the purpose of dispensing such food, drink, or 
other articles as the State determines are appropriate and desirable, 
except that the dispensing by any means, of petroleum products or motor 
vehicle replacement parts shall not be allowed. Such vending machines 
shall be operated by the State.
    (c) The State may operate the vending machines directly or may 
contract with a vendor for the installation, operation, and maintenance 
of the vending machines. In permitting the placement of vending machines 
the State shall give priority to vending machines which are operated 
through the State licensing agency designated pursuant to section 
2(a)(5) of the Randolph-Sheppard Act, U.S.C. 107(a)(5).
    (d) Access from the safety rest areas to adjacent publicly owned 
conservation and recreation areas may be permitted if access to these 
areas is only available through the rest area and if these areas or 
their usage does not adversely affect the facilities of the safety rest 
area.
    (e) The scenic quality of the site, its accessibility and 
adaptability, and the availability of utilities are the prime 
considerations in the selection of rest area sites. A statewide safety 
rest area system plan should be maintained. This plan should include 
development priorities to ensure safety rest areas will be constructed 
first at locations most needed by the motorist. Proposals for safety 
rest areas or similar facilities on Federal-aid highways in suburban or 
urban areas shall be special case and must be fully justified before 
being authorized by the FHWA Regional Administrator.
    (f) Facilities within newly constructed safety rest areas should 
meet the forecast needs of the design year. Expansion and modernization 
of older existing rest areas that do not provide adequate service should 
be considered.
    (g) No charge to the public may be made for goods and services at 
safety rest areas except for telephone and articles dispensed by vending 
machines.

[43 FR 19390, May 5, 1978, as amended at 48 FR 38611, Aug. 25, 1983]

[[Page 378]]


<R05>
Sec. 752.6  Scenic overlooks.

    Scenic overlooks shall be located and designed as appropriate to the 
site and the scenic view with consideration for safety, access, and 
convenience of the motorist. Scenic overlooks may provide facilities 
equivalent to those provided in safety rest area.


<R05>
Sec. 752.7  Information centers and systems.

    (a) The State may establish at existing or new safety rest areas 
information centers for the purpose of providing specific information to 
the motorist as to services, as to places of interest within the State 
and such other information as the State may consider desirable.
    (b) The State may construct and operate the facilities, may 
construct and lease the operation of information facilities, or may 
lease the construction and operation of information facilities.
    (c) Where the information center or system includes an enclosed 
building, the identification of the operator and all advertising must be 
restricted to the interior of the building. Where a facility is in the 
nature of a bulletin board or partial enclosure, none of the 
advertising, including the trade name, logo, or symbol of the operator 
shall be legible from the main traveled way.
    (d) Subject to FHWA approval, States may establish or permit 
information systems within the right-of-way of federally funded highways 
which provide information of specific interest to the traveling public 
which do not visually intrude upon the main-traveled way of the highway 
in a manner violating 23 U.S.C. 131 and other applicable local, State, 
and Federal laws, rules, and regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 752.8  Privately operated information centers and systems.

    (a) Subject to the FHWA Regional Administrator's approval of the 
lease or agreement, the State may permit privately operated information 
centers and systems which conform with the standards of this directive.
    (b) There shall be no violation of control of access, and no adverse 
effect on traffic in the main traveled way.
    (c) The agreement between the State and the private operator shall 
provide that:
    (1) The State shall have title to the information center or system 
upon completion of construction or termination of the lease.
    (2) Advertising must be limited to matters relating to and of 
interest to the traveling public.
    (3) Equal access must be provided at reasonable rates to all 
advertisers considered qualified by the State.
    (4) Forty percent or more of all display areas and audible 
communications shall be devoted free of charge to providing information 
to the traveling public and public service announcements.
    (5) No charge to the public may be made for goods or services except 
telephone and articles dispensed by vending machines.
    (6) Nondiscrimination provisions must be included in accordance with 
the State assurance with regard to 42 U.S.C. 2000d--2000d-5 (Civil 
Rights Act of 1964). The private operator may not permit advertising 
from advertisers who do not provide their services without regard to 
race, color, or national origin.
    (7) The center or system shall be adequately maintained and kept 
clean and sanitary.
    (8) The State may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations on the 
conduct of the information center or system in the interests of the 
public.
    (9) The State may terminate the lease or agreement for violation of 
its terms or for other cause.

[43 FR 19390, May 5, 1978, as amended at 48 FR 38611, Aug. 25, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 752.9  Scenic lands.

    (a) Acquisition of interests in and improvement of strips of land or 
water areas adjacent to Federal-aid highways may be made as necessary 
for restoration, preservation, and enhancement of scenic beauty.
    (b) Scenic strip interests may be acquired in urban or rural areas, 
combined in one or more projects, authorized separately whether or not 
there is or has been a Federal-aid project on the adjoining Federal-aid 
highway.

[[Page 379]]

    (c) Approval of acquisition and development of scenic strips on 
completed Interstate should be conditioned on a showing that the 
acquisition of scenic strips was considered under the Highway 
Beautification Program for that particular section of Interstate.


<R05>
Sec. 752.10  Abandoned vehicles.

    (a) Abandoned motor vehicles may be removed from the right-of-way 
and from private lands adjacent to Federal-aid highways for the 
restoration, preservation, or enhancement of scenic beauty as seen from 
the traveled way of the highway as a landscape or roadside development 
project.
    (b) The State shall obtain permission or sufficient legal authority 
to go on private land to carry out this program. Where feasible, an 
agreement should be made with the owner that he will not in the future 
place junk, or allow junk to be placed, on his land so as to create an 
eyesore to the traveling public. The permission or authority and the 
agreement may be informal.
    (c) The collection of abandoned motor vehicles from within the 
right-of-way must be a development project and not a maintenance 
operation. Once a State completes a development project for the removal 
of abandoned motor vehicles from within the highway right-of-way, it is 
obligated to continue the removal of future abandoned motor vehicles 
from within the development project limits without further 
participation.


<R05>
Sec. 752.11  Federal participation.

    (a) Federal-aid highway funds, but generally excluding Interstate 
construction funds, are available for landscape development; for the 
acquisition and development of safety rest areas, scenic overlooks, and 
scenic lands; for the development of information centers and systems; 
and for the removal of abandoned motor vehicles.
    (b) Federal-aid highway funds may participate in any landscaping 
project undertaken pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section provided 
that at least one-quarter of one percent of funds expended for such 
landscaping project is used to plant native wildflower seeds or 
seedlings or both. The Administrator may, upon the request of a State 
highway agency, grant a waiver to this requirement provided the State 
certifies that:
    (1) Native wildflowers or seedlings cannot be grown satisfactorily; 
or
    (2) There is a scarcity of available planting areas; or
    (3) The available planting areas will be used for agricultural 
purposes.
    (c) Subject to the requirement of paragraph (b) of this section, 
Federal-aid highway funds may participate in plant establishment periods 
in or associated with landscape development.
    (d) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, 
Federal-aid highway funds may participate in the planting of flowering 
materials, including native wildflowers, donated by garden clubs and 
other organizations or individuals.
    (e) The value of donated plant materials shall not count toward the 
one-quarter of one percent minimum expenditure required by paragraph (b) 
of this section.
    (f) Federal-aid funds may not be used for assemblage, printing, or 
distribution of information materials; for temporary or portable 
information facilities; or for installation, operation, or maintenance 
of vending machines.

[52 FR 34638, Sept. 14, 1987]


<R03>
PART 771_ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND RELATED PROCEDURES--Table of Contents




Sec.
771.101 Purpose.
771.103 [Reserved]
771.105 Policy.
771.107 Definitions.
771.109 Applicability and responsibilities.
771.111 Early coordination, public involvement, and project development.
771.113 Timing of Administration activities.
771.115 Classes of actions.
771.117 Categorical exclusions.
771.119 Environmental assessments.
771.121 Findings of no significant impact.
771.123 Draft environmental impact statements.
771.125 Final environmental impact statements.
771.127 Record of decision.
771.129 Re-evaluations.
771.130 Supplemental environmental impact statements.
771.131 Emergency action procedures.

[[Page 380]]

771.133 Compliance with other requirements.
771.135 Section 4(f) (49 U.S.C. 303).
771.137 International actions.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.; 23 U.S.C. 109, 110, 128, 138 and 
315; 49 U.S.C. 303(c), 5301(e), 5323, and 5324; 40 CFR part 1500 et 
seq.; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and 1.51.

    Source: 52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 771.101  Purpose.

    This regulation prescribes the policies and procedures of the 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and the Urban Mass Transportation 
Administration (UMTA) for implementing the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969 as amended (NEPA), and the regulation of the Council on 
Environmental Quality (CEQ), 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508. This 
regulation sets forth all FHWA, UMTA, and Department of Transportation 
(DOT) requirements under NEPA for the processing of highway and urban 
mass transportation projects. This regulation also sets forth procedures 
to comply with 23 U.S.C. 109(h), 128, 138, and 49 U.S.C. 303, 1602(d), 
1604(h), 1604(i), 1607a, 1607a-1 and 1610.


<R05>
Sec. 771.103  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 771.105  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Administration that:
    (a) To the fullest extent possible, all environmental 
investigations, reviews, and consultations be coordinated as a single 
process, and compliance with all applicable environmental requirements 
be reflected in the environmental document required by this 
regulation.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ FHWA and UMTA have supplementary guidance on the format and 
content of NEPA documents for their programs. This includes a list of 
various environmental laws, regulations, and Executive orders which may 
be applicable to projects. The FHWA Technical Advisory T6640.8A, October 
30, 1987, and the UMTA supplementary guidance are available from the 
respective FHWA and UMTA headquarters and field offices as prescribed in 
49 CFR part 7, Appendices D and G.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Alternative courses of action be evaluated and decisions be made 
in the best overall public interest based upon a balanced consideration 
of the need for safe and efficient transportation; of the social, 
economic, and environmental impacts of the proposed transportation 
improvement; and of national, State, and local environmental protection 
goals.
    (c) Public involvement and a systematic interdisciplinary approach 
be essential parts of the development process for proposed actions.
    (d) Measures necessary to mitigate adverse impacts be incorporated 
into the action. Measures necessary to mitigate adverse impacts are 
eligible for Federal funding when the Administration determines that:
    (1) The impacts for which the mitigation is proposed actually result 
from the Administration action; and
    (2) The proposed mitigation represents a reasonable public 
expenditure after considering the impacts of the action and the benefits 
of the proposed mitigation measures. In making this determination, the 
Administration will consider, among other factors, the extent to which 
the proposed measures would assist in complying with a Federal statute, 
Executive Order, or Administration regulation or policy.
    (e) Costs incurred by the applicant for the preparation of 
environmental documents requested by the Administration be eligible for 
Federal assistance.
    (f) No person, because of handicap, age, race, color, sex, or 
national origin, be excluded from participating in, or denied benefits 
of, or be subject to discrimination under any Administration program or 
procedural activity required by or developed pursuant to this 
regulation.

[52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987; 53 FR 11065, Apr. 5, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 771.107  Definitions.

    The definitions contained in the CEQ regulation and in Titles 23 and 
49 of the United States Code are applicable. In addition, the following 
definitions apply.
    (a) Environmental studies. The investigations of potential 
environmental impacts to determine the environmental process to be 
followed and to assist in the preparation of the environmental document.
    (b) Action. A highway or transit project proposed for FHWA or UMTA

[[Page 381]]

funding. It also includes activities such as joint and multiple use 
permits, changes in access control, etc., which may or may not involve a 
commitment of Federal funds.
    (c) Administration action. The approval by FHWA or UMTA of the 
applicant's request for Federal funds for construction. It also includes 
approval of activities such as joint and multiple use permits, changes 
in access control, etc., which may or may not involve a commitment of 
Federal funds.
    (d) Administration. FHWA or UMTA, whichever is the designated lead 
agency for the proposed action.
    (e) Section 4(f). Refers to 49 U.S.C. 303 and 23 U.S.C. 138.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ Section 4(f), which protected certain public lands and all 
historic sites, technically was repealed in 1983 when it was codified, 
without substantive change, as 49 U.S.C. 303. This regulation continues 
to refer to section 4(f) because it would create needless confusion to 
do otherwise; the policies section 4(f) engendered are widely referred 
to as ``section 4(f)'' matters. A provision with the same meaning is 
found at 23 U.S.C. 138 and applies only to FHWA actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 771.109  Applicability and responsibilities.

    (a)(1) The provisions of this regulation and the CEQ regulation 
apply to actions where the Administration exercises sufficient control 
to condition the permit or project approval. Actions taken by the 
applicant which do not require Federal approvals, such as preparation of 
a regional transportation plan are not subject to this regulation.
    (2) This regulation does not apply to, or alter approvals by the 
Administration made prior to the effective date of this regulation.
    (3) Environmental documents accepted or prepared by the 
Administration after the effective date of this regulation shall be 
developed in accordance with this regulation.
    (b) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant, in cooperation 
with the Administration to implement those mitigation measures stated as 
commitments in the environmental documents prepared pursuant to this 
regulation. The FHWA will assure that this is accomplished as a part of 
its program management responsibilities that include reviews of designs, 
plans, specifications, and estimates (PS&E), and construction 
inspections. The UMTA will assure implementation of committed mitigation 
measures through incorporation by reference in the grant agreement, 
followed by reviews of designs and contruction inspections.
    (c) The Administration, in cooperation with the applicant, has the 
responsibility to manage the preparation of the appropriate 
environmental document. The role of the applicant will be determined by 
the Administration accordance with the CEQ regulation:
    (1) Statewide agency. If the applicant is a public agency that has 
statewide jurisdiction (for example, a State highway agency or a State 
department of transportation) or is a local unit of government acting 
through a statewide agency, and meets the requirements of section 
102(2)(D) of NEPA, the applicant may prepare the environmental impact 
statement (EIS) and other environmental documents with the 
Administration furnishing guidance, participating in the preparation, 
and independently evaluating the document. All FHWA applicants qualify 
under this paragraph.
    (2) Joint lead agency. If the applicant is a public agency and is 
subject to State or local requirements comparable to NEPA, then the 
Administration and the applicant may prepare the EIS and other 
environmental documents as joint lead agencies. The applicant shall 
initially develop substantive portions of the environmental document, 
although the Administration will be responsible for its scope and 
content.
    (3) Cooperating agency. Local public agenices with special expertise 
in the proposed action may be cooperating agencies in the preparation of 
an environmental document. An applicant for capital assistance under the 
Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended (UMT Act), is presumed 
to be a cooperating agency if the conditions in paragraph (c) (1) or (2) 
of this section do not apply. During the environmental process, the 
Administration will determine the scope and content of the environmental 
document and will

[[Page 382]]

direct the applicant, acting as a cooperating agency, to develop 
information and prepare those portions of the document concerning which 
it has special expertise.
    (4) Other. In all other cases, the role of the applicant is limited 
to providing environmental studies and commenting on environmental 
documents. All private institutions or firms are limited to this role.
    (d) When entering into Federal-aid project agreements pursuant to 23 
U.S.C. 110, it shall be the responsibility of the State highway agency 
to ensure that the project is constructed in accordance with and 
incorporates all committed environmental impact mitigation measures 
listed in approved environmental documents unless the State requests and 
receives written Federal Highway Administration approval to modify or 
delete such mitigation features.

[52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987; 53 FR 11065, Apr. 5, 1988, as amended at 62 
FR 6873, Feb. 14, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 771.111  Early coordination, public involvement, and project development.

    (a) Early coordination with appropriate agencies and the public aids 
in determining the type of environmental document an action requires, 
the scope of the document, the level of analysis, and related 
environmental requirements. This involves the exchange of information 
from the inception of a proposal for action to preparation of the 
environmental document. Applicants intending to apply for funds should 
notify the Administration at the time that a project concept is 
identified. When requested, the Administration will advise the 
applicant, insofar as possible, of the probable class of action and 
related environmental laws and requirements and of the need for specific 
studies and findings which would normally be developed concurrently with 
the environmental document.
    (b) The Administration will identify the probable class of action as 
soon as sufficient information is available to identify the probable 
impacts of the action. For UMTA, this is normally no later than the 
review of the transportation improvement program (TIP) and for FHWA, the 
approval of the 105 program (23 U.S.C. 105).
    (c) When FHWA and UMTA are involved in the development of joint 
projects, or when FHWA or UMTA acts as a joint lead agency with another 
Federal agency, a mutually acceptable process will be established on a 
case-by-case basis.
    (d) During the early coordination process, the Administration, in 
cooperation with the applicant, may request other agencies having 
special interest or expertise to become cooperating agencies. Agencies 
with jurisdiction by law must be requested to become cooperating 
agencies.
    (e) Other States, and Federal land management entities, that may be 
significantly affected by the action or by any of the alternatives shall 
be notified early and their views solicited by the applicant in 
cooperation with the Administration. The Administration will prepare a 
written evaluation of any significant unresolved issues and furnish it 
to the applicant for incorporation into the environmental assessment 
(EA) or draft EIS.
    (f) In order to ensure meaningful evaluation of alternatives and to 
avoid commitments to transportation improvements before they are fully 
evaluated, the action evaluated in each EIS or finding of no significant 
impact (FONSI) shall:
    (1) Connect logical termini and be of sufficient length to address 
environmental matters on a broad scope;
    (2) Have independent utility or independent significance, i.e., be 
usable and be a reasonable expenditure even if no additional 
transportation improvements in the area are made; and
    (3) Not restrict consideration of alternatives for other reasonably 
foreseeable transportation improvements.
    (g) For major transportation actions, the tiering of EISs as 
discussed in the CEQ regulation (40 CFR 1502.20) may be appropriate. The 
first tier EIS would focus on broad issues such as general location, 
mode choice, and areawide air quality and land use implications of the 
major alternatives. The second tier would address site-specific details 
on project impacts, costs, and mitigation measures.

[[Page 383]]

    (h) For the Federal-aid highway program:
    (1) Each State must have procedures approved by the FHWA to carry 
out a public involvement/public hearing program pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 
128 and 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508.
    (2) State public involvement/public hearing procedures must provide 
for:
    (i) Coordination of public involvement activities and public 
hearings with the entire NEPA process.
    (ii) Early and continuing opportunities during project development 
for the public to be involved in the identification of social, economic, 
and environmental impacts, as well as impacts associated with relocation 
of individuals, groups, or institutions.
    (iii) One or more public hearings or the opportunity for hearing(s) 
to be held by the State highway agency at a convenient time and place 
for any Federal-aid project which requires significant amounts of right-
of-way, substantially changes the layout or functions of connecting 
roadways or of the facility being improved, has a substantial adverse 
impact on abutting property, otherwise has a significant social, 
economic, environmental or other effect, or for which the FHWA 
determines that a public hearing is in the public interest.
    (iv) Reasonable notice to the public of either a public hearing or 
the opportunity for a public hearing. Such notice will indicate the 
availability of explanatory information. The notice shall also provide 
information required to comply with public involvement requirements of 
other laws, Executive orders, and regulations.
    (v) Explanation at the public hearing of the following information, 
as appropriate:
    (A) The project's purpose, need, and consistency with the goals and 
objectives of any local urban planning,
    (B) The project's alternatives, and major design features,
    (C) The social, economic, environmental, and other impacts of the 
project,
    (D) The relocation assistance program and the right-of-way 
acquisition process.
    (E) The State highway agency's procedures for receiving both oral 
and written statements from the public.
    (vi) Submission to the FHWA of a transcript of each public hearing 
and a certification that a required hearing or hearing opportunity was 
offered. The transcript will be accompanied by copies of all written 
statements from the public, both submitted at the public hearing or 
during an announced period after the public hearing.
    (3) Based on the reevaluation of project environmental documents 
required by Sec. 771.129, the FHWA and the State highway agency will 
determine whether changes in the project or new information warrant 
additional public involvement.
    (4) Approvals or acceptances of public involvement/public hearing 
procedures prior to the publication date of this regulation remain 
valid.
    (i) Applicants for capital assistance in the UMTA program achieve 
public participation on proposed projects by holding public hearings and 
seeking input from the public through the scoping process for 
environmental documents. For projects requiring EISs, a public hearing 
will be held during the circulation period of the draft EIS. For all 
other projects, an opportunity for public hearings will be afforded with 
adequate prior notice pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 1602(d), 1604(i), 1607a(f) 
and 1607a-1(d), and such hearings will be held when anyone with a 
significant social, economic, or environmental interest in the matter 
requests it. Any hearing on the action must be coordinated with the NEPA 
process to the fullest extent possible.
    (j) Information on the UMTA environmental process may be obtained 
from: Director, Office of Planning Assistance, Urban Mass Transportation 
Administration, Washington, DC 20590. Information on the FHWA 
environmental process may be obtained from: Director, Office of 
Environmental Policy, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC 
20590.


<R05>
Sec. 771.113  Timing of Administration activities.

    (a) The Administration in cooperation with the applicant will 
perform the work necessary to complete a

[[Page 384]]

FONSI or an EIS and comply with other related environmental laws and 
regulations to the maximum extent possible during the NEPA process. This 
work includes environmental studies, related engineering studies, agency 
coordination and public involvement. However, final design activities, 
property acquisition (with the exception of hardship and protective 
buying, as defined in Sec. 771.117(d)), purchase of construction 
materials or rolling stock, or project construction shall not proceed 
until the following have been completed:
    (1)(i) The action has been classified as a categorical exclusion 
(CE), or
    (ii) A FONSI has been approved, or
    (iii) A final EIS has been approved and available for the prescribed 
period of time and a record of decision has been signed;
    (2) For actions proposed for FHWA funding, the FHWA Division 
Administrator has received and accepted the certifications and any 
required public hearing transcripts required by 23 U.S.C. 128;
    (3) For activities proposed for FHWA funding, the programming 
requirements of 23 CFR part 450, subpart B, and 23 CFR part 630, subpart 
A, have been met.
    (b) For FHWA, the completion of the requirements set forth in 
paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section is considered acceptance of 
the general project location and concepts described in the environmental 
document unless otherwise specified by the approving official. However, 
such approval does not commit the Administration to approve any future 
grant request to fund the preferred alternative.
    (c) Letters of Intent issued under the authority of section 3(a)(4) 
of the UMT Act are used by UMTA to indicate an intention to obligate 
future funds for multi-year capital transit projects. Letters of Intent 
will not be issued by UMTA until the NEPA process is completed.

[52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987; 53 FR 11066, Apr. 5, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 771.115  Classes of actions.

    There are three classes of actions which prescribe the level of 
documentation required in the NEPA process.
    (a) Class I (EISs). Actions that significantly affect the 
environment require an EIS (40 CFR 1508.27). The following are examples 
of actions that normally required an EIS:
    (1) A new controlled access freeway.
    (2) A highway project of four or more lanes on a new location.
    (3) New construction or extension of fixed rail transit facilities 
(e.g., rapid rail, light rail, commuter rail, automated guideway 
transit).
    (4) New construction or extension of a separate roadway for buses or 
high occupancy vehicles not located within an existing highway facility.
    (b) Class II (CEs). Actions that do not individually or cumulative 
have a significant environmental effect are excluded from the 
requirement to prepare an EA or EIS. A specific list of CEs normally not 
requiring NEPA documentation is set forth in Sec. 771.117(c). When 
appropriately documented, additional projects may also qualify as CEs 
pursuant to Sec. 771.117(d).
    (c) Class III (EAs). Actions in which the significance of the 
environmental impact is not clearly estabilished. All actions that are 
not Class I or II are Class III. All actions in this class require the 
preparation of an EA to determine the appropriate environmental document 
required.


<R05>
Sec. 771.117  Categorical exclusions.

    (a) Categorical exclusions (CEs) are actions which meet the 
definition contained in 40 CFR 1508.4, and, based on past experience 
with similar actions, do not involve significnt environmental impacts. 
They are actions which: do not induce significant impacts to planned 
growth or land use for the area; do not require the relocation of 
significant numbers of people; do not have a significant impact on any 
natural, cultural, recreational, historic or other resource; do not 
involve significant air, noise, or water quality impacts; do not have 
significant impacts on travel patterns; or do not otherwise, either 
individually or cumulatively, have any significant environmental 
impacts.
    (b) Any action which normally would be classified as a CE but could 
involve

[[Page 385]]

unusual circumstances will require the Administration, in cooperation 
with the applicant, to conduct appropriate environmental studies to 
determine if the CE classification is proper. Such unusual circumstances 
include:
    (1) Significant environmental impacts;
    (2) Substantial controversy on environmental grounds;
    (3) Significant impact on properties protected by section 4(f) of 
the DOT Act or section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act; or
    (4) Inconsistencies with any Federal, State, or local law, 
requirement or administrative determination relating to the 
environmental aspects of the action.
    (c) The following actions meet the criteria for CEs in the CEQ 
regulation (section 1508.4) and Sec. 771.117(a) of this regulation and 
normally do not require any further NEPA approvals by the 
Administration:
    (1) Activities which do not involve or lead directly to 
construction, such as planning and technical studies; grants for 
training and research programs; research activities as defined in 23 
U.S.C. 307; approval of a unified work program and any findings required 
in the planning process pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 134; approval of statewide 
programs under 23 CFR part 630; approval of project concepts under 23 
CFR part 476; engineering to define the elements of a proposed action or 
alternatives so that social, economic, and environmental effects can be 
assessed; and Federal-aid system revisions which establish classes of 
highways on the Federal-aid highway system.
    (2) Approval of utility installations along or across a 
transportation facility.
    (3) Construction of bicycle and pedestrian lanes, paths, and 
facilities.
    (4) Activities included in the State's highway safety plan under 23 
U.S.C. 402.
    (5) Transfer of Federal lands pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 317 when the 
subsequent action is not an FHWA action.
    (6) The installation of noise barriers or alterations to existing 
publicly owned buildings to provide for noise reduction.
    (7) Landscaping.
    (8) Installation of fencing, signs, pavement markings, small 
passenger shelters, traffic signals, and railroad warning devices where 
no substantial land acquisition or traffic disruption will occur.
    (9) Emergency repairs under 23 U.S.C. 125.
    (10) Acquisition of scenic easements.
    (11) Determination of payback under 23 CFR part 480 for property 
previously acquired with Federal-aid participation.
    (12) Improvements to existing rest areas and truck weigh stations.
    (13) Ridesharing activities.
    (14) Bus and rail car rehabilitation.
    (15) Alterations to facilities or vehicles in order to make them 
accessible for elderly and handicapped persons.
    (16) Program administration, technical assistance activities, and 
operating assistance to transit authorities to continue existing service 
or increase service to meet routine changes in demand.
    (17) The purchase of vehicles by the applicant where the use of 
these vehicles can be accommodated by existing facilities or by new 
facilities which themselves are within a CE.
    (18) Track and railbed maintenance and improvements when carried out 
within the existing right-of-way.
    (19) Purchase and installation of operating or maintenance equipment 
to be located within the transit facility and with no significant 
impacts off the site.
    (20) Promulgation of rules, regulations, and directives.
    (d) Additional actions which meet the criteria for a CE in the CEQ 
regulations (40 CFR 1508.4) and paragraph (a) of this section may be 
designated as CEs only after Administration approval. The applicant 
shall submit documentation which demonstrates that the specific 
conditions or criteria for these CEs are satisfied and that significant 
environmental effects will not result. Examples of such actions include 
but are not limited to:
    (1) Modernization of a highway by resurfacing, restoration, 
rehabilitation, reconstruction, adding shoulders, or adding auxiliary 
lanes (e.g., parking, weaving, turning, climbing).

[[Page 386]]

    (2) Highway safety or traffic operations improvement projects 
including the installation of ramp metering control devices and 
lighting.
    (3) Bridge rehabilitation, reconstruction or replacement or the 
construction of grade separation to replace existing at-grade railroad 
crossings.
    (4) Transportation corridor fringe parking facilities.
    (5) Construction of new truck weigh stations or rest areas.
    (6) Approvals for disposal of excess right-of-way or for joint or 
limited use of right-of-way, where the proposed use does not have 
significant adverse impacts.
    (7) Approvals for changes in access control.
    (8) Construction of new bus storage and maintenance facilities in 
areas used predominantly for industrial or transportation purposes where 
such construction is not inconsistent with existing zoning and located 
on or near a street with adequate capacity to handle anticipated bus and 
support vehicle traffic.
    (9) Rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing rail and bus 
buildings and ancillary facilities where only minor amounts of 
additional land are required and there is not a substantial increase in 
the number of users.
    (10) Construction of bus transfer facilities (an open area 
consisting of passenger shelters, boarding areas, kiosks and related 
street improvements) when located in a commercial area or other high 
activity center in which there is adequate street capacity for projected 
bus traffic.
    (11) Construction of rail storage and maintenance facilities in 
areas used predominantly for industrial or transportation purposes where 
such construction is not inconsistent with existing zoning and where 
there is no significant noise impact on the surrounding community.
    (12) Acquisition of land for hardship or protective purposes; 
advance land acquisition loans under section 3(b) of the UMT Act.\3\ 
Hardship and protective buying will be permitted only for a particular 
parcel or a limited number of parcels. These types of land acquisition 
quality for a CE only where the acquisition will not limit the 
evaluation of alternatives, including shifts in alignment for planned 
construction projects, which may be required in the NEPA process. No 
project development on such land may proceed until the NEPA process has 
been completed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ Hardship acquisition is early acquisition of property by the 
applicant at the property owner's request to alleviate particular 
hardship to the owner, in contrast to others, because of an inability to 
sell his property. This is justified when the property owner can 
document on the basis of health, safety or financial reasons that 
remaining in the property poses an undue hardship compared to others.
    Protective acquisition is done to prevent imminent development of a 
parcel which is needed for a proposed transportation corridor or site. 
Documentation must clearly demonstrate that development of the land 
would preclude future transportation use and that such development is 
imminent. Advance acquisition is not permitted for the sole purpose of 
reducing the cost of property for a proposed project.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Where a pattern emerges of granting CE status for a particular 
type of action, the Administration will initiate rulemaking proposing to 
add this type of action to the list of categorical exclusions in 
paragraph (c) or (d) of this section, as appropriate.

[52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987; 53 FR 11066, Apr. 5, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 771.119  Environmental assessments.

    (a) An EA shall be prepared by the applicant in consultation with 
the Administration for each action that is not a CE and does not clearly 
require the preparation of an EIS, or where the Administration believes 
an EA would assist in determining the need for an EIS.
    (b) For actions that require an EA, the applicant, in consultation 
with the Administration, shall, at the earliest appropriate time, begin 
consultation with interested agencies and others to advise them of the 
scope of the project and to achieve the following objectives: determine 
which aspects of the proposed action have potential for social, 
economic, or environmental impact; identify alternatives and measures 
which might mitigate adverse environmental impacts; and identify other 
environmental review and consultation

[[Page 387]]

requirements which should be performed concurrently with the EA. The 
applicant shall accomplish this through an early coordination process 
(i.e., procedures under Sec. 771.111) or through a scoping process. 
Public involvement shall be summarized and the results of agency 
coordination shall be included in the EA.
    (c) The EA is subject to Administration approval before it is made 
available to the public as an Administration document. The UMTA 
applicants may circulate the EA prior to Administration approval 
provided that the document is clearly labeled as the applicant's 
document.
    (d) The EA need not be circulated for comment but the document must 
be made available for public inspection at the applicant's office and at 
the appropriate Administration field offices in accordance with 
paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section. Notice of availability of the 
EA, briefly describing the action and its impacts, shall be sent by the 
applicant to the affected units of Federal, State and local government. 
Notice shall also be sent to the State intergovernmental review contacts 
established under Executive Order 12372.
    (e) When a public hearing is held as part of the application for 
Federal funds, the EA shall be available at the public hearing and for a 
minimum of 15 days in advance of the public hearing. The notice of the 
public hearing in local newspapers shall announce the availability of 
the EA and where it may be obtained or reviewed. Comments shall be 
submitted in writing to the applicant or the Administration within 30 
days of the availability of the EA unless the Administration determines, 
for good cause, that a different period is warranted. Public hearing 
requirements are as described in Sec. 771.111.
    (f) When a public hearing is not held, the applicant shall place a 
notice in a newspaper(s) similar to a public hearing notice and at a 
similar stage of development of the action, advising the public of the 
availability of the EA and where information concerning the action may 
be obtained. The notice shall invite comments from all interested 
parties. Comments shall be submitted in writing to the applicant or the 
Administration within 30 days of the publication of the notice unless 
the Administration determines, for good cause, that a different period 
is warranted.
    (g) If no significant impacts are identified, the applicant shall 
furnish the administration a copy of the revised EA, as appropriate; the 
public hearing transcript, where applicable; copies of any comments 
received and responses thereto; and recommend a FONSI. The EA should 
also document compliance, to the extent possible, with all applicable 
environmental laws and Executive orders, or provide reasonable assurance 
that their requirements can be met.
    (h) When the Administration expects to issue a FONSI for an action 
described in Sec. 771.115(a), copies of the EA shall be made available 
for public review (including the affected units of government) for a 
minimum of 30 days before the Administration makes its final decision 
(See 40 CFR 1501.4(e)(2).) This public availability shall be announced 
by a notice similar to a public hearing notice.
    (i) If, at any point in the EA process, the Administration 
determines that the action is likely to have a significant impact on the 
environment, the preparation of an EIS will be required.


<R05>
Sec. 771.121  Findings of no significant impact.

    (a) The Administration will review the EA and any public hearing 
comments and other comments received regarding the EA. If the 
Administration agrees with the applicant's recommendations pursuant to 
Sec. 771.119(g), it will make a separate written FONSI incorporating by 
reference the EA and any other appropriate environmental documents.
    (b) After a FONSI has been made by the Administration, a notice of 
availability of the FONSI shall be sent by the applicant to the affected 
units of Federal, State and local government and the document shall be 
available from the applicant and the Administration upon request by the 
public. Notice shall also be sent to the State intergovernmental review 
contacts established under Executive Order 12372.

[[Page 388]]

    (c) If another Federal agency has issued a FONSI on an action which 
includes an element proposed for Administration funding, the 
Administration will evaluate the other agency's FONSI. If the 
Administration determines that this element of the project and its 
environmental impacts have been adequately identified and assessed, and 
concurs in the decision to issue a FONSI, the Administration will issue 
its own FONSI incorporating the other agency's FONSI. If environmental 
issues have not been adequately identified and assessed, the 
Administration will require appropriate environmental studies.


<R05>
Sec. 771.123  Draft environmental impact statements.

    (a) A draft EIS shall be prepared when the Administration determines 
that the action is likely to cause significant impacts on the 
environment. When the decision has been made by the Administration to 
prepare an EIS, the Administration will issue a Notice of Intent (40 CFR 
1508.22) for publication in the Federal Register. Applicants are 
encouraged to announce the intent to prepare an EIS by apprpriate means 
at the local level.
    (b) After publication of the Notice of Intent, the Administration, 
in cooperation with the applicant, will begin a scoping process. The 
scoping process will be used to identify the range of alternatives and 
impacts and the significant issues to be addressed in the EIS and to 
achieve the other objectives of 40 CFR 1501.7. For FHWA, scoping is 
normally achieved through public and agency involvement procedures 
required by Sec. 771.111. For UMTA, scoping is achieved by soliciting 
agency and public responses to the action by letter or by holding 
scoping meetings. If a scoping meeting is to be held, it should be 
announced in the Administration's Notice of Intent and by appropriate 
means at the local level.
    (c) The draft EIS shall be prepared by the Administration in 
cooperation with the applicant or, where permitted by law, by the 
applicant with appropriate guidance and participation by the 
Administration. The draft EIS shall evaluate all reasonable alternatives 
to the action and discuss the reasons why other alternatives, which may 
have been considered, were eliminated from detailed study. The draft EIS 
shall also summarize the studies, reviews, consultations, and 
coordination required by environmental laws or Executive orders to the 
extent appropriate at this stage in the environmental process.
    (d) An applicant which is a statewide agency may select a consultant 
to assist in the preparation of an EIS in accordance with applicable 
contracting procedures. Where the applicant is a joint lead or 
cooperating agency, the applicant may select a consultant, after 
coordination with the Administration to assure compliance with 40 CFR 
1506.5(c). The Administration will select any such consultant for other 
applicants. (See Sec. 771.109(c) for definitions of these terms.)
    (e) The Administration, when satisfied that the draft EIS complies 
with NEPA requirements, will approve the draft EIS for circulation by 
signing and dating the cover sheet.
    (f) A lead, joint lead, or a cooperating agency shall be responsible 
for printing the EIS. The initial printing of the draft EIS shall be in 
sufficient quantity to meet requirements for copies which can reasonably 
be expected from agencies, organizations, and individuals. Normally, 
copies will be furnished free of charge. However, with Administration 
concurrence, the party requesting the draft EIS may be charged a fee 
which is not more than the actual cost of reproducing the copy or may be 
directed to the nearest location where the statement may be reviewed.
    (g) The draft EIS shall be circulated for comment by the applicant 
on behalf of the Administration. The draft EIS shall be made available 
to the public and transmitted to agencies for comment no later than the 
time the document is filed with the Environmental Protection Agency in 
accordance with 40 CFR 1506.9. The draft EIS shall be transmitted to:
    (1) Public officials, interest groups, and members of the public 
known to have an interest in the proposed action or the draft EIS;
    (2) Federal, State and local government agencies expected to have 
jurisdiction or responsibility over, or interest or expertise in, the 
action. Copies

[[Page 389]]

shall be provided directly to appropriate State and local agencies, and 
to the State intergovernmental review contacts established under 
Executive Order 12372; and
    (3) States and Federal land management entities which may be 
significantly affected by the proposed action or any of the 
alternatives. These copies shall be accompanied by a request that such 
State or entity advise the Administration in writing of any disagreement 
with the evaluation of impacts in the statement. The Administration will 
furnish the comments received to the applicant along with a written 
assessment of any disagreements for incorporation into the final EIS.
    (h) The UMTA requires a public hearing during the circulation period 
of all draft EISs. FHWA public hearing requirements are as described in 
Sec. 771.111(h). Whenever a public hearing is held, the draft EIS shall 
be available at the public hearing and for a minimum of 15 days in 
advance of the public hearing. The availability of the draft EIS shall 
be mentioned, and public comments requested, in any public hearing 
notice and at any public hearing presentation. If a public hearing on an 
action proposed for FHWA funding is not held, a notice shall be placed 
in a newspaper similar to a public hearing notice advising where the 
draft EIS is available for review, how copies may be obtained, and where 
the comments should be sent.
    (i) The Federal Register public availability notice (40 CFR 1506.10) 
shall establish a period of not less than 45 days for the return of 
comments on the draft EIS. The notice and the draft EIS transmittal 
letter shall identify where comments are to be sent.
    (j) For UMTA funded major urban mass transportation investments, the 
applicant shall prepare a report identifying a locally preferred 
alternative at the conclusion of the Draft EIS circulation period. 
Approval may be given to begin preliminary engineering on the principal 
alternative(s) under consideration. During the course of such 
preliminary engineering, the applicant will refine project costs, 
effectiveness, and impact information with particular attention to 
alternative designs, operations, detailed location decisions and 
appropriate mitigation measures. These studies will be used to prepare 
the final EIS or, where appropriate, a supplemental draft EIS.


<R05>
Sec. 771.125  Final environmental impact statements.

    (a)(1) After circulation of a draft EIS and consideration of 
comments received, a final EIS shall be prepared by the Administration 
in cooperation with the applicant or, where permitted by law, by the 
applicant with appropriate guidance and participation by the 
Administration. The final EIS shall identify the preferred alternative 
and evaluate all reasonable alternatives considered. It shall also 
discuss substantive comments received on the draft EIS and responses 
thereto, summarize public involvement, and describe the mitigation 
measures that are to be incorporated into the proposed action. 
Mitigation measures presented as commitments in the final EIS will be 
incorporated into the project as specified in Sec. 771.109(b). The 
final EIS should also document compliance, to the extent possible, with 
all applicable environmental laws and Executive orders, or provide 
reasonable assurance that their requirements can be met.
    (2) Every reasonable effort shall be made to resolve interagency 
disagreements on actions before processing the final EIS. If significant 
issues remain unresolved, the final EIS shall identify those issues and 
the consultations and other efforts made to resolve them.
    (b) The final EIS will be reviewed for legal sufficiency prior to 
Administration approval.
    (c) The Administration will indicate approval of the EIS for an 
action by signing and dating the cover page. Final EISs prepared for 
actions in the following categories will be submitted to the 
Administration's Headquarters for prior concurrence:
    (1) Any action for which the Administration determines that the 
final EIS should be reviewed at the Headquarters office. This would 
typically occur when the Headquarters office determines that (i) 
additional coordination with

[[Page 390]]

other Federal, State or local governmental agencies is needed; (ii) the 
social, economic, or environmental impacts of the action may need to be 
more fully explored; (iii) the impacts of the proposed action are 
unusually great; (iv) major issues remain unresolved; or (v) the action 
involves national policy issues.
    (2) Any action to which a Federal, State or local government agency 
has indicated opposition on environmental grounds (which has not been 
resolved to the written satisfaction of the objecting agency).
    (3) Major urban mass transportation investments as defined by UMTA's 
policy on major investments (49 FR 21284; May 18, 1984).
    (d) The signature of the UMTA approving official on the cover sheet 
also indicates compliance with section 14 of the UMT Act and fulfillment 
of the grant application requirements of sections 3(d)(1) and (2), 5(h), 
and 5(i) of the UMT Act.
    (e) Approval of the final EIS is not an Administration Action (as 
defined in Sec. 771.107(c)) and does not commit the Administration to 
approve any future grant request to fund the preferred alternative.
    (f) The initial printing of the final EIS shall be in sufficient 
quantity to meet the request for copies which can be reasonably expected 
from agencies, organizations, and individuals. Normally, copies will be 
furnished free of charge. However, with Administration concurrence, the 
party requesting the final EIS may be charged a fee which is not more 
than the actual cost of reproducing the copy or may be directed to the 
nearest location where the statement may be reviewed.
    (g) The final EIS shall be transmitted to any persons, 
organizations, or agencies that made substantive comments on the draft 
EIS or requested a copy, no later than the time the document is filed 
with EPA. In the case of lengthy documents, the agency may provide 
alternative circulation processes in accordance with 40 CFR 1502.19. The 
applicant shall also publish a notice of availability in local 
newspapers and make the final EIS available through the mechanism 
established pursuant to DOT Order 4600.13 which implements Executive 
Order 12372. When filed with EPA, the final EIS shall be available for 
public review at the applicant's offices and at appropriate 
Administration offices. A copy should also be made available for public 
review at institutions such as local government offices, libraries, and 
schools, as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 771.127  Record of decision.

    (a) The Administration will complete and sign a record of decision 
(ROD) no sooner than 30 days after publication of the final EIS notice 
in the Federal Register or 90 days after publication of a notice for the 
draft EIS, whichever is later. The ROD will present the basis for the 
decision as specified in 40 CFR 1505.2, summarize any mitigation 
measures that will be incorporated in the project and document any 
required section 4(f) approval in accordance with Sec. 771.135(l). 
Until any required ROD has been signed, no further approvals may be 
given except for administrative activities taken to secure further 
project funding and other activities consistent with 40 CFR 1506.1.
    (b) If the Administration subsequently wishes to approve an 
alternative which was not identified as the preferred alternative but 
was fully evaluated in the final EIS, or proposes to make substantial 
changes to the mitigation measures or findings discussed in the ROD, a 
revised ROD shall be subject to review by those Administration offices 
which reviewed the final EIS under Sec. 771.125(c). To the extent 
practicable the approved revised ROD shall be provided to all persons, 
organizations, and agencies that received a copy of the final EIS 
pursuant to Sec. 771.125(g).


<R05>
Sec. 771.129  Re-evaluations.

    (a) A written evaluation of the draft EIS shall be prepared by the 
applicant in cooperation with the Administration if an acceptable final 
EIS is not submitted to the Administration within 3 years from the date 
of the draft EIS circulation. The purpose of this evaluation is to 
determine whether or not a supplement to the draft EIS or a new draft 
EIS is needed.

[[Page 391]]

    (b) A written evaluation of the final EIS will be required before 
further approvals may be granted if major steps to advance the action 
(e.g., authority to undertake final design, authority to acquire a 
significant portion of the right-of-way, or approval of the plans, 
specifications and estimates) have not occurred within three years after 
the approval of the final EIS, final EIS supplement, or the last major 
Administration approval or grant.
    (c) After approval of the EIS, FONSI, or CE designation, the 
applicant shall consult with the Administration prior to requesting any 
major approvals or grants to establish whether or not the approved 
environmental document or CE designation remains valid for the requested 
Administration action. These consultations will be documented when 
determined necessary by the Administration.

[52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987; 53 FR 11066, Apr. 5, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 771.130  Supplemental environmental impact statements.

    (a) A draft EIS, final EIS, or supplemental EIS may be supplemented 
at any time. An EIS shall be supplemented whenever the Administration 
determines that:
    (1) Changes to the proposed action would result in significant 
environmental impacts that were not evaluated in the EIS; or
    (2) New information or circumstances relevant to environmental 
concerns and bearings on the proposed action or its impacts would result 
in significant environmental impacts not evaluated in the EIS.
    (b) However, a supplemental EIS will not be necessary where:
    (1) The changes to the proposed action, new information, or new 
circumstances result in a lessening of adverse environmental impacts 
evaluated in the EIS without causing other environmental impacts that 
are significant and were not evaluated in the EIS; or
    (2) The Administration decides to approve an alternative fully 
evaluated in an approved final EIS but not identified as the preferred 
alternative. In such a case, a revised ROD shall be prepared and 
circulated in accordance with Sec. 771.127(b).
    (c) Where the Administration is uncertain of the significance of the 
new impacts, the applicant will develop appropriate environmental 
studies or, if the Administration deems appropriate, an EA to assess the 
impacts of the changes, new information, or new circumstances. If, based 
upon the studies, the Administration determines that a supplemental EIS 
is not necessary, the Administration shall so indicate in the project 
file.
    (d) A supplement is to be developed using the same process and 
format (i.e., draft EIS, final EIS, and ROD) as an original EIS, except 
that scoping is not required.
    (e) A supplemental draft EIS may be necessary for UMTA major urban 
mass transportation investments if there is a substantial change in the 
level of detail on project impacts during project planning and 
development. The supplement will address site-specific impacts and 
refined cost estimates that have been developed since the original draft 
EIS.
    (f) In some cases, a supplemental EIS may be required to address 
issues of limited scope, such as the extent of proposed mitigation or 
the evaluation of location or design variations for a limited portion of 
the overall project. Where this is the case, the preparation of a 
supplemental EIS shall not necessarily:
    (1) Prevent the granting of new approvals;
    (2) Require the withdrawal of previous approvals; or
    (3) Require the suspension of project activities; for any activity 
not directly affected by the supplement. If the changes in question are 
of such magnitude to require a reassessment of the entire action, or 
more than a limited portion of the overall action, the Administration 
shall suspend any activities which would have an adverse environmental 
impact or limit the choice of reasonable alternatives, until the 
supplemental EIS is completed.


<R05>
Sec. 771.131  Emergency action procedures.

    Requests for deviations from the procedures in this regulation 
because of emergency circumstances (40 CFR

[[Page 392]]

1506.11) shall be referred to the Administration's headquarters for 
evaluation and decision after consultation with CEQ.


<R05>
Sec. 771.133  Compliance with other requirements.

    The final EIS or FONSI should document compliance with requirements 
of all applicable environmental laws, Executive orders, and other 
related requirements. If full compliance is not possible by the time the 
final EIS or FONSI is prepared, the final EIS or FONSI should reflect 
consultation with the appropriate agencies and provide reasonable 
assurance that the requirements will be met. Approval of the 
environmental document constitutes adoption of any Administration 
findings and determinations that are contained therein. The FHWA 
approval of the appropriate NEPA document will constitute its finding of 
compliance with the report requirements of 23 U.S.C. 128.


<R05>
Sec. 771.135  Section 4(f) (49 U.S.C. 303).

    (a)(l) The Administration may not approve the use of land from a 
significant publicly owned public park, recreation area, or wildlife and 
waterfowl refuge, or any significant historic site unless a 
determination is made that:
    (i) There is no feasible and prudent alternative to the use of land 
from the property; and
    (ii) The action includes all possible planning to minimize harm to 
the property resulting from such use.
    (2) Supporting information must demonstrate that there are unique 
problems or unusual factors involved in the use of alternatives that 
avoid these properties or that the cost, social, economic, and 
environmental impacts, or community disruption resulting from such 
alternatives reach extraordinary magnitudes.
    (b) The Administration will determine the application of section 
4(f). Any use of lands from a section 4(f) property shall be evaluated 
early in the development of the action when alternatives to the proposed 
action are under study.
    (c) Consideration under section 4(f) is not required when the 
Federal, State, or local officials having jurisdiction over a park, 
recreation area or refuge determine that the entire site is not 
significant. In the absence of such a determination, the section 4(f) 
land will be presumed to be significant. The Administration will review 
the significance determination to assure its reasonableness.
    (d) Where Federal lands or other public land holdings (e.g., State 
forests) are administered under statutes permitting management for 
multiple uses, and, in fact, are managed for multiple uses, section 4(f) 
applies only to those portions of such lands which function for, or are 
designated in the plans of the administering agency as being for, 
significant park, recreation, or wildlife and waterfowl purposes. The 
determination as to which lands so function or are so designated, and 
the significance of those lands, shall be made by the officials having 
jurisdiction over the lands. The Administration will review this 
determination to assure its reasonableness. The determination of 
significance shall apply to the entire area of such park, recreation, or 
wildlife and waterfowl refuge sites.
    (e) In determining the application of section 4(f) to historic 
sites, the Administration, in cooperation with the applicant, will 
consult with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) and 
appropriate local officials to identify all properties on or eligible 
for the National Register of Historic Places (National Register). The 
section 4(f) requirements apply only to sites on or eligible for the 
National Register unless the Administration determines that the 
application of section 4(f) is otherwise appropriate.
    (f) The Administration may determine that section 4(f) requirements 
do not apply to restoration, rehabilitation, or maintenance of 
transportation facilities that are on or eligible for the National 
Register when:
    (1) Such work will not adversely affect the historic qualities of 
the facility that caused it to be on or eligible for the National 
Register, and
    (2) The SHPO and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation 
(ACHP) have been consulted and have not objected to the Administration 
finding in paragraph (f)(1) of this section.

[[Page 393]]

    (g)(1) Section 4(f) applies to all archeological sites on or 
eligible for inclusion on the National Register, including those 
discovered during construction except as set forth in paragraph (g)(2) 
of this section. Where section 4(f) applies to archeological sites 
discovered during construction, the section 4(f) process will be 
expedited. In such cases, the evaluation of feasible and prudent 
alternatives will take account of the level of investment already made. 
The review process, including the consultation with other agencies, will 
be shortened as appropriate.
    (2) Section 4(f) does not apply to archeological sites where the 
Administration, after consultation with the SHPO and the ACHP, 
determines that the archeological resource is important chiefly because 
of what can be learned by data recovery and has minimal value for 
preservation in place. This exception applies both to situations where 
data recovery is undertaken or where the Administration decides, with 
agreement of the SHPO and, where applicable, the ACHP not to recover the 
resource.
    (h) Designations of park and recreation lands, wildlife and 
waterfowl refuges, and historic sites are sometimes made and 
determinations of significance changed late in the development of a 
proposed action. With the exception of the treatment of archeological 
resources in paragraph (g) of this section, the Administration may 
permit a project to proceed without consideration under section 4(f) if 
the property interest in the section 4(f) lands was acquired for 
transportation purposes prior to the designation or change in the 
determination of significance and if an adequate effort was made to 
identify properties protected by section 4(f) prior to acquisition.
    (i) The evaluations of alternatives to avoid the use of section 4(f) 
land and of possible measures to minimize harm to such lands shall be 
developed by the applicant in cooperation with the Administration. This 
information should be presented in the draft EIS, EA, or, for a project 
classified as a CE in a separate document. The section 4(f) evaluation 
shall be provided for coordination and comment to the officials having 
jurisdiction over the section 4(f) property and to the Department of the 
Interior, and as appropriate to the Department of Agriculture and the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development. A minimum of 45 days shall 
be established by the Administration for receipt of comments. Uses of 
section 4(f) land covered by a programmatic section 4(f) evaluation 
shall be documented and coordinated as specified in the programmatic 
section 4(f) evaluation.
    (j) When adequate support exists for a section 4(f) determination, 
the discussion in the final EIS, FONSI, or separate section 4(f) 
evaluation shall specifically address:
    (1) The reasons why the alternatives to avoid a section 4(f) 
property are not feasible and prudent; and
    (2) All measures which will be taken to minimize harm to the section 
4(f) property.
    (k) The final Section 4(f) evaluation will be reviewed for legal 
sufficiency.
    (l) For actions processed with EISs, the Administration will make 
the section 4(f) approval either in its approval of the final EIS or in 
the ROD. Where the section 4(f) approval is documented in the final EIS, 
the Administration will summarize the basis for its section 4(f) 
approval in the ROD. Actions requiring the use of section 4(f) property, 
and proposed to be processed with a FONSI or classified as a CE, shall 
not proceed until notified by the Administration of section 4(f) 
approval. For these actions, any required section 4(f) approval will be 
documented separately.
    (m) Circulation of a separate section 4(f) evaluation will be 
required when:
    (1) A proposed modification of the alignment or design would require 
the use of section 4(f) property after the CE, FONSI, draft EIS, or 
final EIS has been processed;
    (2) The Administration determines, after processing the CE, FONSI, 
draft EIS, or final EIS that section 4(f) applies to a property;
    (3) A proposed modification of the alignment, design, or measures to 
minimize harm (after the original section

[[Page 394]]

4(f) approval) would result in a substantial increase in the amount of 
section 4(f) land used, a substantial increase in the adverse impacts to 
section 4(f) land, or a substantial reduction in mitigation measures; or
    (4) Another agency is the lead agency for the NEPA process, unless 
another DOT element is preparing the section 4(f) evaluation.
    (n) If the Administration determines under Sec. 771.135(m) or 
otherwise, that section 4(f) is applicable after the CE, FONSI, or final 
EIS has been processed, the decision to prepare and circulate a section 
4(f) evaluation will not necessarily require the preparation of a new or 
supplemental environmental document. Where a separately circulated 
section 4(f) evaluation is prepared, such evaluation does not 
necessarily:
    (1) Prevent the granting of new approvals;
    (2) Require the withdrawal of previous approvals; or
    (3) Require the suspension of project activities; for any activity 
not affected by the section 4(f) evaluation.
    (o) An analysis required by section 4(f) may involve different 
levels of detail where the section 4(f) involvement is addressed in a 
tiered EIS.
    (1) When the first-tier, broad-scale EIS is prepared, the detailed 
information necessary to complete the section 4(f) evaluation may not be 
available at that stage in the development of the action. In such cases, 
an evaluation should be made on the potential impacts that a proposed 
action will have on section 4(f) land and whether those impacts could 
have a bearing on the decision to be made. A preliminary determination 
may be made at this time as to whether there are feasible and prudent 
locations or alternatives for the action to avoid the use of section 
4(f) land. This preliminary determination shall consider all possible 
planning to minimize harm to the extent that the level of detail 
available at the first-tier EIS stage allows. It is recognized that such 
planning at this stage will normally be limited to ensuring that 
opportunities to minimize harm at subsequent stages in the development 
process have not been precluded by decisions made at the first-tier 
stage. This preliminary determination is then incorporated into the 
first-tier EIS.
    (2) A section 4(f) approval made when additional design details are 
available will include a determination that:
    (i) The preliminary section 4(f) determination made pursuant to 
paragraph (o)(1) of this section is still valid; and
    (ii) The criteria of paragraph (a) of this section have been met.
    (p) Use. (1) Except as set forth in paragraphs (f), (g)(2), and (h) 
of this section, ``use'' (in paragraph (a)(1) of this section) occurs:
    (i) When land is permanently incorporated into a transportation 
facility;
    (ii) When there is a temporary occupancy of land that is adverse in 
terms of the statute's preservationist purposes as determined by the 
criteria in paragraph (p)(7) of this section; or
    (iii) When there is a constructive use of land.
    (2) Constructive use occurs when the transportation project does not 
incorporate land from a section 4(f) resource, but the project's 
proximity impacts are so severe that the protected activities, features, 
or attributes that qualify a resource for protection under section 4(f) 
are substantially impaired. Substantial impairment occurs only when the 
protected activities, features, or attributes of the resource are 
substantially diminished.
    (3) The Administration is not required to determine that there is no 
constructive use. However, such a determination could be made at the 
discretion of the Administration.
    (4) The Administration has reviewed the following situations and 
determined that a constructive use occurs when:
    (i) The projected noise level increase attributable to the project 
substantially interferes with the use and enjoyment of a noise-sensitive 
facility of a resource protected by section 4(f), such as hearing the 
performances at an outdoor amphitheater, sleeping in the sleeping area 
of a campground, enjoyment of a historic site where a quiet setting is a 
generally recognized feature or attribute of the site's significance, or 
enjoyment of an urban park where serenity and quiet are significant 
attributes;

[[Page 395]]

    (ii) The proximity of the proposed project substantially impairs 
esthetic features or attributes of a resource protected by section 4(f), 
where such features or attributes are considered important contributing 
elements to the value of the resource. Examples of substantial 
impairment to visual or esthetic qualities would be the location of a 
proposed transportation facility in such proximity that it obstructs or 
eliminates the primary views of an architecturally significant 
historical building, or substantially detracts from the setting of a 
park or historic site which derives its value in substantial part due to 
its setting;
    (iii) The project results in a restriction on access which 
substantially diminishes the utility of a significant publicly owned 
park, recreation area, or a historic site;
    (iv) The vibration impact from operation of the project 
substantially impairs the use of a section 4(f) resource, such as 
projected vibration levels from a rail transit project that are great 
enough to affect the structural integrity of a historic building or 
substantially diminish the utility of the building; or
    (v) The ecological intrusion of the project substantially diminishes 
the value of wildlife habitat in a wildlife or waterfowl refuge adjacent 
to the project or substantially interferes with the access to a wildlife 
or waterfowl refuge, when such access is necessary for established 
wildlife migration or critical life cycle processes.
    (5) The Administration has reviewed the following situations and 
determined that a constructive use does not occur when:
    (i) Compliance with the requirements of section 106 of the National 
Historic Preservation Act and 36 CFR part 800 for proximity impacts of 
the proposed action, on a site listed on or eligible for the National 
Register of Historic Places, results in an agreement of ``no effect'' or 
``no adverse effect'';
    (ii) The projected traffic noise levels of the proposed highway 
project do not exceed the FHWA noise abatement critieria as contained in 
Table 1, 23 CFR part 772, or the projected operational noise levels of 
the proposed transit project do not exceed the noise impact criteria in 
the UMTA guidelines;
    (iii) The projected noise levels exceed the relevant threshold in 
paragraph (p)(5)(ii) of this section because of high existing noise, but 
the increase in the projected noise levels if the proposed project is 
constructed, when compared with the projected noise levels if the 
project is not built, is barely perceptible (3 dBA or less);
    (iv) There are proximity impacts to a section 4(f) resource, but a 
governmental agency's right-of-way acquisition, an applicant's adoption 
of project location, or the Administration approval of a final 
environmental document, established the location for a proposed 
transportation project before the designation, establishment, or change 
in the significance of the resource. However, if the age of an historic 
site is close to, but less than, 50 years at the time of the 
governmental agency's acquisition, adoption, or approval, and except for 
its age would be eligible for the National Register, and construction 
would begin after the site was eligible, then the site is considered a 
historic site eligible for the National Register;
    (v) There are impacts to a proposed public park, recreation area, or 
wildlife refuge, but the proposed transportation project and the 
resource are concurrently planned or developed. Examples of such 
concurrent planning or development include, but are not limited to:
    (A) Designation or donation of property for the specific purpose of 
such concurrent development by the entity with jurisdiction or ownership 
of the property for both the potential transportation project and the 
section 4(f) resource, or
    (B) Designation, donation, planning or development of property by 
two or more governmental agencies, with jurisdiction for the potential 
transportation project and the section 4(f) resource, in consultation 
with each other;
    (vi) Overall (combined) proximity impacts caused by a proposed 
project do not substantially impair the activities, features, or 
attributes that qualify a resource for protection under section 4(f);

[[Page 396]]

    (vii) Proximity impacts will be mitigated to a condition equivalent 
to, or better than, that which would occur under a no-build scenario;
    (viii) Change in accessibility will not substantially diminish the 
utilization of the section 4(f) resource; or
    (ix) Vibration levels from project construction activities are 
mitigated, through advance planning and monitoring of the activities, to 
levels that do not cause a substantial impairment of the section 4(f) 
resource.
    (6) When a constructive use determination is made, it will be based, 
to the extent it reasonably can, upon the following:
    (i) Identification of the current activities, features, or 
attributes of a resource qualified for protection under section 4(f) and 
which may be sensitive to proximity impacts;
    (ii) An analysis of the proximity impacts of the proposed project on 
the section 4(f) resource. If any of the proximity impacts will be 
mitigated, only the net impact need be considered in this analysis. The 
analysis should also describe and consider the impacts which could 
reasonably be expected if the proposed project were not implemented, 
since such impacts should not be attributed to the proposed project;
    (iii) Consultation, on the above identification and analysis, with 
the Federal, State, or local officials having jurisdiction over the 
park, recreation area, refuge, or historic site.
    (7) A temporary occupancy of land is so minimal that it does not 
constitute a use within the meaning of section 4(f) when the following 
conditions are satisfied:
    (i) Duration must be temporary, i.e., less than the time needed for 
construction of the project, and there should be no change in ownership 
of the land;
    (ii) Scope of the work must be minor, i.e., both the nature and the 
magnitude of the changes to the section 4(f) resource are minimal;
    (iii) There are no anticipated permanent adverse physical impacts, 
nor will there be interference with the activities or purposes of the 
resource, on either a temporary or permanent basis;
    (iv) The land being used must be fully restored, i.e., the resource 
must be returned to a condition which is at least as good as that which 
existed prior to the project; and
    (v) There must be documented agreement of the appropriate Federal, 
State, or local officials having jurisdiction over the resource 
regarding the above conditions.

[52 FR 32660, Aug. 28, 1987; 53 FR 11066, Apr. 5, 1988, as amended at 56 
FR 13279, Apr. 1, 1991; 57 FR 12411, Apr. 10, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 771.137  International actions.

    (a) The requirements of this part apply to:
    (1) Administration actions significantly affecting the environment 
of a foreign nation not participating in the action or not otherwise 
involved in the action.
    (2) Administration actions outside the U.S., its territories, and 
possessions which significantly affect natural resources of global 
importance designated for protection by the President or by 
international agreement.
    (b) If communication with a foreign government concerning 
environmental studies or documentation is anticipated, the 
Administration shall coordinate such communication with the Department 
of State through the Office of the Secretary of Transportation.


<R03>
PART 772_PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT OF HIGHWAY TRAFFIC NOISE AND 
CONSTRUCTION NOISE--Table of Contents




Sec.
772.1 Purpose.
772.3 Noise standards.
772.5 Definitions.
772.7 Applicability.
772.9 Analysis of traffic noise impacts and abatement measures.
772.11 Noise abatement.
772.13 Federal participation.
772.15 Information for local officials.
772.17 Traffic noise prediction.
772.19 Construction noise.

Table 1 to Part 772--Noise Abatement Criteria
Appendix A to Part 772--National Reference Energy Mean Emission Levels 
          as a Function of Speed

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 109(h), 109(i); 42 U.S.C. 4331, 4332; sec. 
339(b), Pub. L. 104-59, 109 Stat. 568, 605; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 47 FR 29654, July 8, 1982; 47 FR 33956, Aug. 5, 1982, unless 
otherwise noted.

[[Page 397]]


<R05>
Sec. 772.1  Purpose.

    To provide procedures for noise studies and noise abatement measures 
to help protect the public health and welfare, to supply noise abatement 
criteria, and to establish requirements for information to be given to 
local officials for use in the planning and design of highways approved 
pursuant to title 23 U.S.C.


<R05>
Sec. 772.3  Noise standards.

    The highway traffic noise prediction requirements, noise analyses, 
noise abatement criteria, and requirements for informing local officials 
in this regulation constitute the noise standards mandated by 23 U.S.C. 
109(i). All highway projects which are developed in conformance with 
this regulation shall be deemed to be in conformance with the Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA) noise standards.


<R05>
Sec. 772.5  Definitions.

    (a) Design year. The future year used to estimate the probable 
traffic volume for which a highway is designed. A time, 10 to 20 years, 
from the start of construction is usually used.
    (b) Existing noise levels. The noise, resulting from the natural and 
mechanical sources and human activity, considered to be usually present 
in a particular area.
    (c) L10. The sound level that is exceeded 10 percent of the time 
(the 90th percentile) for the period under consideration.
    (d) L10(h). The hourly value of L10.
    (e) Leq--the equivalent steady-state sound level which in a stated 
period of time contains the same acoustic energy as the time-varying 
sound level during the same time period.
    (f) Leq(h). The hourly value of Leq.
    (g) Traffic noise impacts. Impacts which occur when the predicted 
traffic noise levels approach or exceed the noise abatement criteria 
(Table 1), or when the predicted traffic noise levels substantially 
exceed the existing noise levels.
    (h) Type I projects. A proposed Federal or Federal-aid highway 
project for the construction of a highway on new location or the 
physical alteration of an existing highway which significantly changes 
either the horizonal or vertical alignment or increases the number of 
through-traffic lanes.
    (i) Type II projects. A proposed Federal or Federal-aid highway 
project for noise abatement on an existing highway.


<R05>
Sec. 772.7  Applicability.

    (a) Type I projects. This regulation applies to all Type I projects 
unless it is specifically indicated that a section applies only to Type 
II projects.
    (b) Type II projects. The development and implementation of Type II 
projects are not mandatory requirements of 23 U.S.C. 109(i) and are, 
therefore, not required by this regulation. When Type II projects are 
proposed for Federal-aid highway participation at the option of the 
highway agency, the provisions of Sec. Sec. 772.9(c), 772.13, and 
772.19 of this regulation shall apply.


<R05>
Sec. 772.9  Analysis of traffic noise impacts and abatement measures.

    (a) The highway agency shall determine and analyze expected traffic 
noise impacts and alternative noise abatement measures to mitigate these 
impacts, giving weight to the benefits and cost of abatement, and to the 
overall social, economic and environmental effects.
    (b) The traffic noise analysis shall include the following for each 
alternative under detailed study:
    (1) Identification of existing activities, developed lands, and 
undeveloped lands for which development is planned, designed and 
programmed, which may be affected by noise from the highway;
    (2) Prediction of traffic noise levels;
    (3) Determination of existing noise levels;
    (4) Determination of traffic noise impacts; and
    (5) Examination and evaluation of alternative noise abatement 
measures for reducing or eliminating the noise impacts.
    (c) Highway agencies proposing to use Federal-aid highway funds for 
Type II projects shall perform a noise analysis of sufficient scope to 
provide information needed to make the determination required by Sec. 
772.13(a) of this chapter.

[[Page 398]]


<R05>
Sec. 772.11  Noise abatement.

    (a) In determining and abating traffic noise impacts, primary 
consideration is to be given to exterior areas. Abatement will usually 
be necessary only where frequent human use occurs and a lowered noise 
level would be of benefit.
    (b) In those situations where there are no exterior activities to be 
affected by the traffic noise, or where the exterior activities are far 
from or physically shielded from the roadway in a manner that prevents 
an impact on exterior activities, the interior criterion shall be used 
as the basis of determining noise impacts.
    (c) If a noise impact is identified, the abatement measures listed 
in Sec. 772.13(c) of this chapter must be considered.
    (d) When noise abatement measures are being considered, every 
reasonable effort shall be made to obtain substantial noise reductions.
    (e) Before adoption of a final environmental impact statement or 
finding of no significant impact, the highway agency shall identify:
    (1) Noise abatement measures which are reasonable and feasible and 
which are likely to be incorporated in the project, and
    (2) Noise impacts for which no apparent solution is available.
    (f) The views of the impacted residents will be a major 
consideration in reaching a decision on the reasonableness of abatement 
measures to be provided.
    (g) The plans and specifications will not be approved by FHWA unless 
those noise abatement measures which are reasonable and feasible are 
incorporated into the plans and specifications to reduce or eliminate 
the noise impact on existing activities, developed lands, or undeveloped 
lands for which development is planned, designed, and programmed.


<R05>
Sec. 772.13  Federal participation.

    (a) Federal funds may be used for noise abatement measures where:
    (1) A traffic noise impact has been identified,
    (2) The noise abatement measures will reduce the traffic noise 
impact, and
    (3) The overall noise abatement benefits are determined to outweigh 
the overall adverse social, economic, and environmental effects and the 
costs of the noise abatement measures.
    (b) For Type II projects, noise abatement measures will only be 
approved for projects that were approved before November 28, 1995, or 
are proposed along lands where land development or substantial 
construction predated the existence of any highway. The granting of a 
building permit, filing of a plat plan, or a similar action must have 
occurred prior to right-of-way acquisition or construction approval for 
the original highway. Noise abatement measures will not be approved at 
locations where such measures were previously determined not to be 
reasonable and feasible for a Type I project.
    (c) The noise abatement measures listed below may be incorporated in 
Type I and Type II projects to reduce traffic noise impacts. The costs 
of such measures may be included in Federal-aid participating project 
costs with the Federal share being the same as that for the system on 
which the project is located, except that Interstate construction funds 
may only participate in Type I projects.
    (1) Traffic management measures (e.g., traffic control devices and 
signing for prohibition of certain vehicle types, time-use restrictions 
for certain vehicle types, modified speed limits, and exclusive land 
designations).
    (2) Alteration of horizontal and vertical alignments.
    (3) Acquisition of property rights (either in fee or lesser 
interest) for construction of noise barriers.
    (4) Construction of noise barriers (including landscaping for 
esthetic purposes) whether within or outside the highway right-of-way. 
Interstate construction funds may not participate in landscaping.
    (5) Acquisition of real property or interests therein (predominantly 
unimproved property) to serve as a buffer zone to preempt development 
which would be adversely impacted by traffic noise. This measure may be 
included in Type I projects only.
    (6) Noise insulation of public use or nonprofit institutional 
structures.
    (d) There may be situations where (1) severe traffic noise impacts 
exist or are

[[Page 399]]

expected, and (2) the abatement measures listed above are physically 
infeasible or economically unreasonable. In these instances, noise 
abatement measures other than those listed in Sec. 772.13(c) of this 
chapter may be proposed for Types I and II projects by the highway 
agency and approved by the Regional Federal Highway Administrator on a 
case-by-case basis when the conditions of Sec. 772.13(a) of this 
chapter have been met.

[47 FR 29654, July 8, 1982; 47 FR 33956, Aug. 5, 1982, as amended at 61 
FR 45321, Aug. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 772.15  Information for local officials.

    In an effort to prevent future traffic noise impacts on currently 
undeveloped lands, highway agencies shall inform local officials within 
whose jurisdiction the highway project is located of the following:
    (a) The best estimation of future noise levels (for various 
distances from the highway improvement) for both developed and 
undeveloped lands or properties in the immediate vicinity of the 
project,
    (b) Information that may be useful to local communities to protect 
future land development from becoming incompatible with anticipated 
highway noise levels, and
    (c) Eligibility for Federal-aid participation for Type II projects 
as described in Sec. 772.13(b) of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 772.17  Traffic noise prediction.

    (a) Any traffic noise prediction method is approved for use in any 
noise analysis required by this regulation if it generally meets the 
following two conditions:
    (1) The methodology is consistent with the methodology in the FHWA 
Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (Report No. FHWA-RD-77-108).*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    *These documents are available for inspection and copying as 
prescribed in 49 CFR part 7, appendix D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) The prediction method uses noise emission levels obtained from 
one of the following:
    (i) National Reference Energy Mean Emission Levels as a Function of 
Speed (appendix A).
    (ii) Determination of reference energy mean emission levels in Sound 
Procedures for Measuring Highway Noise: Final Report, DP-45-1R.*
    (b) In predicting noise levels and assessing noise impacts, traffic 
characteristics which will yield the worst hourly traffic noise impact 
on a regular basis for the design year shall be used.


<R05>
Sec. 772.19  Construction noise.

    The following general steps are to be performed for all Types I and 
II projects:
    (a) Identify land uses or activities which may be affected by noise 
from construction of the project. The identification is to be performed 
during the project development studies.
    (b) Determine the measures which are needed in the plans and 
specifications to minimize or eliminate adverse construction noise 
impacts to the community. This determination shall include a weighing of 
the benefits achieved and the overall adverse social, economic and 
environmental effects and the costs of the abatement measures.
    (c) Incorporate the needed abatement measures in the plans and 
specifications.

              Table 1 to Part 772--Noise Abatement Criteria

                               [Hourly A-Weighted Sound Level--decibels (dBA)\1\]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                     Description of activity
         Activity Category                  Leq(h)                L10(h)                     category
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A.................................  57 (Exterior)........  60 (Exterior).......  Lands on which serenity and
                                                                                  quiet are of extraordinary
                                                                                  significance and serve an
                                                                                  important public need and
                                                                                  where the preservation of
                                                                                  those qualities is essential
                                                                                  if the area is to continue to
                                                                                  serve its intended purpose.
B.................................  67 (Exterior)........  70 (Exterior).......  Picnic areas, recreation areas,
                                                                                  playgrounds, active sports
                                                                                  areas, parks, residences,
                                                                                  motels, hotels, schools,
                                                                                  churches, libraries, and
                                                                                  hospitals.

[[Page 400]]

 
C.................................  72 (Exterior)........  75 (Exterior).......  Developed lands, properties, or
                                                                                  activities not included in
                                                                                  Categories A or B above.
D.................................  .....................  ....................  Undeveloped lands.
E.................................  52 (Interior)........  55 (Interior).......  Residences, motels, hotels,
                                                                                  public meeting rooms, schools,
                                                                                  churches, libraries,
                                                                                  hospitals, and auditoriums.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Either L10(h) or Leq(h) (but not both) may be used on a project.


[[Page 401]]

 Appendix A to Part 772--National Reference Energy Mean Emission Levels 
                         as a Function of Speed
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.013


[[Page 402]]




<R03>
PART 777_MITIGATION OF IMPACTS TO WETLANDS AND NATURAL HABITAT--Table of Contents




Sec.
777.1 Purpose.
777.2 Definitions.
777.3 Background.
777.5 Federal participation.
777.7 Evaluation of impacts.
777.9 Mitigation of impacts.
777.11 Other considerations.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.; 49 U.S.C. 303; 23 U.S.C. 101(a), 
103, 109(h), 133(b)(1), (b)(11), and (d)(2), 138, 315; E.O. 11990; DOT 
Order 5660.1A; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 65 FR 82924, Dec. 29, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 777.1  Purpose.

    To provide policy and procedures for the evaluation and mitigation 
of adverse environmental impacts to wetlands and natural habitat 
resulting from Federal-aid projects funded pursuant to provisions of 
title 23, U.S. Code. These policies and procedures shall be applied by 
the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) to projects under the Federal 
Lands Highway Program to the extent such application is deemed 
appropriate by the FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 777.2  Definitions.

    In addition to those contained in 23 U.S.C. 101(a), the following 
definitions shall apply as used in this part:
    Biogeochemical transformations means those changes in chemical 
compounds and substances which naturally occur in ecosystems. Examples 
are the carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus cycles in nature, in which 
these elements are incorporated from inorganic substances into organic 
matter and recycled on a continuing basis.
    Compensatory mitigation means restoration, enhancement, creation, 
and under exceptional circumstances, preservation, of wetlands, wetland 
buffer areas, and other natural habitats, carried out to replace or 
compensate for the loss of wetlands or natural habitat area or 
functional capacity resulting from Federal-aid projects funded pursuant 
to provisions of title 23, U.S. Code. Compensatory mitigation usually 
occurs in advance of or concurrent with the impacts to be mitigated, but 
may occur after such impacts in special circumstances.
    Mitigation bank means a site where wetlands and/or other aquatic 
resources or natural habitats are restored, created, enhanced, or in 
exceptional circumstances, preserved, expressly for the purpose of 
providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts to 
similar resources. For purposes of the Clean Water Act, Section 404 (33 
U.S.C. 1344), use of a mitigation bank can only be authorized when 
impacts are unavoidable.
    Natural habitat means a complex of natural, primarily native or 
indigenous vegetation, not currently subject to cultivation or 
artificial landscaping, a primary purpose of which is to provide habitat 
for wildlife, either terrestrial or aquatic. For purposes of this part, 
habitat has the same meaning as natural habitat. This definition 
excludes rights-of-way that are acquired with Federal transportation 
funds specifically for highway purposes.
    Net gain of wetlands means a wetland resource conservation and 
management principle under which, over the long term, unavoidable losses 
of wetlands area or functional capacity due to highway projects are 
offset by gains at a ratio greater than 1:1, through restoration, 
enhancement, preservation, or creation of wetlands or associated areas 
critical to the protection or conservation of wetland functions. This 
definition specifically excludes natural habitat, as defined in this 
section, other than wetlands.
    On-site, in-kind mitigation means compensatory mitigation which 
replaces wetlands or natural habitat area or functions lost as a result 
of a highway project with the same or like wetland or habitat type and 
functions adjacent or contiguous to the site of the impact.
    Practicable means available and capable of being done after taking 
into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics, in light of 
overall project purposes.
    Service area of a mitigation bank means that the service area of a 
wetland or natural habitat mitigation bank shall be consistent with that 
in

[[Page 403]]

the Federal Guidance for the Establishment, Use and Operation of 
Mitigation Banks (60 FR 58605, November 28, 1995), i.e., the designated 
area (e.g., watershed, county) wherein a bank can be expected to provide 
appropriate compensation for impacts to wetlands and/or other aquatic or 
natural habitat resources.
    Wetland or habitat enhancement means activities conducted in 
existing wetlands or other natural habitat to achieve specific 
management objectives or provide conditions which previously did not 
exist, and which increase one or more ecosystem functions. Enhancement 
may involve tradeoffs between the resource structure, function, and 
values; a positive change in one may result in negative effects to other 
functions. Examples of activities which may be carried out to enhance 
wetlands or natural habitats include, but are not limited to, alteration 
of hydrologic regime, vegetation management, erosion control, fencing, 
integrated pest management and control, and fertilization.
    Wetland or habitat establishment period means a period of time 
agreed to by the FHWA, State DOT, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as 
necessary to establish wetland or natural habitat functional capacity in 
a compensatory mitigation project sufficient to compensate wetlands or 
habitat losses due to impacts of Federal-aid highway projects. The 
establishment period may vary depending on the specific wetland or 
habitat type being developed.
    Wetland or habitat functional capacity means the ability of a 
wetland or natural habitat to perform natural functions, such as provide 
wildlife habitat, support biodiversity, store surface water, or perform 
biogeochemical transformations, as determined by scientific functional 
assessment. Natural functions of wetlands include, but are not limited 
to, those listed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at 33 CFR 
320.4(b)(2)(i) through (viii).
    Wetland or habitat preservation means the protection of ecologically 
important wetlands, other aquatic resources, or other natural habitats 
in perpetuity through the implementation of appropriate legal and 
physical mechanisms. Preservation of wetlands for compensatory 
mitigation purposes may include protection of upland areas adjacent to 
wetlands as necessary to ensure protection and/or enhancement of the 
aquatic ecosystem.
    Wetland or habitat restoration means the reestablishment of wetlands 
or natural habitats on a site where they formerly existed or exist in a 
substantially degraded state.
    Wetland or wetlands means those areas that are inundated or 
saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration to 
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of 
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
    Wetlands or habitat mitigation credit means a unit of wetlands or 
habitat mitigation, defined either by area or a measure of functional 
capacity through application of scientific functional assessment. With 
respect to mitigation banks, this definition means the same as that in 
the Federal Guidance for the Establishment, Use, and Operation of 
Mitigation Banks.


<R05>
Sec. 777.3  Background.

    (a) Executive Order 11990 (42 FR 26961, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 121) 
Protection of Wetlands, and DOT Order 5660.1A,\1\ Preservation of the 
Nation's Wetlands, emphasize the important functions and values inherent 
in the Nation's wetlands. Federal agencies are directed to avoid new 
construction in wetlands unless the head of the agency determines that:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ DOT Order 5660.1A is available for inspection and copying from 
FHWA headquarters and field offices as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (1) There is no practicable alternative to such construction, and
    (2) The proposed action includes all practicable measures to 
minimize harm to wetlands which may result from such use.
    (b) Sections 103 and 133 of title 23, U.S. Code, identify additional 
approaches for mitigation and management of impacts to wetlands and 
natural habitats which result from projects funded pursuant to title 23,

[[Page 404]]

U.S. Code, as eligible for participation with title 23, U.S. Code, 
funds.
    (c) 33 CFR parts 320 through 330, Regulatory Program, U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers; Section 404, Clean Water Act and 40 CFR part 230, 
Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines for the Specification of Disposal Sites for 
Dredged or Fill Material, establish requirements for the permitting of 
discharge of dredge or fill material in wetlands and other waters of the 
United States.
    (d) Federal Guidance for the Establishment, Use, and Operation of 
Mitigation Banks presents guidance for the use of ecological mitigation 
banks as compensatory mitigation in the Section 404 Regulatory Program 
for unavoidable impacts to wetlands and other aquatic resources.
    (e) Interagency Cooperation--Endangered Species Act of 1973, as 
amended (50 CFR part 402), presents regulations establishing interagency 
consultation procedures relative to impacts to species listed under the 
authority of the Act and their habitats as required by Section 7, 
Interagency Coordination, of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 
U.S.C. 1536).


<R05>
Sec. 777.5  Federal participation.

    (a) Those measures which the FHWA and a State DOT find appropriate 
and necessary to mitigate adverse environmental impacts to wetlands and 
natural habitats are eligible for Federal participation where the 
impacts are the result of projects funded pursuant to title 23, U.S. 
Code. The justification for the cost of proposed mitigation measures 
should be considered in the same context as any other public 
expenditure; that is, the proposed mitigation represents a reasonable 
public expenditure when weighed against other social, economic, and 
environmental values, and the benefit realized is commensurate with the 
proposed expenditure. Mitigation measures shall give like consideration 
to traffic needs, safety, durability, and economy of maintenance of the 
highway.
    (b) It is FHWA policy to permit, consistent with the limits set 
forth in this part, the expenditure of title 23, U.S. Code, funds for 
activities required for the planning, design, construction, monitoring, 
and establishment of wetlands and natural habitat mitigation projects, 
and acquisition of land or interests therein.


<R05>
Sec. 777.7  Evaluation of impacts.

    (a) The reasonableness of the public expenditure and extent of 
Federal participation with title 23, U.S. Code, funds shall be directly 
related to:
    (1) The importance of the impacted wetlands and natural habitats;
    (2) The extent of highway impacts on the wetlands and natural 
habitats, as determined through an appropriate, interdisciplinary, 
impact assessment; and
    (3) Actions necessary to comply with the Clean Water Act, Section 
404, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and other relevant Federal 
statutes.
    (b) Evaluation of the importance of the impacted wetlands and 
natural habitats shall consider:
    (1) Wetland and natural habitat functional capacity;
    (2) Relative importance of these functions to the total wetland or 
natural habitat resource of the area;
    (3) Other factors such as uniqueness, esthetics, or cultural values; 
and
    (4) Input from the appropriate resource management agencies through 
interagency coordination.
    (c) A determination of the highway impact should focus on both the 
short-and long-term affects of the project on wetland or natural habitat 
functional capacity, consistent with 40 CFR part 1500, 40 CFR 1502.16, 
33 CFR 320.4, and the FHWA's environmental compliance regulations, found 
at 23 CFR part 771.


<R05>
Sec. 777.9  Mitigation of impacts.

    (a) Actions eligible for Federal funding. There are a number of 
actions that can be taken to minimize the impact of highway projects on 
wetlands or natural habitats. The following actions qualify for Federal-
aid highway funding:
    (1) Avoidance and minimization of impacts to wetlands or natural 
habitats through realignment and special design, construction features, 
or other measures.
    (2) Compensatory mitigation alternatives, either inside or outside 
of the right-of-way. This includes, but is not limited to, such measures 
as on-site

[[Page 405]]

mitigation, when that alternative is determined to be the preferred 
approach by the appropriate regulatory agency; improvement of existing 
degraded or historic wetlands or natural habitats through restoration or 
enhancement on or off site; creation of new wetlands; and under 
exceptional circumstances, preservation of existing wetlands or natural 
habitats on or off site. Restoration of wetlands is generally preferable 
to enhancement or creation of new wetlands.
    (3) Improvements to existing wetlands or natural habitats. Such 
activities may include, but are not limited to, construction or 
modification of water level control structures or ditches, establishment 
of natural vegetation, re-contouring of a site, installation or removal 
of irrigation, drainage, or other water distribution systems, integrated 
pest management, installation of fencing, monitoring, and other measures 
to protect, enhance, or restore the wetland or natural habitat character 
of a site.
    (4) Mitigation banks. In accordance with all applicable Federal law 
(including regulations), with respect to participation in compensatory 
mitigation related to a project funded under title 23, U.S. Code, that 
has an impact on wetlands or natural habitat occurring within the 
service area of a mitigation bank, preference shall be given, to the 
maximum extent practicable, to the use of the mitigation bank, if the 
bank contains sufficient available credits to offset the impact and the 
bank is approved in accordance with the Federal Guidance for the 
Establishment, Use, and Operation of Mitigation Banks, or other 
agreement between appropriate agencies.
    (b) Mitigation banking alternatives eligible for participation with 
Federal-aid funds including such measures as the following:
    (1) Mitigation banks in which mitigation credits are purchased by 
State DOTs to mitigate impacts to wetlands or natural habitats due to 
projects funded under title 23, U.S. Code, including privately owned 
banks or those established with private funds to mitigate wetland or 
natural habitat losses.
    (2) Single purpose banks established by and for the use of a State 
DOT with Federal-aid participation; or multipurpose publicly owned 
banks, established with public, non-title 23 Federal highway funds, in 
which credits may be purchased by highway agencies using title 23 
highway funds on a per-credit basis.
    (c) Contributions to statewide and regional efforts to conserve, 
restore, enhance and create wetlands or natural habitats. Federal-aid 
funds may participate in the development of statewide and regional 
wetlands conservation plans, including any efforts and plans authorized 
pursuant to the Water Resources Development Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-
640, 104 Stat. 4604). Contributions to these efforts may occur in 
advance of project construction only if such efforts are consistent with 
all applicable requirements of Federal law and regulations and State 
transportation planning processes.
    (d) Mitigation or restoration of historic impacts to wetlands and 
natural habitats caused by past highway projects funded pursuant to 
title 23, U.S. Code, even if there is no current federally funded 
highway project in the immediate vicinity. These impacts must be related 
to transportation projects funded under the authority of title 23, U.S. 
Code.


<R05>
Sec. 777.11  Other considerations.

    (a) The development of measures proposed to mitigate impacts to 
wetlands or natural habitats shall include consultation with appropriate 
State and Federal agencies.
    (b) Federal-aid funds shall not participate in the replacement of 
wetlands or natural habitats absent sufficient assurances, such as, but 
not limited to, deed restrictions, fee ownership, permanent easement, or 
performance bond, that the area will be maintained as a wetland or 
natural habitat.
    (c) The acquisition of proprietary interests in replacement wetlands 
or natural habitats as a mitigation measure may be in fee simple, by 
easement, or by other appropriate legally recognized instrument, such as 
a banking instrument legally approved by the appropriate regulatory 
agency. The acquisition of mitigation credits in wetland or natural 
habitat mitigation banks shall

[[Page 406]]

be accomplished through a legally recognized instrument, such as 
permanent easement, deed restriction, or legally approved mitigation 
banking instrument, which provides for the protection and permanent 
continuation of the wetland or natural habitat nature of the mitigation.
    (d) A State DOT may acquire privately owned lands in cooperation 
with another public agency or third party. Such an arrangement may 
accomplish greater benefits than would otherwise be accomplished by the 
individual agency acting alone.
    (e) A State DOT may transfer the title to, or enter into an 
agreement with, an appropriate public natural resource management agency 
to manage lands acquired outside the right-of-way without requiring a 
credit to Federal funds. Any such transfer of title or agreement shall 
require the continued use of the lands for the purpose for which they 
were acquired. In the event the purpose is no longer served, the lands 
and interests therein shall immediately revert to the State DOT for 
proper disposition.
    (f) The reasonable costs of acquiring lands or interests therein to 
provide replacement lands with equivalent wetlands or natural habitat 
area or functional capacity associated with these areas are eligible for 
Federal participation.
    (g) The objective in mitigating impacts to wetlands in the Federal-
aid highway program is to implement the policy of a net gain of wetlands 
on a program wide basis.
    (h) Certain activities to ensure the viability of compensatory 
mitigation wetlands or natural habitats during the period of 
establishment are eligible for Federal-aid participation. These include, 
but are not limited to, such activities as repair or adjustment of water 
control structures, pest control, irrigation, fencing modifications, 
replacement of plantings, and mitigation site monitoring. The 
establishment period should be specifically determined by the mitigation 
agreement among the mitigation planners prior to beginning any 
compensatory mitigation activities.

[[Page 407]]


<R03>
                   SUBCHAPTER I_PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION




<R03>
PART 810_MASS TRANSIT AND SPECIAL USE HIGHWAY PROJECTS--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
810.2 Purpose.
810.4 Definitions.
810.6 Prerequisites for projects authorized by 23 U.S.C. 137, 142, or 
          149.
810.8 Coordination.

Subpart B_Highway Public Transportation Projects and Special Use Highway 
                               Facilities

810.100 Purpose.
810.102 Eligible projects.
810.104 Applicability of other provisions.
810.106 Approval of fringe and transportation corridor parking 
          facilities.
810.108 Designation of existing facilities.

   Subpart C_Making Highway Rights-of-Way Available for Mass Transit 
                                Projects

810.200 Purpose.
810.202 Applicability.
810.204 Application by mass transit authority.
810.206 Review by the State Highway Agency.
810.208 Action by the Federal Highway Administrator.
810.210 Authorization for use and occupancy by mass transit.
810.212 Use to be without charge.

   Subpart D_Federal-Aid Urban System Nonhighway Public Mass Transit 
                                Projects

810.300 Purpose.
810.302 Eligible projects.
810.304 Submission of projects.
810.306 Reservation of funds.
810.308 Approval of urban system nonhighway public mass transit 
          projects.
810.310 Applicability of other provisions.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 137, 142, 149 and 315; sec. 4 of Pub. L. 97-
134, 95 Stat. 1699; secs. 118, 120, and 163 of Pub. L. 97-424, 96 Stat. 
2097; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and 1.51(f).

    Source: 50 FR 33917, Aug. 22, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 810.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to implement sections 137, 142, 
and 149 of title 23, U.S.C.


<R05>
Sec. 810.4  Definitions.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided terms defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a) 
are used in this subpart as so defined.
    (b) The following terms, where used in the regulations in this 
subpart have the following meanings:
    (1) Exclusive or preferential high occupancy vehicle, truck, or 
emergency vehicle lanes-one or more lanes of a highway facility or an 
entire highway facility where high occupancy vehicles, trucks or 
emergency vehicles or any combination thereof, are given, at all times 
or at any regularly scheduled times, a priority or preference over some 
or all other vehicles moving in the general stream of mixed highway 
traffic. Carpool lane(s)--is any high occupancy vehicle lane which 
allows use by carpools.
    (2) Fringe and transportation corridor parking facilities--those 
facilities which are intended to be used for the temporary storage of 
vehicles and which are located and designed so as to facilitate the safe 
and convenient transfer of persons traveling in such vehicles to and 
from high occupancy vehicles and/or public mass transportation systems 
including rail. The term parking facilities includes but is not limited 
to access roads, buildings, structures, equipment, improvements and 
interests in land.
    (3) High occupancy vehicle--a bus or other motorized passenger 
vehicle such as a carpool or vanpool vehicle used for ridesharing 
purposes and occupied by a specified minimum number of persons.
    (4) Highway traffic control devices--traffic control devices as 
defined by the currently approved ``Manual on Uniform Traffic Control 
Devices for Streets and Highways.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The MUTCD is incorporated by reference at 23 CFR part 655, 
subpart F.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 408]]

    (5) Metropolitan Planning Organization--that organization designated 
as being responsible, together with the State, for carrying out the 
provisions of 23 U.S.C. 134, as required by 23 U.S.C. 104(f)(3), and 
capable of meeting the requirements of sections 3(e)(1), 5(1), 8 (a) and 
(c) and 9(e)(3)(G) of the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as 
amended, 49 U.S.C. 1602(e)(1), 1604(1), 1607 (a) and (c) and 
1607a(e)(3)(G). This organization shall be the forum for cooperative 
transportation decisionmaking.
    (6) Nonhighway public mass transit project--a project to develop or 
improve public mass transit facilities or equipment. A project need not 
be physically located or operated on a route designated as part of the 
Federal-aid urban system, but must be included in and related to a 
program for the development or improvement of an urban public mass 
transit system which includes the purchase and rehabilitation of 
passenger buses and rolling stock for fixed rail facilities, and the 
purchase, construction, reconstruction or improvement of fixed rail 
passenger operating facilities. Such projects may also include the 
construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of passenger loading and 
unloading facilities for either bus or rail passengers.
    (7) Passenger loading areas and facilities (including shelters)--
areas and facilities located at or near passenger loading points for 
safety, protection, comfort, or convenience of high occupancy vehicle 
passengers. The term areas and facilities includes but is not limited to 
access roads, buildings, structures, equipment, improvements, and 
interest in land.
    (8) Responsible local officials--(i) In areas under 50,000 
population, the principal elected officials of general purpose local 
governments; or (ii) In urbanized areas, the principal elected officials 
of general purpose local governments acting through the Metropolitan 
Planning Organization.

[50 FR 33917, Aug. 22, 1985, as amended at 51 FR 16834, May 7, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 810.6  Prerequisites for projects authorized by 23 U.S.C. 137, 
142, or 149.

    (a) Projects in an urbanized area must be based on a continuing 
comprehensive transportation planning process, carried on in accordance 
with 23 U.S.C. 134 as prescribed in 23 CFR part 450, subpart A and 
included in the transportation improvement program required by 23 CFR 
part 450, subpart B.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided by 23 CFR 450.202, projects under 
this subpart located outside the urbanized area boundaries should be 
coordinated with the appropriate local officials of the urbanized area 
as necessary to insure compatibility with the area's urban 
transportation plan.
    (c) All proposed projects must be included in a program of projects 
approved pursuant to 23 CFR part 630, subpart A (Federal-Aid Program 
Approval and Authorization).


<R05>
Sec. 810.8  Coordination.

    The Federal Highway Administrator and the Urban Mass Transportation 
Administrator shall coordinate with each other on any projects involving 
public mass transit to facilitate project selection, approval and 
completion.


<R04>
Subpart B_Highway Public Transportation Projects and Special Use Highway 
                               Facilities


<R05>
Sec. 810.100  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subpart is to implement 23 
U.S.C. 137, 142(a)(1), 142(b), and 149, which authorize various highway 
public mass transportation improvements and special use highway 
facilities as Federal-aid highway projects.


<R05>
Sec. 810.102  Eligible projects.

    Under this subpart the Federal Highway Administrator may approve on 
any Federal-aid system projects which facilitate the use of high 
occupancy vehicles and public mass transportation systems so as to 
increase the traffic capacity of the Federal-aid system for the movement 
of persons. Eligible projects include:
    (a) Construction of exclusive or preferential high occupancy 
vehicle, truck, or emergency vehicle lanes, except the

[[Page 409]]

construction of exclusive or preferential lanes limited to use by 
emergency vehicles can be approved only on the Federal-aid Interstate 
System;
    (b) Highway traffic control devices;
    (c) Passenger loading areas and facilities (including shelters) that 
are on or serve a Federal-aid system; and
    (d) Construction or designation of fringe and transportation 
corridor parking facilities. For parking facilities located in the 
central business district the Federal-aid project must be limited to 
space reserved exclusively for the parking of high occupancy vehicles 
used for carpools or vanpools.


<R05>
Sec. 810.104  Applicability of other provisions.

    (a) Projects authorized under Sec. 810.102 shall be deemed to be 
highway projects for all purposes of title 23 U.S.C., and shall be 
subject to all regulations of title 23 CFR.
    (b) Projects approved under this subpart on the Federal-aid 
Interstate System for exclusive or preferential high occupancy vehicle, 
truck, and emergency vehicle lanes are excepted from the minimum four-
lane requirement of 23 U.S.C. 109(b).
    (c) Exclusive or preferential lanes on the Interstate System, 
including approaches and directly related facilities, can be constructed 
with Interstate construction funds only if they were approved in the 
1981 Interstate Cost Estimate.
    (d) The Federal proportional share of a project approved under this 
subpart shall be as provided in 23 U.S.C. 120 for the class of funds 
involved. The Federal share for Interstate substitution projects is 85 
percent except for signalization projects which may be 100 percent as 
provided by 23 U.S.C. 120(d). The provisions of section 120(d) title 23 
U.S.C. may also be applied to regularly funded projects under Sec. 
810.102 of this subpart as follows:
    (1) Signalization projects.
    (2) Passenger loading area and facilities which principally serve 
carpools and vanpools.
    (3) Fringe and transportation corridor parking facilities or 
portions thereof which are reserved exclusively for use by carpool and 
vanpool passengers and vehicles.
    (e) As required by section 163 of the Surface Transportation 
Assistance Act of 1982, approval of Federal-aid highway funding for a 
physical construction or resurfacing project having a carpool lane(s) 
within the project limits may not be granted unless the project allows 
the use of the carpool lane(s) by motorcycles or it is certified by the 
State that such use will create a safety hazard. This requirement does 
not apply to high occupancy vehicle lanes which exclude carpools or to 
carpool lanes constructed by the State without the use of Federal-aid 
Highway funds. The issue of the extent of utilization of these 
facilities including those constructed prior to January 6, 1982 with 
Federal-aid Highway funds is a matter for individual determination by 
the State Highway Agency.


<R05>
Sec. 810.106  Approval of fringe and transportation corridor parking 
facilities.

    (a) In approving fringe and transportation corridor parking 
facilities, the Federal Highway Administrator:
    (1) Shall make a determination that the proposed parking facility 
will benefit the Federal-aid systems by improving its traffic capacity 
for the movement of persons;
    (2) May approve acquisition of land proximate to the right-of-way of 
a Federal-aid highway;
    (3) May approve construction of publicly-owned parking facilities on 
land within the right-of-way of any Federal-aid highway, including the 
use of the airspace above and below the established gradeline of the 
highway pavement, and on land, acquired with or without Federal-aid 
funds which is not within the right-of-way of any Federal-aid highway 
but which was acquired in accordance with the Uniform Relocation 
Assistance and Land Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (84 Stat. 1894, 42 
U.S.C. 4601 et seq.);
    (4) May permit the charging of fees for the use of the facility, 
except that the rate of the fee shall not be in excess of that required 
for maintenance and operation and the cost of providing shuttle service 
to and from the facility (including compensation to any person for 
operating such facility and for providing such shuttle service);

[[Page 410]]

    (5) Shall determine that the State, or the political subdivision 
thereof, where the project is to be located, or any agency or 
instrumentality of such State or political subdivision, has the 
authority and capability of constructing, maintaining, and operating the 
facility.
    (6) Shall receive assurance from the State that the facility will 
remain in public ownershp as long as the facility is needed and that any 
change in ownership shall have prior FHWA approval;
    (7) Shall enter into an agreement with the State, political 
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality governing the financing, 
maintenance, and operation of the parking facility; and
    (8) Shall approve design standards for constructing the facility as 
developed in cooperation with the State highway agency.
    (b) A State political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality 
thereof may contract with any person to operate any parking facility 
constructed under this section.
    (c) In authorizing projects involving fringe and transportation 
corridor parking facilities, the class of Federal-aid funds (primary, 
secondary, or urban system) used for projects under this subpart may be 
either funds designated for the Federal-aid system on which the facility 
is located or the Federal-aid system substantially benefited. For 
Interstate funds to be used for such eligible projects the Federal-aid 
Interstate system must be the system which substantially benefits. The 
benefiting system is that system which would have otherwise carried the 
high occupancy vehicle or rail passengers to their destination. 
Interstate construction funds may be used only where the parking 
facility was approved in the 1981 Interstate Cost Estimate and is 
constructed in conjunction with a high occupancy vehicle lane approved 
in the 1981 Interstate Cost Estimate.


<R05>
Sec. 810.108  Designation of existing facilities.

    (a) In accordance with the provisions of 23 CFR 810.102, the Federal 
Highway Administrator may approve on any Federal-aid system the work 
necessary to designate existing parking facilities (such as at shopping 
centers or other public or private locations) for fringe and 
transportation corridor parking.
    (1) Eligible activities include the acquisition of or the initial 
and renewal costs for leasing existing parking space, signing of and 
modifications to existing facilities, trail blazer signs, and passenger 
loading areas and facilities.
    (2) The approval criteria in 23 CFR 810.106 (a)(1), (4), (5), (7) 
and (8) apply to these parking facilities.
    (b) In accordance with the provisions of 23 CFR 810.102, the Federal 
Highway Administrator may approve on any Federal-aid system the work 
necessary to designate existing highway lanes as high occupancy vehicle 
lanes.
    (1) Eligible activities include preliminary engineering, signing, 
pavement marking, traffic control devices, minor physical modifications 
and initial inspection or monitoring of use.
    (2) Such improvements may be approved on any public road if they 
facilitate more efficient use of any Federal-aid highway.
    (c) Interstate construction funds may be used only where the 
proposed projects were approved in the 1981 Interstate Cost Estimate.


<R04>
   Subpart C_Making Highway Rights-of-Way Available for Mass Transit 
                                Projects


<R05>
Sec. 810.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 142(g), which 
permits the Federal Highway Administrator to authorize a State to make 
available to a publicly-owned mass transit authority existing highway 
rights-of-way for rail or other non-highway public mass transit 
facilities.


<R05>
Sec. 810.202  Applicability.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart are applicable to the rights-of-
way of all Federal-aid highways in which Federal-aid highway funds have 
participated or will participate in any part of the cost of the highway.
    (b) The provisions of this subpart do not preclude acquisition of 
rights-of-way for use involving mass transit facilities under the 
provisions of subparts B and D of this part. Rights-of-way made 
available under this subpart

[[Page 411]]

may be used in combination with rights-of-way acquired under subparts B 
and D of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 810.204  Application by mass transit authority.

    A publicly-owned mass transit authority desiring to utilize land 
existing within the publicly acquired right-of-way of any Federal-aid 
highway for a rail or other nonhighway public mass transit facility may 
submit an application therefor to the State highway agency.


<R05>
Sec. 810.206  Review by the State Highway Agency.

    The State highway agency, after reviewing the application, may 
request the Federal Highway Administrator to authorize the State to make 
available to the publicly-owned mass transit authority the land needed 
for the proposed facility. A request shall be accompanied by evidence 
that utilization of the land for the proposed purposes will not impair 
future highway improvements or the safety of highway users.


<R05>
Sec. 810.208  Action by the Federal Highway Administrator.

    The Federal Highway Administrator may authorize the State to make 
available to the publicly-owned mass transit authority the land needed 
for the proposed facility, if it is determined that:
    (a) The evidence submitted by the State highway agency under Sec. 
810.206 is satisfactory;
    (b) The public interest will be served thereby; and
    (c) The proposed action in urbanized areas is based on a continuing, 
comprehensive transportation planning process carried on in accordance 
with 23 U.S.C. 134 as described under 23 CFR part 450, subpart A.


<R05>
Sec. 810.210  Authorization for use and occupancy by mass transit.

    (a) Upon being authorized by the Federal Highway Administrator, the 
State shall enter into a written agreement with the publicly-owned mass 
transit authority relating to the use and occupancy of highway right-of-
way subject to the following conditions:
    (1) That any significant revision in the design, construction, or 
use of the facility for which the land was made available shall receive 
prior review and approval by the State highway agency.
    (2) The use of the lands made available to the publicly-owned mass 
transit authority shall not be transferred to another party without the 
prior approval of the State highway agency.
    (3) That, if the publicly-owned mass transit authority fails within 
a reasonable or agreed time to use the land for the purpose for which it 
was made available, or if it abandons the land or the facility 
developed, such use shall terminate. Any abandoned facility developed or 
under development by the publicly-owned mass transit authority which was 
financed all or in part with Federal funds shall be disposed of in a 
manner prescribed by OMB Circular A-102, Attachment N. The land shall 
revert to the State for its original intended highway purpose.
    (b) A copy of the use and occupancy agreement and any modification 
under paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section shall be 
forwarded to the Federal Highway Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 810.212  Use to be without charge.

    The use and occupancy of the lands made available by the State to 
the publicly-owned transit authority shall be without charge. Costs 
incidental to making the lands available for mass transit shall be borne 
by the publicly-owned mass transit authority.


<R04>
   Subpart D_Federal-Aid Urban System Nonhighway Public Mass Transit 
                                Projects


<R05>
Sec. 810.300  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 142(a)(2), 
which allows the Urban Mass Transportation Administrator, by delegation 
of the Secretary, to approve nonhighway public mass transit projects as 
Federal-aid urban system projects.


<R05>
Sec. 810.302  Eligible projects.

    (a) Eligible projects are those defined as nonhighway public mass 
transit projects in Sec. 810.4 of this part subject to

[[Page 412]]

the limitations in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) All projects under this subpart for the construction, 
reconstruction, or improvement of fixed rail facilities shall be located 
within the urban boundaries established under 23 U.S.C. 101(a).


<R05>
Sec. 810.304  Submission of projects.

    (a) An application for an urban system nonhighway public mass 
transit project shall be developed by a public body as defined under the 
UMTA Discretionary Capital Assistance Program and shall be prepared in 
accordance with procedures for the same Discretionary Capital Assistance 
program.
    (b) The application shall be submitted concurrently to the State 
highway agency and to the UMTA Administrator. The State highway agency, 
if it concurs, shall submit a request to the FHWA Administrator for a 
reservation of apportioned Federal-aid urban system funds. The State 
shall include in its submission advice that such reservation of funds 
will not impair its ability to comply with the provisions of section 
105(d) of Pub. L. 97-424 (if a State certifies it does not need forty 
percent of its Federal-aid urban system funds for 4R work, and the 
Secretary accepts such certification, the State may spend that unneeded 
amount for other eligible FAUS purpose, including nonhighway public mass 
transit projects).


<R05>
Sec. 810.306  Reservation of funds.

    (a) The FHWA Administrator shall review the State request, determine 
whether sufficient Federal-aid urban system funds are available, and 
notify the State highway agency and the UMTA Administrator of the 
reservation of funds.
    (b) The apportioned funds reserved for the proposed project under 
paragraph (a) of this section shall remain available for obligation 
unless the FHWA Administrator is notified that the application has been 
disapproved by the UMTA Administrator, or unless the responsible local 
officials in whose jurisdiction the project is to be located and the 
State highway agency jointly request the withdrawal of the project 
application.


<R05>
Sec. 810.308  Approval of urban system nonhighway public mass transit 
projects.

    (a) An urban system public mass transit project may be approved by 
the UMTA Administrator when it is determined that:
    (1) The application and project are in accordance with the current 
UMTA procedures relating to discretionary capital assistance grants; and
    (2) Notification has been received from the FHWA Administrator that 
sufficient apportioned Federal-aid urban system funds are available to 
finance the Federal share of the cost of the proposed project.
    (b) Approval of the plans, specifications, and estimates of a 
nonhighway public mass transit project shall be deemed to occur on the 
date the UMTA Administrator approves the project application. This 
approval which is subject to the availability of obligation authority at 
the time of approval, will obligate the United States to pay its 
proportional share of the cost of the project.
    (c) Upon approval of an urban system nonhighway public mass transit 
project, the UMTA Administrator will execute a grant contract covering 
implementation of the project.


<R05>
Sec. 810.310  Applicability of other provisions.

    The Federal proportional share of the cost of an urban system 
nonhighway public mass transit project approved under this subpart shall 
be equal to the Federal share which would have been paid if the project 
were a highway project as determined under 23 U.S.C. 120(a).

[[Page 413]]


<R03>
                       SUBCHAPTER J_HIGHWAY SAFETY




<R03>
PART 924_HIGHWAY SAFETY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM--Table of Contents




Sec.
924.1 Purpose.
924.3 Definitions.
924.5 Policy.
924.7 Program structure.
924.9 Planning.
924.11 Implementation.
924.13 Evaluation.
924.15 Reporting.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 105(f), 152, 315, and 402; sec. 203 of the 
Highway Safety Act of 1973, as amended; 49 CFR 1.48(b).

    Source: 44 FR 11544, Mar. 1, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 924.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this regulation is to set forth policy for the 
development and implementation of a comprehensive highway safety 
improvement program in each State.


<R05>
Sec. 924.3  Definitions.

    (a) The term highway, as used in this regulation, includes in 
addition to those items listed in 23 U.S.C. 101(a), those facilities 
specifically provided for the accommodation and protection of 
pedestrians and bicyclists.
    (b) The term State, as used in this regulation, means any one of the 
50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, 
Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands except that, for the purpose of implementing section 203 of the 
Highway Safety Act of 1973, as amended, State means any one of the 50 
States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.


<R05>
Sec. 924.5  Policy.

    Each State shall develop and implement, on a continuing basis, a 
highway safety improvement program which has the overall objective of 
reducing the number and severity of accidents and decreasing the 
potential for accidents on all highways.


<R05>
Sec. 924.7  Program structure.

    The highway safety improvement program in each State shall consist 
of components for planning, implementation, and evaluation of safety 
programs and projects. These components shall be comprised of processes 
developed by the States and approved by the Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA). Where appropriate, the processes shall be 
developed cooperatively with officials of the various units of local 
governments. The processes may incorporate a range of alternate 
procedures appropriate for the administration of an effective highway 
safety improvement program on individual highway systems, portions of 
highway systems and in local political subdivisions, but combined shall 
cover all public roads in the State.

[48 FR 44066, Sept. 26, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 924.9  Planning.

    (a) The planning component of the highway safety improvement program 
shall incorporate:
    (1) A process for collecting and maintaining a record of accident, 
traffic, and highway data, including, for railroad-highway grade 
crossings, the characteristics of both highway and train traffic;
    (2) A process for analyzing available data to identify highway 
locations, sections and elements determined to be hazardous on the basis 
of accident experience or accident potential;
    (3) A process for conducting engineering studies of hazardous 
locations, sections, and elements to develop highway safety improvement 
projects as defined in 23 U.S.C. 101(a); and
    (4) A process for establishing priorities for implementing highway 
safety improvement, projects, considering:
    (i) The potential reduction in the number and/or severity of 
accidents,
    (ii) The cost of the projects and the resources available,
    (iii) The relative hazard of public railroad-highway grade crossings 
based on a hazard index formula,
    (iv) Onsite inspection of public grade crossings,
    (v) The potential danger to large numbers of people at public grade 
crossings used on a regular basis by

[[Page 414]]

passenger trains, school buses, transit buses, pedestrians, bicyclists, 
or by trains and/or motor vehicles carrying hazardous materials, and
    (vi) Other criteria as appropriate in each State.
    (b) In planning a program of safety improvement projects at 
railroad-highway grade crossings, special emphasis shall be given to the 
legislative requirement that all public crossings be provided with 
standard signing.
    (c) The planning component of the highway safety improvement program 
may be financed with funds made available through 23 U.S.C. 402, 307(c), 
and, where applicable, 104(f).


<R05>
Sec. 924.11  Implementation.

    (a) The implementation component of the highway safety improvement 
program in each State shall include a process for scheduling and 
implementing safety improvement projects in accordance with (1) the 
procedures set forth in 23 CFR part 630, subpart A (Federal-Aid Program 
Approval and Project Authorization) and (2) the priorities developed in 
accordance with Sec. 924.9. The States are encouraged to utilize the 
timesaving procedures incorporated in FHWA directives for the minor type 
of work normal to highway safety improvement projects.
    (b) Funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 152, Hazard Elimination 
Program, are to be used to implement highway safety improvement projects 
on any public road other than Interstate.
    (c) Funds apportioned under section 203(b) of the Highway Safety Act 
of 1973, as amended, Rail-Highway Crossings, are to be used to implement 
railroad-highway grade crossing safety projects on any public road. At 
least 50 percent of the funds apportioned under section 203(b) must be 
made available for the installation of grade crossing protective 
devices. The railroad share, if any, of the cost of grade crossing 
improvements shall be determined in accordance with 23 CFR part 646, 
subpart B (Railroad-Highway Projects).
    (d) Highway safety improvement projects may be implemented on the 
Federal-aid system with funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 104(b), and 
with funds apportioned under section 104(b)(1) of the Federal-Aid 
Highway Act of 1978 and section 103(a) of the Highway Improvement Act of 
1982, if excess to Interstate System needs.
    (e) Funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 219, Safer Off-System Roads, 
may be used to implement highway safety improvement projects on public 
roads which are not on a Federal-aid system.
    (f) Major safety defects on bridges, including related approach 
improvements, may be corrected as part of a bridge rehabilitation 
project on any public road with funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 144, 
if such project is considered eligible under 23 CFR part 650, subpart D 
(Special Bridge Replacement Program).
    (g) Award of contracts for highway safety improvement programs shall 
be in accordance with 23 CFR part 635.

[48 FR 44066, Sept. 26, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 924.13  Evaluation.

    (a) The evaluation component of the highway safety improvement 
progam in each State shall include a process for determining the effect 
that highway safety improvement projects have in reducing the number and 
severity of accidents and potential accidents, including:
    (1) The cost of, and the safety benefits derived from the various 
means and methods used to mitigate or eliminate hazards,
    (2) A record of accident experience before and after the 
implementation of a highway safety improvement, project, and
    (3) A comparison of accident numbers, rates, and severity observed 
after the implementation of a highway safety improvement project with 
the accident numbers, rates, and severity expected if the improvement 
had not been made.
    (b) The findings resulting from the evaluation process shall be 
incorporated as basic source data in the planning process outlined in 
Sec. 924.9(a).
    (c) The evaluation component may be financed with funds made 
available through 23 U.S.C. 402, 307(c), and, where applicable, 104(f). 
In addition, when highway safety improvement projects are undertaken 
with funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 152 or section 203 of the

[[Page 415]]

Highway Safety Act of 1973, as amended, these funds may also be used to 
evaluate the improvements.


<R05>
Sec. 924.15  Reporting.

    (a) Each State shall submit to the FHWA Division Administrator no 
later than August 31 of each year a report (OMB Number 04-R2450) 
covering the State's highway safety improvement program during the 
previous July 1 through June 30 period. In its annual report, the State 
shall report on the progress made in implementing the hazard elimination 
program and the grade crossing improvement program, and shall evaluate 
the effectiveness of completed highway safety improvement projects in 
these programs.
    (b) The preparation of the State's annual report may be financed 
with funds made available through 23 U.S.C. 402, 307(c), and, where 
applicable, 104(f).

[[Page 416]]


<R03>
             SUBCHAPTER K_INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS




<R03>
PART 940_INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND 
STANDARDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
940.1 Purpose.
940.3 Definitions.
940.5 Policy.
940.7 Applicability.
940.9 Regional ITS architecture.
940.11 Project implementation.
940.13 Project administration.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 101, 106, 109, 133, 315, and 508; sec 5206(e), 
Public Law 105-178, 112 Stat. 457 (23 U.S.C. 502 note); and 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 66 FR 1453, Jan. 8, 2001, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 940.1  Purpose.

    This regulation provides policies and procedures for implementing 
section 5206(e) of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century 
(TEA-21), Public Law 105-178, 112 Stat. 457, pertaining to conformance 
with the National Intelligent Transportation Systems Architecture and 
Standards.


<R05>
Sec. 940.3  Definitions.

    Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) means electronics, 
communications, or information processing used singly or in combination 
to improve the efficiency or safety of a surface transportation system.
    ITS project means any project that in whole or in part funds the 
acquisition of technologies or systems of technologies that provide or 
significantly contribute to the provision of one or more ITS user 
services as defined in the National ITS Architecture.
    Major ITS project means any ITS project that implements part of a 
regional ITS initiative that is multi-jurisdictional, multi-modal, or 
otherwise affects regional integration of ITS systems.
    National ITS Architecture (also ``national architecture'') means a 
common framework for ITS interoperability. The National ITS Architecture 
comprises the logical architecture and physical architecture which 
satisfy a defined set of user services. The National ITS Architecture is 
maintained by the United States Department of Transportation (DOT) and 
is available on the DOT web site at http://www.its.dot.gov.
    Project level ITS architecture is a framework that identifies the 
institutional agreement and technical integration necessary to interface 
a major ITS project with other ITS projects and systems.
    Region is the geographical area that identifies the boundaries of 
the regional ITS architecture and is defined by and based on the needs 
of the participating agencies and other stakeholders. In metropolitan 
areas, a region should be no less than the boundaries of the 
metropolitan planning area.
    Regional ITS architecture means a regional framework for ensuring 
institutional agreement and technical integration for the implementation 
of ITS projects or groups of projects.
    Systems engineering is a structured process for arriving at a final 
design of a system. The final design is selected from a number of 
alternatives that would accomplish the same objectives and considers the 
total life-cycle of the project including not only the technical merits 
of potential solutions but also the costs and relative value of 
alternatives.


<R05>
Sec. 940.5  Policy.

    ITS projects shall conform to the National ITS Architecture and 
standards in accordance with the requirements contained in this part. 
Conformance with the National ITS Architecture is interpreted to mean 
the use of the National ITS Architecture to develop a regional ITS 
architecture, and the subsequent adherence of all ITS projects to that 
regional ITS architecture. Development of the regional ITS architecture 
should be consistent with the transportation planning process for 
Statewide and Metropolitan Transportation Planning.


<R05>
Sec. 940.7  Applicability.

    (a) All ITS projects that are funded in whole or in part with the 
highway

[[Page 417]]

trust fund, including those on the National Highway System (NHS) and on 
non-NHS facilities, are subject to these provisions.
    (b) The Secretary may authorize exceptions for:
    (1) Projects designed to achieve specific research objectives 
outlined in the National ITS Program Plan under section 5205 of the TEA-
21, or the Surface Transportation Research and Development Strategic 
Plan developed under 23 U.S.C. 508; or
    (2) The upgrade or expansion of an ITS system in existence on the 
date of enactment of the TEA-21, if the Secretary determines that the 
upgrade or expansion:
    (i) Would not adversely affect the goals or purposes of Subtitle C 
(Intelligent Transportation Systems Act of 1998) of the TEA-21;
    (ii) Is carried out before the end of the useful life of such 
system; and
    (iii) Is cost-effective as compared to alternatives that would meet 
the conformity requirement of this rule.
    (c) These provisions do not apply to funds used for operations and 
maintenance of an ITS system in existence on June 9, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 940.9  Regional ITS architecture.

    (a) A regional ITS architecture shall be developed to guide the 
development of ITS projects and programs and be consistent with ITS 
strategies and projects contained in applicable transportation plans. 
The National ITS Architecture shall be used as a resource in the 
development of the regional ITS architecture. The regional ITS 
architecture shall be on a scale commensurate with the scope of ITS 
investment in the region. Provision should be made to include 
participation from the following agencies, as appropriate, in the 
development of the regional ITS architecture: Highway agencies; public 
safety agencies (e.g., police, fire, emergency/medical); transit 
operators; Federal lands agencies; State motor carrier agencies; and 
other operating agencies necessary to fully address regional ITS 
integration.
    (b) Any region that is currently implementing ITS projects shall 
have a regional ITS architecture by April 8, 2005.
    (c) All other regions not currently implementing ITS projects shall 
have a regional ITS architecture within four years of the first ITS 
project for that region advancing to final design.
    (d) The regional ITS architecture shall include, at a minimum, the 
following:
    (1) A description of the region;
    (2) Identification of participating agencies and other stakeholders;
    (3) An operational concept that identifies the roles and 
responsibilities of participating agencies and stakeholders in the 
operation and implementation of the systems included in the regional ITS 
architecture;
    (4) Any agreements (existing or new) required for operations, 
including at a minimum those affecting ITS project interoperability, 
utilization of ITS related standards, and the operation of the projects 
identified in the regional ITS architecture;
    (5) System functional requirements;
    (6) Interface requirements and information exchanges with planned 
and existing systems and subsystems (for example, subsystems and 
architecture flows as defined in the National ITS Architecture);
    (7) Identification of ITS standards supporting regional and national 
interoperability; and
    (8) The sequence of projects required for implementation.
    (e) Existing regional ITS architectures that meet all of the 
requirements of paragraph (d) of this section shall be considered to 
satisfy the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section.
    (f) The agencies and other stakeholders participating in the 
development of the regional ITS architecture shall develop and implement 
procedures and responsibilities for maintaining it, as needs evolve 
within the region.

[66 FR 1453, Jan. 8, 2001, as amended at 66 FR 19856, Apr. 18, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 940.11  Project implementation.

    (a) All ITS projects funded with highway trust funds shall be based 
on a systems engineering analysis.
    (b) The analysis should be on a scale commensurate with the project 
scope.
    (c) The systems engineering analysis shall include, at a minimum:

[[Page 418]]

    (1) Identification of portions of the regional ITS architecture 
being implemented (or if a regional ITS architecture does not exist, the 
applicable portions of the National ITS Architecture);
    (2) Identification of participating agencies roles and 
responsibilities;
    (3) Requirements definitions;
    (4) Analysis of alternative system configurations and technology 
options to meet requirements;
    (5) Procurement options;
    (6) Identification of applicable ITS standards and testing 
procedures; and
    (7) Procedures and resources necessary for operations and management 
of the system.
    (d) Upon completion of the regional ITS architecture required in 
Sec. Sec. 940.9(b) or 940.9(c), the final design of all ITS projects 
funded with highway trust funds shall accommodate the interface 
requirements and information exchanges as specified in the regional ITS 
architecture. If the final design of the ITS project is inconsistent 
with the regional ITS architecture, then the regional ITS architecture 
shall be updated as provided in the process defined in Sec. 940.9(f) to 
reflect the changes.
    (e) Prior to the completion of the regional ITS architecture, any 
major ITS project funded with highway trust funds that advances to final 
design shall have a project level ITS architecture that is coordinated 
with the development of the regional ITS architecture. The final design 
of the major ITS project shall accommodate the interface requirements 
and information exchanges as specified in this project level ITS 
architecture. If the project final design is inconsistent with the 
project level ITS architecture, then the project level ITS architecture 
shall be updated to reflect the changes. The project level ITS 
architecture is based on the results of the systems engineering 
analysis, and includes the following:
    (1) A description of the scope of the ITS project;
    (2) An operational concept that identifies the roles and 
responsibilities of participating agencies and stakeholders in the 
operation and implementation of the ITS project;
    (3) Functional requirements of the ITS project;
    (4) Interface requirements and information exchanges between the ITS 
project and other planned and existing systems and subsystems; and
    (5) Identification of applicable ITS standards.
    (f) All ITS projects funded with highway trust funds shall use 
applicable ITS standards and interoperability tests that have been 
officially adopted through rulemaking by the DOT.
    (g) Any ITS project that has advanced to final design by April 8, 
2001 is exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (d) through (f) of 
this section.

[66 FR 1453, Jan. 8, 2001, as amended at 66 FR 19856, Apr. 18, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 940.13  Project administration.

    (a) Prior to authorization of highway trust funds for construction 
or implementation of ITS projects, compliance with Sec. 940.11 shall be 
demonstrated.
    (b) Compliance with this part will be monitored under Federal-aid 
oversight procedures as provided under 23 U.S.C. 106 and 133.

[[Page 419]]


<R03>
                   SUBCHAPTER L_FEDERAL LANDS HIGHWAYS




<R03>
PART 970_NATIONAL PARK SERVICE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS--Table of Contents




                          Subpart A_Definitions

Sec.
970.100 Purpose.
970.102 Applicability.
970.104 Definitions.

           Subpart B_National Park Service Management Systems

970.200 Purpose.
970.202 Applicability.
970.204 Management systems requirements.
970.206 Funds for establishment, development, and implementation of the 
          systems.
970.208 Federal lands pavement management system (PMS).
970.210 Federal lands bridge management system (BMS).
970.212 Federal lands safety management system (SMS).
970.214 Federal lands congestion management system (CMS).

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 204 and 315; 42 U.S.C. 7410 et seq.; 49 CFR 
1.48.

    Source: 69 FR 9473, Feb. 27, 2004, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                          Subpart A_Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 970.100  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to provide definitions for terms used 
in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 970.102  Applicability.

    The definitions in this subpart are applicable to this part, except 
as otherwise provided.


<R05>
Sec. 970.104  Definitions.

    Alternative transportation systems means modes of transportation 
other than private vehicles, including methods to improve system 
performance such as transportation demand management, congestion 
management, and intelligent transportation systems. These mechanisms 
help reduce the use of private vehicles and thus improve overall 
efficiency of transportation systems and facilities.
    Elements means the components of a bridge important from a 
structural, user, or cost standpoint. Examples are decks, joints, 
bearings, girders, abutments, and piers.
    Federal lands bridge management system (BMS) means a systematic 
process used by the Forest Service (FS), the Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS) and the National Park Service (NPS) for collecting and analyzing 
bridge data to make forecasts and recommendations, and provides the 
means by which bridge maintenance, rehabilitation, and replacement 
programs and policies may be efficiently and effectively considered.
    Federal lands congestion management system (CMS) means a systematic 
process used by the NPS, the FWS and the FS for managing congestion that 
provides information on transportation system performance, and 
alternative strategies for alleviating congestion and enhancing the 
mobility of persons and goods to levels that meet Federal, State and 
local needs.
    Federal Lands Highway Program (FLHP) means a federally funded 
program established in 23 U.S.C. 204 to address transportation needs of 
Federal and Indian lands.
    Federal lands pavement management system (PMS) means a systematic 
process used by the NPS, the FWS and the FS that provides information 
for use in implementing cost-effective pavement reconstruction, 
rehabilitation, and preventive maintenance programs and policies, and 
that results in pavement designed to accommodate current and forecasted 
traffic in a safe, durable, and cost-effective manner.
    Federal lands safety management system (SMS) means a systematic 
process used by the NPS, the FWS and the FS with the goal of reducing 
the number and severity of traffic accidents by ensuring that all 
opportunities to improve roadway safety are identified, considered, 
implemented, and evaluated, as appropriate, during all phases of highway 
planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance, by providing 
information for selecting and implementing effective highway safety 
strategies and projects.

[[Page 420]]

    Highway safety means the reduction of traffic accidents on public 
roads, including reductions in deaths, injuries, and property damage.
    Intelligent transportation system (ITS) means electronics, 
communications, or information processing used singly or in combination 
to improve the efficiency and safety of a surface transportation system.
    Life-cycle cost analysis means an evaluation of costs incurred over 
the life of a project allowing a comparative analysis between or among 
various alternatives. Life-cycle cost analysis promotes consideration of 
total cost, including maintenance and operation expenditures. 
Comprehensive life-cycle cost analysis includes all economic variables 
essential to the evaluation, including user costs such as delay, safety 
costs associated with maintenance and rehabilitation projects, agency 
capital costs, and life-cycle maintenance costs.
    Metropolitan planning area means the geographic area in which the 
metropolitan transportation planning process required by 23 U.S.C. 134 
and 49 U.S.C. 5303-5306 must be carried out.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decision-making for the metropolitan planning 
area pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 134 and 49 U.S.C. 5303.
    National Park Service transportation plan means an official NPS 
multimodal transportation plan that is developed through the NPS 
transportation planning process pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204.
    Operations means those activities associated with managing, 
controlling, and regulating highway and pedestrian traffic.
    Park road means a public road, including a bridge built primarily 
for pedestrian use, but with capacity for use by emergency vehicles, 
that is located within, or provides access to, an area in the National 
Park System with title and maintenance responsibilities vested in the 
United States.
    Park Road Program transportation improvement program (PRPTIP) means 
a staged, multi-year, multimodal program of NPS transportation projects 
in a State area. The PRPTIP is consistent with the NPS transportation 
plan and developed through the NPS planning processes pursuant to 23 
U.S.C. 204.
    Park roads and parkways program means a program that is authorized 
in 23 U.S.C. 204 with funds allocated to the NPS by the Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) for each fiscal year as provided in 23 U.S.C. 
202(c) and 23 U.S.C. 204.
    Parkway means a parkway authorized by Act of Congress on lands to 
which title is vested in the United States.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Transportation.
    Serviceability means the degree to which a bridge provides 
satisfactory service from the point of view of its users.
    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.
    Transportation facilities means roads, streets, bridges, parking 
areas, transit vehicles, and other related transportation 
infrastructure.
    Transportation Management Area (TMA) means an urbanized area with a 
population over 200,000 (as determined by the latest decennial census) 
or other area when TMA designation is requested by the Governor and the 
MPO (or affected local officials), and officially designated by the 
Administrators of the FHWA and the Federal Transit Administration (FTA). 
The TMA designation applies to the entire metropolitan planning area(s).


<R04>
           Subpart B_National Park Service Management Systems


<R05>
Sec. 970.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 204, which 
requires the Secretary and the Secretary of each appropriate Federal 
land management agency, to the extent appropriate, to develop by rule 
safety, bridge, pavement, and congestion management systems for roads 
funded under the FLHP. These management systems serve to guide the 
National Park Service (NPS) in developing transportation plans and 
making resource allocation decisions for the PRPTIP.

[[Page 421]]


<R05>
Sec. 970.202  Applicability.

    The provisions in this subpart are applicable to the NPS and the 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) that are responsible for 
satisfying these requirements for management systems pursuant to 23 
U.S.C. 204.


<R05>
Sec. 970.204  Management systems requirements.

    (a) The NPS shall develop, establish and implement the management 
systems as described in this subpart. The NPS may tailor all management 
systems to meet the NPS goals, policies, and needs using professional 
engineering and planning judgment to determine the required nature and 
extent of systems coverage consistent with the intent and requirements 
of this rule. The management systems also shall be developed so they 
assist in meeting the goals and measures that were jointly developed by 
the FHWA and the NPS in response to the Government Performance and 
Results Act of 1993 (Pub. L. 103-62, 107 Stat. 285).
    (b) The NPS and the FHWA shall develop an implementation plan for 
each of the management systems. These plans will include, but are not 
limited to, the following: Overall goals and policies concerning the 
management systems, each agency's responsibilities for developing and 
implementing the management systems, implementation schedule, data 
sources, and cost estimate. The FHWA will provide the NPS ongoing 
technical engineering support for the development, implementation, and 
maintenance of the management systems.
    (c) The NPS shall develop and implement procedures for the 
development, establishment, implementation and operation of management 
systems. The procedures shall include:
    (1) A process for ensuring the outputs of the management systems are 
considered in the development of NPS transportation plans and PRPTIPs 
and in making project selection decisions under 23 U.S.C. 204;
    (2) A process for the analysis and coordination of all management 
system outputs to systematically operate, maintain, and upgrade existing 
transportation assets cost-effectively;
    (3) A description of each management system;
    (4) A process to operate and maintain the management systems and 
their associated databases; and
    (5) A process for data collection, processing, analysis and updating 
for each management system.
    (d) All management systems will use databases with a geographical 
reference system that can be used to geolocate all database information.
    (e) Existing data sources may be used by the NPS to the maximum 
extent possible to meet the management system requirements.
    (f) The NPS shall develop an appropriate means to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the management systems in enhancing transportation 
investment decision-making and improving the overall efficiency of the 
affected transportation systems and facilities. This evaluation is to be 
conducted periodically, preferably as part of the NPS planning process.
    (g) The management systems shall be operated so investment decisions 
based on management system outputs can be considered at the national, 
regional, and park levels.


<R05>
Sec. 970.206  Funds for establishment, development, and implementation 
of the systems.

    The Park Roads and Parkways program funds may be used for 
development, establishment, and implementation of the management 
systems. These funds are to be administered in accordance with the 
procedures and requirements applicable to the funds.


<R05>
Sec. 970.208  Federal lands pavement management system (PMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 970.204, the PMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The NPS shall have PMS coverage of all paved park roads, 
parkways, parking areas and other associated facilities, as appropriate, 
that are funded under the FLHP.
    (b) The PMS may be utilized at various levels of technical 
complexity depending on the nature of the transportation network. These 
different levels may depend on mileage, functional

[[Page 422]]

classes, volumes, loading, usage, surface type, or other criteria the 
NPS deems appropriate.
    (c) The PMS shall be designed to fit the NPS goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using the following components, at a minimum, as a 
basic framework for a PMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the PMS. The minimum PMS database shall include:
    (i) An inventory of the physical pavement features including the 
number of lanes, length, width, surface type, functional classification, 
and shoulder information;
    (ii) A history of project dates and types of construction, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, and preventive maintenance. If some of 
the inventory or historic data is difficult to establish, it may be 
collected when preservation or reconstruction work is performed;
    (iii) Condition data that includes roughness, distress, rutting, and 
surface friction (as appropriate);
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) Data for estimating the costs of actions.
    (2) A system for applying network level analytical procedures that 
are capable of analyzing data for all park roads, parkways and other 
appropriate associated facilities in the inventory or any subset. The 
minimum analyses shall include:
    (i) A pavement condition analysis that includes roughness, distress, 
rutting, and surface friction (as appropriate);
    (ii) A pavement performance analysis that includes present and 
predicted performance and an estimate of the remaining service life 
(performance and remaining service life to be developed with time); and
    (iii) An investment analysis that:
    (A) Identifies alternative strategies to improve pavement 
conditions;
    (B) Estimates costs of any pavement improvement strategy;
    (C) Determines maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies 
for pavements using life-cycle cost analysis or a comparable procedure;
    (D) Provides for short and long term budget forecasting; and
    (E) Recommends optimal allocation of limited funds by developing a 
prioritized list of candidate projects over a predefined planning 
horizon (both short and long term).
    (d) For any park roads, parkways and other appropriate associated 
facilities in the inventory or subset thereof, PMS reporting 
requirements shall include, but are not limited to, percentage of roads 
in good, fair, and poor condition.

[69 FR 9473, Feb. 27, 2004; 69 FR 16793, Mar. 31, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 970.210  Federal lands bridge management system (BMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 970.204, the BMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The NPS shall have a BMS for the bridges which are under the NPS 
jurisdiction, funded under the FLHP, and required to be inventoried and 
inspected as prescribed by 23 U.S.C. 144.
    (b) The BMS shall be designed to fit the NPS goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using, as a minimum, the following components:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the BMS. The minimum BMS database shall include:
    (i) Data described by the inventory section of the National Bridge 
Inspection Standards (23 CFR part 650, subpart C);
    (ii) Data characterizing the severity and extent of deterioration of 
bridge elements;
    (iii) Data for estimating the cost of improvement actions;
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and other pertinent 
information; and
    (v) A history of conditions and actions taken on each bridge, 
excluding minor or incidental maintenance.
    (2) A system for applying network level analytical procedures that 
are capable of analyzing data for all bridges in the inventory or any 
subset. The minimum analyses shall include:

[[Page 423]]

    (i) A prediction of performance and estimate of the remaining 
service life of structural and other key elements of each bridge, both 
with and without intervening actions; and
    (ii) A recommendation for optimal allocation of limited funds 
through development of a prioritized list of candidate projects over 
predefined short and long term planning horizons.
    (c) The BMS may include the capability to perform an investment 
analysis as appropriate, considering size of structure, traffic volume, 
and structural condition. The investment analysis may:
    (1) Identify alternative strategies to improve bridge condition, 
safety and serviceability;
    (2) Estimate the costs of any strategies ranging from maintenance of 
individual elements to full bridge replacement;
    (3) Determine maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies for 
bridge elements using life cycle cost analysis or a comparable 
procedure;
    (4) Provide short and long term budget forecasting; and
    (5) Evaluate the cultural and historical values of the structure.
    (d) For any bridge in the inventory or subset thereof, BMS reporting 
requirements shall include, but are not limited to, percentage of non-
deficient bridges.


<R05>
Sec. 970.212  Federal lands safety management system (SMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 970.204, the SMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The NPS shall have an SMS for all transportation systems serving 
NPS facilities, as appropriate, funded under the FLHP.
    (b) The NPS shall use the SMS to ensure that safety is considered 
and implemented, as appropriate, in all phases of transportation system 
planning, design, construction, maintenance, and operations.
    (c) The SMS shall be designed to fit the NPS goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs and shall contain the following components: (1) An 
ongoing program for the collection, maintenance and reporting of a data 
base that includes:
    (i) Accident records with details for analysis such as accident 
type, using standard reporting descriptions (e.g., right-angle, rear-
end, head-on, pedestrian-related), location, description of event, 
severity, weather and cause;
    (ii) An inventory of safety appurtenances such as signs, 
delineators, and guardrails (including terminals);
    (iii) Traffic information including volume, speed, and vehicle 
classification, as appropriate.
    (iv) Accident rates by customary criteria such as location, roadway 
classification, and vehicle miles of travel.
    (2) Development, establishment, and implementation of procedures 
for:
    (i) Routinely maintaining and upgrading safety appurtenances 
including highway-rail crossing warning devices, signs, highway 
elements, and operational features, where appropriate;
    (ii) Identifying and investigating hazardous or potentially 
hazardous transportation elements and systems, transit vehicles and 
facilities, roadway locations and features;
    (iii) Establishing countermeasures and setting priorities to address 
identified needs.
    (3) A process for communication, coordination, and cooperation among 
the organizations responsible for the roadway, human, and vehicle safety 
elements;
    (d) While the SMS applies to appropriate transportation systems 
serving NPS facilities funded under the FLHP, the extent of system 
requirements (e.g., data collection, analyses, and standards) for low 
volume roads may be tailored to be consistent with the functional 
classification of the road and number and types of transit and other 
vehicles operated by the NPS.


<R05>
Sec. 970.214  Federal lands congestion management system (CMS).

    (a) For purposes of this section, congestion means the level at 
which transportation system performance is no longer acceptable due to 
traffic interference. For portions of the NPS transportation system 
outside the boundaries of TMAs, the NPS shall:
    (1) Develop criteria to determine when a CMS is to be implemented 
for a specific transportation system; and

[[Page 424]]

    (2) Have CMS coverage for all transportation systems serving NPS 
facilities that meet minimum CMS needs criteria, as appropriate, funded 
through the FLHP.
    (b) The NPS shall consider the results of the CMS when selecting 
congestion mitigation strategies that are the most time efficient and 
cost effective and that add value (protection/rejuvenation of resources, 
improved visitor experience) to the park and adjacent communities.
    (c) In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 970.204, the 
CMS must meet the following requirements:
    (1) For those NPS transportation systems that require a CMS, in both 
metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas, consideration shall be given to 
strategies that promote alternative transportation systems, reduce 
private automobile travel, and best integrate private automobile travel 
with other transportation modes.
    (2) For portions of the NPS transportation system within 
transportation management areas (TMAs), the NPS transportation planning 
process shall include a CMS that meets the requirements of this section. 
By agreement between the TMA and the NPS, the TMA's CMS coverage may 
include the transportation systems serving NPS facilities, as 
appropriate. Through this agreement(s), the NPS may meet the 
requirements of this section.
    (3) If congestion exists at a NPS facility within the boundaries of 
a TMA, and the TMA's CMS does not provide coverage of the portions of 
the NPS transportation facilities experiencing congestion, the NPS shall 
develop a separate CMS to cover those facilities. Approaches may include 
the use of alternate mode studies and implementation plans as components 
of the CMS.
    (4) A CMS will:
    (i) Identify and document measures for congestion (e.g., level of 
service);
    (ii) Identify the causes of congestion;
    (iii) Include processes for evaluating the cost and effectiveness of 
alternative strategies;
    (iv) Identify the anticipated benefits of appropriate alternative 
traditional and nontraditional congestion management strategies;
    (v) Determine methods to monitor and evaluate the performance of the 
multi-modal transportation system; and
    (vi) Appropriately consider strategies, or combinations of 
strategies for each area, such as:
    (A) Transportation demand management measures;
    (B) Traffic operational improvements;
    (C) Public transportation improvements;
    (D) ITS technologies; and
    (E) Additional system capacity.


<R03>
PART 971_FOREST SERVICE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS--Table of Contents




                          Subpart A_Definitions

Sec.
971.100 Purpose.
971.102 Applicability.
971.104 Definitions.

           Subpart B_Forest Highway Program Management Systems

971.200 Purpose.
971.202 Applicability.
971.204 Management systems requirements.
971.206 Funds for establishment, development, and implementation of the 
          systems.
971.208 Federal lands pavement management system (PMS).
971.210 Federal lands bridge management system (BMS).
971.212 Federal lands safety management system (SMS).
971.214 Federal lands congestion management system (CMS).

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 204, 315; 42 U.S.C. 7410 et seq.; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 69 FR 9480, Feb. 27, 2004, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                          Subpart A_Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 971.100  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to provide definitions for terms used 
in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 971.102  Applicability.

    The definitions in this subpart are applicable to this part, except 
as otherwise provided.

[[Page 425]]


<R05>
Sec. 971.104  Definitions.

    Alternative transportation systems means modes of transportation 
other than private vehicles, including methods to improve system 
performance such as transportation demand management, congestion 
management, and intelligent transportation systems. These mechanisms 
help reduce the use of private vehicles and thus, improve overall 
efficiency of transportation systems and facilities.
    Elements mean the components of a bridge that are important from a 
structural, user, or cost standpoint. Examples are decks, joints, 
bearings, girders, abutments, and piers.
    Federal lands bridge management system (BMS) means a systematic 
process used by the Forest Service (FS), the Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS), and the National Park Service (NPS) for collecting and analyzing 
bridge data to make forecasts and recommendations, and that provides the 
means by which bridge maintenance, rehabilitation, and replacement 
programs and policies may be efficiently and effectively considered.
    Federal lands congestion management system (CMS) means a systematic 
process used by the FS, FWS, and NPS for managing congestion that 
provides information on transportation system performance, and 
alternative strategies for alleviating congestion and enhancing the 
mobility of persons and goods to levels that meet Federal, State, and 
local needs.
    Federal Lands Highway Program (FLHP) means a federally funded 
program established in 23 U.S.C. 204 to address transportation needs of 
Federal and Indian lands.
    Federal lands pavement management system (PMS) means a systematic 
process used by the FS, FWS, and NPS that provides information for use 
in implementing cost-effective pavement reconstruction, rehabilitation, 
and preventive maintenance programs and policies, and that results in 
pavement designed to accommodate current and forecasted traffic in a 
safe, durable, and cost-effective manner.
    Federal lands safety management system (SMS) means a systematic 
process used by the FS, FWS, and NPS with the goal of reducing the 
number and severity of traffic accidents by ensuring that all 
opportunities to improve roadway safety are identified, considered, 
implemented, and evaluated as appropriate, during all phases of highway 
planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance, by providing 
information for selecting and implementing effective highway safety 
strategies and projects.
    Forest highway (FH) means a forest road under the jurisdiction of, 
and maintained by, a public authority and open to public travel.
    Forest Highway Program means the public lands highway funds 
allocated each fiscal year, as is provided in 23 U.S.C. 202, for 
projects that provide access to and within the National Forest system, 
as described in 23 U.S.C. 202(b) and 23 U.S.C. 204.
    Forest Highway Program transportation improvement program (FHTIP) 
means a staged, multiyear, multimodal program of transportation projects 
in a State area consistent with the FH transportation plan and developed 
through the tri-party FH planning processes pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204, 
and 23 CFR 660 subpart A.
    Forest Service transportation plan means the official FH multimodal, 
transportation plan that is developed through the tri-party FH 
transportation planning process pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204.
    Highway safety means the reduction of traffic accidents on public 
roads, including reductions in deaths, injuries, and property damage.
    Intelligent transportation system (ITS) means electronics, 
communications, or information processing, used singly or in 
combination, to improve the efficiency and safety of a surface 
transportation system.
    Life-cycle cost analysis means an evaluation of costs incurred over 
the life of a project allowing a comparative analysis between or among 
various alternatives. Life-cycle cost analysis promotes consideration of 
total cost, including maintenance and operation expenditures. 
Comprehensive life-cycle cost analysis includes all economic variables 
essential to the evaluation including user costs such as delay, safety 
costs associated with maintenance and rehabilitation projects,

[[Page 426]]

agency capital costs, and life-cycle maintenance costs.
    Metropolitan planning area means the geographic area in which the 
metropolitan transportation planning process, required by 23 U.S.C. 134 
and 49 U.S.C. 5303-5306, must be carried out.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decision-making for the metropolitan planning 
area pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 134 and 49 U.S.C. 5303.
    National Forest System means all the lands and waters reported by 
the FS as being part of the National Forest System, including those 
generally known as National Forests and National Grasslands.
    Operations means those activities associated with managing, 
controlling, and regulating highway traffic.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Transportation.
    Serviceability means the degree to which a bridge provides 
satisfactory service from the point of view of its users.
    State means any one of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, or 
Puerto Rico.
    Transportation facilities mean roads, streets, bridges, parking 
areas, transit vehicles, and other related transportation 
infrastructure.
    Transportation Management Area (TMA) means an urbanized area with a 
population over 200,000 (as determined by the latest decennial census) 
or other area when TMA designation is requested by the Governor and the 
MPO (or affected local officials). It also must be officially designated 
by the Administrators of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and 
the Federal Transit Administration (FTA). The TMA designation applies to 
the entire metropolitan planning area(s).
    Tri-party means the joint, cooperative, shared partnership among the 
Federal Lands Highway Division (FLHD), State Department of 
Transportation (State DOT), and the FS to carry out the FH program.


<R04>
           Subpart B_Forest Highway Program Management Systems


<R05>
Sec. 971.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 204, which 
requires the Secretary and the Secretary of each appropriate Federal 
land management agency, to the extent appropriate, to develop by rule 
safety, bridge, pavement, and congestion management systems for roads 
funded under the FLHP.


<R05>
Sec. 971.202  Applicability.

    The provisions in this subpart are applicable to the FS, the Federal 
Highway Administration, and the State DOTs that are responsible for 
satisfying these requirements for management systems pursuant to 23 
U.S.C. 204.


<R05>
Sec. 971.204  Management systems requirements.

    (a) The tri-party partnership shall develop, establish, and 
implement the management systems as described in this subpart. If the 
State has established a management system for FH that fulfills the 
requirements in 23 U.S.C. 303, that management system, to the extent 
applicable, can be used to meet the requirements of this subpart 
consistent with 23 CFR 660.105(b). The management systems may be 
tailored to meet the FH program goals, policies, and needs using 
professional engineering and planning judgment to determine the nature 
and extent of systems coverage consistent with the intent and 
requirements of this rule.
    (b) The tri-party partnership shall develop and implement procedures 
for the acceptance of the existing, or the development, establishment, 
implementation, and operation of new management systems. The procedures 
shall include:
    (1) A process for ensuring the output of the management systems is 
considered in the development of the FH program transportation plans and 
transportation improvement programs, and in making project selection 
decisions under 23 U.S.C. 204;
    (2) A process for the analyses and coordination of all management 
systems outputs to systematically operate,

[[Page 427]]

maintain, and upgrade existing transportation assets cost-effectively;
    (3) A description of each management system;
    (4) A process to operate and maintain the management systems and 
their associated databases; and
    (5) A process for data collection, processing, analysis, and 
updating for each management system.
    (c) All management systems will use databases with a common or 
coordinated reference system, that can be used to geolocate all database 
information, to ensure that data across management systems are 
comparable.
    (d) Existing data sources may be used by the tri-party partnership 
to meet the management system requirements.
    (e) The tri-party partnership shall develop an appropriate means to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the management systems in enhancing 
transportation investment decision-making and improving the overall 
efficiency of the affected transportation systems and facilities. This 
evaluation is to be conducted periodically, preferably as part of the FS 
planning process.
    (f) The management systems shall be operated so investment decisions 
based on management system outputs can be accomplished at the State 
level.


<R05>
Sec. 971.206  Funds for establishment, development, and implementation 
of the systems.

    The FH program funds may be used for development, establishment, and 
implementation of the management systems. These funds are to be 
administered in accordance with the procedures and requirements 
applicable to the funds.


<R05>
Sec. 971.208  Federal lands pavement management system (PMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 971.204, the PMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The tri-party partnership shall have PMS coverage of all FHs and 
other associated facilities, as appropriate, funded under the FLHP.
    (b) The PMS may be based on the concepts described in the AASHTO's 
``Pavement Management Guide.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ ``Pavement Management Guide,'' AASHTO, 2001, is available for 
inspection as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7. It is also available from the 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO), Publication Order Dept., P.O. Box 96716, Washington, DC 20090-
6716 or online at http://www.transportation.org/publications/
bookstore.nsf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The PMS may be utilized at various levels of technical 
complexity depending on the nature of the transportation network. These 
different levels may depend on mileage, functional classes, volumes, 
loading, usage, surface type, or other criteria the tri-party 
partnership deems appropriate.
    (d) The PMS shall be designed to fit the FH program goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using the following components, at a minimum, as a 
basic framework for a PMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the PMS. The minimum PMS database shall include:
    (i) An inventory of the physical pavement features including the 
number of lanes, length, width, surface type, functional classification, 
and shoulder information;
    (ii) A history of project dates and types of construction, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, and preventive maintenance. If some of 
the inventory or historic data is difficult to establish, it may be 
collected when preservation or reconstruction work is performed;
    (iii) A condition survey that includes ride, distress, rutting, and 
surface friction (as appropriate);
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) Data for estimating the costs of actions.
    (2) A system for applying network level analytical procedures that 
are capable of analyzing data for all FHs and other appropriate 
associated facilities in the inventory or any subset. The minimum 
analyses shall include:

[[Page 428]]

    (i) A pavement condition analysis that includes ride, distress, 
rutting, and surface friction (as appropriate);
    (ii) A pavement performance analysis that includes present and 
predicted performance and an estimate of the remaining service life. 
Performance and remaining service life may be developed with time; and
    (iii) An investment analysis that:
    (A) Identifies alternative strategies to improve pavement 
conditions;
    (B) Estimates costs of any pavement improvement strategy;
    (C) Determines maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies 
for pavements using life cycle cost analysis or a comparable procedure;
    (D) Provides for short and long term budget forecasting; and
    (E) Recommends optimal allocation of limited funds by developing a 
prioritized list of candidate projects over a predefined planning 
horizon (both short and long term).
    (e) For any FHs and other appropriate associated facilities in the 
inventory or subset thereof, PMS reporting requirements shall include, 
but are not limited to, percentage of roads in good, fair, and poor 
condition.


<R05>
Sec. 971.210  Federal lands bridge management system (BMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 971.204, the BMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The tri-party partnership shall have a BMS for the FH bridges 
funded under the FLHP and required to be inventoried and inspected under 
23 CFR 650, subpart C, National Bridge Inspection Standards (NBIS).
    (b) The BMS may be based on the concepts described in the AASHTO's 
``Guidelines for Bridge Management Systems.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ ``Guidelines for Bridge Management Systems,'' AASHTO, 1993, is 
available for inspection as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7. It is also 
available from the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Publication Order Dept., P.O. Box 
96716, Washington, DC 20090-6716 or online at http://
www.transportation.org/publications/bookstore.nsf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The BMS shall be designed to fit the FH program goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using the following components, as a minimum, as a 
basic framework for a BMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the BMS. The minimum BMS database shall include:
    (i) The inventory data required by the NBIS (23 CFR 650, subpart C);
    (ii) Data characterizing the severity and extent of deterioration of 
bridge elements;
    (iii) Data for estimating the cost of improvement actions;
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) A history of conditions and actions taken on each bridge, 
excluding minor or incidental maintenance.
    (2) A system for applying network level analytical procedures at the 
State or local area level, as appropriate, and capable of analyzing data 
for all bridges in the inventory or any subset. The minimum analyses 
shall include:
    (i) A prediction of performance and estimate of the remaining 
service life of structural and other key elements of each bridge, both 
with and without intervening actions; and
    (ii) A recommendation for optimal allocation of limited funds 
through development of a prioritized list of candidate projects over 
predefined short and long-term planning horizons.
    (d) The BMS may include the capability to perform an investment 
analysis, as appropriate, considering size of structure, traffic volume, 
and structural condition. The investment analysis may:
    (1) Identify alternative strategies to improve bridge condition, 
safety, and serviceability;
    (2) Estimate the costs of any strategies ranging from maintenance of 
individual elements to full bridge replacement;
    (3) Determine maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies for 
bridge elements using life cycle cost analysis or a comparable 
procedure; and
    (4) Provide short and long-term budget forecasting.

[[Page 429]]

    (e) For any bridge in the inventory or subset thereof, BMS reporting 
requirements shall include, but are not limited to, percentage of non-
deficient bridges.


<R05>
Sec. 971.212  Federal lands safety management system (SMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 971.204, the SMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The tri-party partnership shall have an SMS for transportation 
systems providing access to and within National Forests and Grasslands, 
and funded under the FLHP.
    (b) The SMS may be based on the guidance in ``Safety Management 
Systems: Good Practices for Development and Implementation.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ ``Safety Management Systems: Good Practices for Development and 
Implementation,'' FHWA and NHTSA, May 1996, may be obtained at the FHWA, 
Office of Safety, Room 3407, 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20590, 
or electronically at http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/media/documents.htm. It 
is available for inspection and copying as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The tri-party partnership shall utilize SMS to ensure that 
safety is considered and implemented, as appropriate, in all phases of 
transportation system planning, design, construction, maintenance, and 
operations.
    (d) The SMS may be utilized at various levels of complexity 
depending on the nature of the facility and/or network involved.
    (e) The SMS shall be designed to fit the FH program goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs and shall contain the following components:
    (1) An ongoing program for the collection, maintenance, and 
reporting of a database that includes:
    (i) Accident records with detail for analysis such as accident type 
using standard reporting descriptions (e.g., right-angle, rear-end, 
head-on, pedestrian-related, etc.), location, description of event, 
severity, weather, and cause;
    (ii) An inventory of safety appurtenances such as signs, 
delineators, and guardrails (including terminals);
    (iii) Traffic information including volume and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (iv) Accident rates by customary criteria such as location, roadway 
classification, and vehicle miles of travel.
    (2) Development, establishment, and implementation of procedures 
for:
    (i) Where appropriate, routine maintenance and upgrading of safety 
appurtenances including highway rail crossing safety devices, signs, 
highway elements, and operational features,
    (ii) Identifying, investigating, and analyzing hazardous or 
potentially hazardous transportation system safety problems, roadway 
locations, and features;
    (iii) Establishing countermeasures and setting priorities to correct 
the identified hazards and potential hazards.
    (3) Identification of focal points for all contacts at State, 
regional, tribal, and local levels to coordinate, develop, establish, 
and implement the SMS among the agencies.
    (f) While the SMS applies to appropriate transportation systems 
providing access to and within National Forests and Grasslands funded 
under the FLHP, the extent of system requirements (e.g., data 
collection, analyses, and standards) for low volume roads may be 
tailored to be consistent with the functional classification of the 
roads. However, adequate requirements should be included for each 
roadway to provide for effective inclusion of safety decisions in the 
administration of the FH program.


<R05>
Sec. 971.214  Federal lands congestion management system (CMS).

    (a) For purposes of this section, congestion means the level at 
which transportation system performance is no longer acceptable due to 
traffic interference. For portions of the FH network outside the 
boundaries of TMAs, the tri-party partnership shall:
    (1) Develop criteria to determine when a CMS is to be implemented 
for a specific FH; and
    (2) Have CMS coverage for the transportation systems providing 
access to and within National Forests, as appropriate, that meet minimum 
CMS criteria.
    (b) The tri-party partnership shall consider the results of the CMS 
when

[[Page 430]]

selecting the implementation of strategies that provide the most 
efficient and effective use of existing and future transportation 
facilities.
    (c) In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 971.204, the 
CMS must meet the following requirements:
    (1) For those FH transportation systems that require a CMS, in both 
metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas, consideration shall be given to 
strategies that reduce private automobile travel and improve existing 
transportation efficiency. Approaches may include the use of alternative 
mode studies and implementation plans as components of the CMS.
    (2) A CMS will:
    (i) Identify and document measures for congestion (e.g., level of 
service);
    (ii) Identify the causes of congestion;
    (iii) Include processes for evaluating the cost and effectiveness of 
alternative strategies to manage congestion;
    (iv) Identify the anticipated benefits of appropriate alternative 
traditional and nontraditional congestion management strategies;
    (v) Determine methods to monitor and evaluate the performance of the 
multi-modal transportation system; and
    (vi) Appropriately consider the following example categories of 
strategies, or combinations of strategies for each area:
    (A) Transportation demand management measures;
    (B) Traffic operational improvements;
    (C) Public transportation improvements;
    (D) ITS technologies; and
    (E) Additional system capacity.


<R03>
PART 972_FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS--Table of Contents




                          Subpart A_Definitions

Sec.
972.100 Purpose.
972.102 Applicability.
972.104 Definitions.

         Subpart B_Fish and Wildlife Service Management Systems

972.200 Purpose.
972.202 Applicability.
972.204 Management systems requirements.
972.206 Funds for establishment, development, and implementation of the 
          systems.
972.208 Federal lands pavement management system (PMS).
972.210 Federal lands bridge management system (BMS).
972.212 Federal lands safety management system (SMS).
972.214 Federal lands congestion management system (CMS).

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 204, 315; 42 U.S.C. 7410 et seq.; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 69 FR 9487, Feb. 27, 2004, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                          Subpart A_Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 972.100  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to provide definitions for terms used 
in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 972.102  Applicability.

    The definitions in this subpart are applicable to this part, except 
as otherwise provided.


<R05>
Sec. 972.104  Definitions.

    Alternative transportation systems means modes of transportation 
other than private vehicles, including methods to improve system 
performance such as transportation demand management, congestion 
management, and intelligent transportation systems. These mechanisms 
help reduce the use of private vehicles and thus improve overall 
efficiency of transportation systems and facilities.
    Elements mean the components of a bridge important from a 
structural, user, or cost standpoint. Examples are decks, joints, 
bearings, girders, abutments, and piers.
    Federal lands bridge management system (BMS) means a systematic 
process used by the Forest Service (FS), the Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS) and the National Park Service (NPS) for analyzing bridge data to 
make forecasts and recommendations, and provides the means by which 
bridge maintenance, rehabilitation, and replacement programs and 
policies may be effectively considered.
    Federal lands congestion management system (CMS) means a systematic 
process used by the FS, FWS and NPS for

[[Page 431]]

managing congestion that provides information on transportation system 
performance and alternative strategies for alleviating congestion and 
enhancing the mobility of persons and goods to levels that meet Federal, 
State and local needs.
    Federal Lands Highway Program (FLHP) means a federally funded 
program established in 23 U.S.C. 204 to address transportation needs of 
Federal and Indian lands.
    Federal lands pavement management system (PMS) means a systematic 
process used by the FS, FWS and NPS that provides information for use in 
implementing cost-effective pavement reconstruction, rehabilitation, and 
preventive maintenance programs and policies and that results in 
pavement designed to accommodate current and forecasted traffic in a 
safe, durable, and cost-effective manner.
    Federal lands safety management system (SMS) means a systematic 
process used by the FS, FWS and NPS with the goal of reducing the number 
and severity of traffic accidents by ensuring that all opportunities to 
improve roadway safety are identified, considered, implemented and 
evaluated as appropriate, during all phases of highway planning, design, 
construction, operation and maintenance, by providing information for 
selecting and implementing effective highway safety strategies and 
projects.
    Fish and Wildlife Service transportation plan means the official 
Fish and Wildlife Service-wide multimodal transportation plan that is 
developed through the Fish and Wildlife Service transportation planning 
process pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204.
    Highway safety means the reduction of traffic accidents, and deaths, 
injuries, and property damage resulting therefrom, on public roads.
    Intelligent transportation system (ITS) means electronics, 
communications, or information processing used singly or in combination 
to improve the efficiency and safety of a surface transportation system.
    Life-cycle cost analysis means an evaluation of costs incurred over 
the life of a project allowing a comparative analysis between or among 
various alternatives. Life-cycle cost analysis promotes consideration of 
total cost, to include maintenance and operation expenditures. 
Comprehensive life-cycle costs analysis includes all economic variables 
essential to the evaluation: User costs such as delay and safety costs 
associated with maintenance and rehabilitation projects, agency capital 
cost, and life-cycle maintenance costs.
    Metropolitan planning area means the geographic area in which the 
metropolitan transportation planning process required by 23 U.S.C. 134 
and 49 U.S.C. 5303-5306 must be carried out.
    Metropolitan planning organization (MPO) means the forum for 
cooperative transportation decision-making for the metropolitan planning 
area pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 134 and 49 U.S.C. 5303.
    National Wildlife Refuge System (Refuge System) means all the lands 
and waters reported by the FWS as being part of the National Wildlife 
Refuge System in the annual ``Report of Lands Under Control of the U.S. 
FWS.'' \1\ Included in the Refuge System are those lands that are 
generally known as refuges, waterfowl production areas, wetland 
management districts, and coordination areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ ``Report of Lands under Control of the U.S. FWS,'' U.S. FWS, 
(published annually on September 30). A free copy is available from the 
U.S. FWS, Division of Realty, 4401 N. Fairfax Drive, Suite 622, 
Arlington, VA 22203; telephone: (703) 358-1713.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Operations means those activities associated with managing, 
controlling, and regulating highway traffic.
    Refuge road means a public road that provides access to or is 
located within a unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System and for 
which title and maintenance responsibilities are vested in the United 
States Government.
    Refuge Roads Program means the funds allocated each fiscal year, as 
described in 23 U.S.C. 202(e) and 23 U.S.C. 204(k).
    Refuge Roads transportation improvement program (RRTIP) means a 
staged, multiyear, multimodal program of transportation projects for the 
Refuge Roads Program consistent with the Fish and Wildlife Service 
transportation plan and planning processes pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204(a) 
and (k).
    Secretary means the Secretary of Transportation.

[[Page 432]]

    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.
    Transportation facilities means roads, streets, bridges, parking 
areas, transit vehicles, and other related transportation 
infrastructure.
    Transportation Management Area (TMA) means an urbanized area with a 
population over 200,000 (as determined by the latest decennial census) 
or other area when TMA designation is requested by the Governor and the 
MPO (or affected local officials), and officially designated by the 
Administrators of the Federal Highway Administration and the Federal 
Transit Administration. The TMA designation applies to the entire 
metropolitan planning area(s).


<R04>
         Subpart B_Fish and Wildlife Service Management Systems


<R05>
Sec. 972.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 204 which 
requires the Secretary and the Secretary of each appropriate Federal 
land management agency, to the extent appropriate, to develop by rule 
safety, bridge, pavement, and congestion management systems for roads 
funded under the FLHP.


<R05>
Sec. 972.202  Applicability.

    The provisions in this subpart are applicable to the Fish and 
Wildlife Service (FWS) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 
that are responsible for satisfying these requirements for management 
systems pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204.


<R05>
Sec. 972.204  Management systems requirements.

    (a) The FWS shall develop, establish and implement the management 
systems as described in this subpart. The FWS may tailor the management 
systems to meet the FWS goals, policies, and needs using professional 
engineering and planning judgment to determine the required nature and 
extent of systems coverage consistent with the intent and requirements 
of this rule.
    (b) The FWS and the FHWA shall develop an implementation plan for 
each of the management systems. These plans will include, but are not 
limited to, the following: Overall goals and policies concerning the 
management systems, each agency's responsibilities for developing and 
implementing the management systems, implementation schedule, data 
sources, and cost estimate. The FHWA will provide the FWS ongoing 
technical engineering support for the development, implementation, and 
maintenance of the management systems.
    (c) The FWS shall develop and implement procedures for the 
development, establishment, implementation and operation of management 
systems. The procedures shall include:
    (1) A process for ensuring the results of any of the management 
systems are considered in the development of FWS transportation plans 
and transportation improvement programs and in making project selection 
decisions under 23 U.S.C. 204;
    (2) A process for the analyses and coordination of all management 
system outputs to systematically operate, maintain, and upgrade existing 
transportation assets cost-effectively;
    (3) A description of each management system;
    (4) A process to operate and maintain the management systems and 
their associated databases; and
    (5) A process for data collection, processing, analysis and updating 
for each management system.
    (d) All management systems will use databases with a geographical 
reference system that can be used to geolocate all database information.
    (e) Existing data sources may be used by the FWS to the maximum 
extent possible to meet the management system requirements.
    (f) The FWS shall develop an appropriate means to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the management systems in enhancing transportation 
decision-making and improving the overall efficiency of the affected 
federally owned transportation systems and facilities. This evaluation 
is to be conducted periodically, preferably as part of the comprehensive 
resource conservation planning process.
    (g) The management systems shall be operated so investment decisions 
based

[[Page 433]]

on management system outputs can be accomplished at the regional level.


<R05>
Sec. 972.206  Funds for establishment, development, and implementation 
of the systems.

    The Refuge Roads program funds may be used for development, 
establishment, and implementation of the management systems. These funds 
are to be administered in accordance with the procedures and 
requirements applicable to the funds.


<R05>
Sec. 972.208  Federal lands pavement management system (PMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 972.204, the PMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The FWS shall, at a minimum, have PMS coverage of all paved 
refuge roads and other associated facilities, as appropriate, funded 
under the FLHP.
    (b) The PMS may be based on the concepts described in the AASHTO's 
``Pavement Management Guide.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ ``Pavement Management Guide,'' AASHTO, 2001, is available for 
inspection as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7. It is also available from the 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO), Publication Order Dept., P.O. Box 96716, Washington, DC 20090-
6716 or online at http://www.transportation.org/publications/
bookstore.nsf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The PMS may be utilized at various levels of technical 
complexity depending on the nature of the pavement network. These 
different levels may depend on mileages, functional classes, volumes, 
loadings, usage, surface type, or other criteria the FWS deems 
appropriate.
    (d) The PMS shall be designed to fit the FWS goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using the following components, at a minimum, as a 
basic framework for a PMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the PMS. The minimum PMS database shall include:
    (i) An inventory of the physical pavement features including the 
number of lanes, length, width, surface type, functional classification, 
and shoulder information;
    (ii) A history of project dates and types of construction, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, and preventive maintenance. If some of 
the inventory or historic data are difficult to establish, it may be 
collected when preservation or reconstruction work is performed;
    (iii) A condition survey that includes ride, distress, rutting, and 
surface friction (as appropriate);
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) Data for estimating the costs of actions.
    (2) A system for applying network level analytical procedures that 
are capable of analyzing data for all FWS managed transportation 
facilities in the inventory or any subset. The minimum analyses shall 
include:
    (i) A pavement condition analysis that includes ride, distress, 
rutting, and surface friction (as appropriate);
    (ii) A pavement performance analysis that includes present and 
predicted performance and an estimate of the remaining service life 
(performance and remaining service life to be developed with time); and
    (iii) An investment analysis that:
    (A) Identifies alternative strategies to improve pavement 
conditions;
    (B) Estimates costs of any pavement improvement strategy;
    (C) Determines maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies 
for pavements using life-cycle cost analysis or a comparable procedure;
    (D) Provides short and long term budget forecasting; and
    (E) Recommends optimal allocation of limited funds by developing a 
prioritized list of candidate projects over a predefined planning 
horizon (both short and long term).
    (e) For any FWS managed transportation facilities in the inventory 
or subset thereof, PMS reporting requirements shall include, but are not 
limited to, percentage of roads in good, fair, and poor condition.


<R05>
Sec. 972.210  Federal lands bridge management system (BMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 972.204, the BMS 
must meet the following requirements:

[[Page 434]]

    (a) The FWS shall have a BMS for bridges which are under the FWS 
jurisdiction, funded under the FLHP, and required to be inventoried and 
inspected under 23 CFR 650, subpart C, National Bridge Inspection 
Standards (NBIS).
    (b) The BMS shall be designed to fit the FWS goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using the following components, as a minimum, as a 
basic framework for a BMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the BMS. The minimum BMS database shall include:
    (i) The inventory data required by the NBIS (23 CFR 650, subpart C);
    (ii) Data characterizing the severity and extent of deterioration of 
bridge elements;
    (iii) Data for estimating the cost of improvement actions;
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) A history of conditions and actions taken on each bridge, 
excluding minor or incidental maintenance.
    (2) Analytical procedures that are capable of analyzing data for all 
bridges in the inventory or any subset. These procedures include, as 
appropriate, such factors as bridge condition, recommended repairs/
replacement and estimated costs, prediction of the estimated remaining 
life of the bridge, development of a prioritized list of candidate 
projects over a specified planning horizon, and budget forecasting.
    (c) For any bridge in the inventory or subset thereof, BMS reporting 
requirements shall include, but are not limited to, percentage of non-
deficient bridges.


<R05>
Sec. 972.212  Federal lands safety management system (SMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 972.204, the SMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The FWS shall have an SMS for all transportation facilities 
serving the Refuge System, as appropriate, funded under the FLHP.
    (b) The FWS SMS may be based on the guidance in ``Safety Management 
Systems: Good Practices for Development and Implementation.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ ``Safety Management Systems: Good Practices for Development and 
Implementation,'' FHWA and NHTSA, May 1996, may be obtained at the FHWA, 
Office of Safety, Room 3407, 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20590, 
or electronically at http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/media/documents.htm. It 
is available for inspection and copying as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The FWS shall utilize the SMS to ensure that safety is 
considered and implemented as appropriate in all phases of 
transportation system planning, design, construction, maintenance, and 
operations.
    (d) The SMS may be utilized at various levels of complexity 
depending on the nature of the transportation facility involved.
    (e) The SMS shall be designed to fit the FWS goals, policies, 
criteria, and needs using, as a minimum, the following components as a 
basic framework for a SMS:
    (1) An ongoing program for the collection, maintenance and reporting 
of a database that includes:
    (i) Accident records with sufficient detail for analysis such as 
accident type using standard reporting descriptions (e.g., right-angle, 
rear-end, head-on, pedestrian-related, etc.), location, description of 
event, severity, weather and cause;
    (ii) An inventory of safety appurtenances such as signs, 
delineators, and guardrails (including terminals);
    (iii) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (iv) Accident rates by customary criteria such as location, roadway 
classification, and vehicle miles of travel.
    (2) Development, establishment and implementation of procedures for:
    (i) Routinely maintaining and upgrading safety appurtenances 
including highway-rail crossing warning devices, signs, highway 
elements, and operational features where appropriate; and
    (ii) Identifying and investigating hazardous or potentially 
hazardous transportation system safety problems, roadway locations and 
features, then establishing countermeasures and setting priorities to 
correct the identified hazards and potential hazards.

[[Page 435]]

    (3) A process for communication, coordination, and cooperation among 
the organizations responsible for the roadway, human, and vehicle safety 
elements; and
    (4) Development and implementation of public information and 
education activities on safety needs, programs, and countermeasures 
which affect safety on the FWS transportation systems.
    (f) While the SMS applies to appropriate transportation facilities 
serving the Refuge System funded under the FLHP, the extent of system 
requirements (e.g., data collection, analyses, and standards) for low 
volume roads may be tailored to be consistent with the functional 
classification of the roads. However, sufficient detail should be 
included for each functional classification to provide adequate 
information for use in making safety decisions in the RR program.


<R05>
Sec. 972. 214  Federal lands congestion management system (CMS).

    (a) For purposes of this section, congestion means the level at 
which transportation system performance is no longer acceptable due to 
traffic interference. For those FWS transportation systems that require 
a CMS, in both metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas, consideration 
shall be given to strategies that reduce private automobile travel and 
improve existing transportation system efficiency. Approaches may 
include the use of alternate mode studies and implementation plans as 
components of the CMS. The FWS shall consider the results of the CMS 
when selecting the implementation of strategies that provide the most 
efficient and effective use of existing and future transportation 
facilities, and alleviate congestion.
    (b) In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 972.204, the 
CMS must meet the following requirements:
    (1) For portions of the FWS transportation system within TMAs, the 
FWS transportation planning process shall include a CMS that meets the 
requirements of this section. By agreement between the TMA and the FWS, 
the TMA's CMS coverage may include the transportation facilities serving 
the Refuge System, as appropriate. Through this agreement(s), the FWS 
may meet the requirements of this section.
    (2) If congestion exists at a FWS facility within the boundaries of 
a TMA, and the TMA's CMS does not provide coverage of the portions of 
the FWS transportation facilities experiencing congestion, the FWS shall 
develop a separate CMS to cover those facilities.
    (3) For portions of the FWS transportation system outside the 
boundaries of TMAs, the FWS shall:
    (i) Develop criteria to determine when a CMS is to be implemented 
for a specific transportation system; and
    (ii) Have CMS coverage for all transportation facilities serving the 
Refuge System, as appropriate, funded through the FLHP that meet minimum 
CMS needs criteria.
    (4) A CMS will:
    (i) Identify and document measures for congestion (e.g., level of 
service);
    (ii) Identify the causes of congestion;
    (iii) Include processes for evaluating the cost and effectiveness of 
alternative strategies to manage congestion;
    (iv) Identify the anticipated benefits of appropriate alternative 
traditional and nontraditional congestion management strategies;
    (v) Determine methods to monitor and evaluate the performance of the 
multi-modal transportation system;
    (vi) Appropriately consider the following example categories of 
strategies, or combinations of strategies for each area:
    (A) Transportation demand management measures;
    (B) Traffic operational improvements;
    (C) Public transportation improvements;
    (D) ITS technologies;
    (E) Additional system capacity; and
    (vii) Provide information supporting the implementation of actions.

[[Page 436]]


<R03>
PART 973_MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS PERTAINING TO THE BUREAU OF INDIAN 
AFFAIRS AND THE INDIAN RESERVATION ROADS PROGRAM--Table of Contents




                          Subpart A_Definitions

Sec.
973.100 Purpose.
973.102 Applicability.
973.104 Definitions.

         Subpart B--Bureau of Indian Affairs Management Systems

973.200 Purpose.
973.202 Applicability.
973.204 Management systems requirements.
973.206 Funds for establishment, development, and implementation of the 
          systems.
973.208 Indian lands pavement management system (PMS).
973.210 Indian lands bridge management system (BMS).
973.212 Indian lands safety management system (SMS).
973.214 Indian lands congestion management system (CMS).

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 204, 315, 42 U.S.C. 7410 et seq.; 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 69 FR 9499, Feb. 27, 2004, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                          Subpart A_Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 973.100  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to provide definitions for terms used 
in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 973.102  Applicability.

    The definitions in this subpart are applicable to this part, except 
as otherwise provided.


<R05>
Sec. 973.104  Definitions.

    Alternative transportation systems means modes of transportation 
other than private vehicles, including methods to improve system 
performance such as transportation demand management, congestion 
management, and intelligent transportation systems. These mechanisms 
help reduce the use of private vehicles and thus improve overall 
efficiency of transportation systems and facilities.
    Elements means the components of a bridge important from a 
structural, user, or cost standpoint. Examples are decks, joints, 
bearings, girders, abutments, and piers.
    Federal Lands Highway Program (FLHP) means a federally funded 
program established in 23 U.S.C. 204 to address transportation needs of 
Federal and Indian lands.
    Indian lands bridge management system (BMS) means a systematic 
process used by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) or Indian Tribal 
Governments (ITGs) for analyzing bridge data to make forecasts and 
recommendations, and provides the means by which bridge maintenance, 
rehabilitation, and replacement programs and policies may be efficiently 
considered.
    Indian lands congestion management system (CMS) means a systematic 
process used by the BIA or ITGs for managing congestion that provides 
information on transportation system performance and alternative 
strategies for alleviating congestion and enhancing the mobility of 
persons and goods to levels that meet Federal, State and local needs.
    Indian lands pavement management system (PMS) means a systematic 
process used by the BIA or ITGs that provides information for use in 
implementing cost-effective pavement reconstruction, rehabilitation, and 
preventive maintenance programs and policies, and that results in 
pavement designed to accommodate current and forecasted traffic in a 
safe, durable, and cost-effective manner.
    Indian lands safety management system (SMS) means a systematic 
process used by the BIA or ITGs with the goal of reducing the number and 
severity of traffic accidents by ensuring that all opportunities to 
improve roadway safety are identified, considered, implemented and 
evaluated, as appropriate, during all phases of highway planning, 
design, construction, operation and maintenance by providing information 
for selecting and implementing effective highway safety strategies and 
projects.
    Indian reservation road (IRR) means a public road that is located 
within or provides access to an Indian reservation or Indian trust land 
or restricted Indian land that is not subject to fee title alienation 
without the approval of the Federal government, or Indian and

[[Page 437]]

Alaska Native villages, groups, or communities in which Indians and 
Alaskan Natives reside, whom the Secretary of the Interior has 
determined are eligible for services generally available to Indians 
under Federal laws specifically applicable to Indians.
    Indian Reservation Roads (IRR) Program means a part of the FLHP 
established in 23 U.S.C. 204 to address the transportation needs of 
federally recognized ITGs.
    Indian Reservation Roads transportation improvement program (IRRTIP) 
means a multi-year, financially constrained list by year, State, and 
tribe of IRR-funded projects selected by ITGs that are programmed for 
construction in the next 3 to 5 years.
    Indian Reservation Roads transportation plan means a document 
setting out a tribe's long-range transportation priorities and needs. 
The IRR transportation plan, which can be developed by either the tribe 
or the BIA on behalf of that tribe, is developed through the IRR 
transportation planning process pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204 and 25 CFR 
part 170.
    Indian Tribal Government (ITG) means a duly formed governing body of 
an Indian or Alaska Native Tribe, Band, Nation, Pueblo, Village, or 
Community that the Secretary of the Interior acknowledges to exist as an 
Indian tribe pursuant to the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act 
of 1994, 25 U.S.C. 479a.
    Indian tribe (tribe) means any Indian tribe, nation, band, pueblo, 
rancheria, colony, or community, including any Alaska Native Village, or 
regional or village corporation as defined or established under the 
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act which is federally recognized by the 
U.S. government for special programs and services provided by the 
Secretary of the Interior to Indians because of their status as Indians.
    Intelligent transportation system (ITS) means electronics, 
communications, or information processing used singly or in combination 
to improve the efficiency and safety of a surface transportation system.
    Life-cycle cost analysis means an evaluation of costs incurred over 
the life of a project allowing a comparative analysis between or among 
various alternatives. Life-cycle cost analysis promotes consideration of 
total cost, to include maintenance and operation expenditures. 
Comprehensive life-cycle cost analysis includes all economic variables 
essential to the evaluation: Safety costs associated with maintenance 
and rehabilitation projects, agency capital cost, and life-cycle 
maintenance costs.
    Operations means those activities associated with managing, 
controlling, and regulating highway traffic.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Transportation.
    Serviceability means the degree to which a bridge provides 
satisfactory service from the point of view of its users.
    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.
    Transportation facilities means roads, streets, bridges, parking 
areas, transit vehicles, and other related transportation 
infrastructure.


<R04>
          Subpart B_Bureau of Indian Affairs Management Systems


<R05>
Sec. 973.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement 23 U.S.C. 204 which 
requires the Secretary and the Secretary of each appropriate Federal 
land management agency to the extent appropriate, to develop by rule 
safety, bridge, pavement, and congestion management systems for roads 
funded under the FLHP.


<R05>
Sec. 973.202  Applicability.

    The provisions in this subpart are applicable to the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs (BIA), the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), and the 
Indian Tribal Governments (ITGs) that are responsible for satisfying 
these requirements for management systems pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 204.


<R05>
Sec. 973.204  Management systems requirements.

    (a) The BIA, in consultation with the tribes, shall develop, 
establish and implement nationwide pavement, bridge, and safety 
management systems for federally and tribally owned IRRs. The

[[Page 438]]

BIA may tailor the nationwide management systems to meet the agency's 
goals, policies, and needs, after considering the input from the tribes, 
and using professional engineering and planning judgment to determine 
the required nature and extent of systems coverage consistent with the 
intent and requirements of this rule.
    (b) The BIA and the FHWA, in consultation with the tribes, shall 
develop an implementation plan for each of the nationwide management 
systems. These plans will include, but are not limited to, the 
following: Overall goals and policies concerning the nationwide 
management systems, each agency's responsibilities for developing and 
implementing the nationwide management systems, implementation schedule, 
data sources, including the need to accommodate State and local data, 
and cost estimate.
    (c) Indian tribes may develop, establish, and implement tribal 
management systems under a self-determination contract or self-
governance annual funding agreement. The tribe may tailor the management 
systems to meet its goals, policies, and needs, using professional 
engineering and planning judgment to determine the required nature and 
extent of systems coverage consistent with the intent and requirements 
of this rule.
    (d) The BIA, in consultation with the tribes, shall develop criteria 
for cases in which tribal management systems are not appropriate.
    (e) The BIA, in consultation with the tribes, or the tribes under a 
self-determination contract or self-governance annual funding agreement, 
may incorporate data provided by States and local governments into the 
nationwide or tribal management systems, as appropriate, for State and 
locally owned IRRs.
    (f) The BIA, in consultation with the tribes, shall develop and 
implement procedures for the development, establishment, implementation 
and operation of nationwide management systems. If a tribe develops 
tribal management systems, the tribe shall develop and implement 
procedures for the development, establishment, implementation and 
operation of tribal management systems. The procedures shall include:
    (1) A description of each management system;
    (2) A process to operate and maintain the management systems and 
their associated databases;
    (3) A process for data collection, processing, analysis and updating 
for each management system;
    (4) A process for ensuring the results of the management systems are 
considered in the development of IRR transportation plans and 
transportation improvement programs and in making project selection 
decisions under 23 U.S.C. 204; and
    (5) A process for the analysis and coordination of all management 
systems outputs to systematically operate, maintain, and upgrade 
existing transportation assets cost-effectively;
    (g) All management systems shall use databases with a common or 
coordinated reference system that can be used to geolocate all database 
information.
    (h) Existing data sources may be used by the BIA and the tribes to 
the maximum extent possible to meet the management system requirements.
    (i) A nationwide congestion management system is not required. The 
BIA and the FHWA, in consultation with the tribes, shall develop 
criteria for determining when congestion management systems are required 
for BIA or tribal transportation facilities providing access to and 
within the Indian reservations. Either the tribes or the BIA, in 
consultation with the tribes, shall develop, establish and implement 
congestion management systems for the transportation facilities that 
meet the criteria.
    (j) The BIA shall develop an appropriate means to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the nationwide management systems in enhancing 
transportation investment decisions and improving the overall efficiency 
of the affected transportation systems and facilities. This evaluation 
is to be conducted periodically, preferably as part of the BIA planning 
process to assist the FHWA in evaluating the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the management systems as a component of the IRR 
program, and

[[Page 439]]

may include consultation with the tribes, as appropriate.
    (k) The management systems shall be operated so investment decisions 
based on management system outputs can be accomplished at the BIA region 
and tribal level and can be utilized throughout the transportation 
planning process.


<R05>
Sec. 973.206  Funds for establishment, development, and implementation 
of the systems.

    The IRR program management funds may be used to accomplish 
nationwide management system activities. For tribal management system 
activities, the IRR two percent tribal transportation planning or 
construction funds may be used. (Refer to 23 U.S.C. 204(b) and 204(j)). 
These funds are to be administered in accordance with the procedures and 
requirements applicable to the funds.


<R05>
Sec. 973.208  Indian lands pavement management system (PMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 973.204, the PMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The BIA shall have PMS coverage for all federally and tribally 
owned, paved IRRs included in the IRR inventory.
    (b) Where a tribe collects data for the tribe's PMS, the tribe shall 
provide the data to the BIA to be used in the nationwide PMS.
    (c) The nationwide and tribal PMSs may be based on the concepts 
described in the AASHTO's ``Pavement Management Guide.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ ``Pavement Management Guide,'' AASHTO, 2001, is available for 
inspection as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7. It is also available from the 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO), Publication Order Dept., P.O. Box 96716, Washington, DC 20090-
6716 or online at http://www.transportation.org/publications/
bookstore.nsf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) The nationwide and tribal PMSs may be utilized at various levels 
of technical complexity depending on the nature of the pavement network. 
These different levels may depend on mileage, functional classes, 
volumes, loading, usage, surface type, or other criteria the BIA and 
ITGs deem appropriate.
    (e) A PMS shall be designed to fit the BIA's or tribes' goals, 
policies, criteria, and needs using the following components, at a 
minimum, as a basic framework for a PMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the PMS. The minimum PMS database shall include:
    (i) An inventory of the physical pavement features including the 
number of lanes, length, width, surface type, functional classification, 
and shoulder information;
    (ii) A history of project dates and types of construction, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, and preventive maintenance. If some of 
the inventory or historic data is difficult to establish, it may be 
collected when preservation or reconstruction work is performed;
    (iii) A condition survey that includes ride, distress, rutting, and 
surface friction (as appropriate);
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) Data for estimating the costs of actions.
    (2) A system for applying network level analytical procedures that 
are capable of analyzing data for all federally and tribally owned IRR 
in the inventory or any subset. The minimum analyses shall include:
    (i) A pavement condition analysis that includes ride, distress, 
rutting, and surface friction (as appropriate);
    (ii) A pavement performance analysis that includes present and 
predicted performance and an estimate of the remaining service life 
(performance and remaining service life to be developed with time); and
    (iii) An investment analysis that:
    (A) Identifies alternative strategies to improve pavement 
conditions;
    (B) Estimates costs of any pavement improvement strategy;
    (C) Determines maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies 
for pavements using life cycle cost analysis or a comparable procedure;
    (D) Performs short and long term budget forecasting; and
    (E) Recommends optimal allocation of limited funds by developing a

[[Page 440]]

prioritized list of candidate projects over a predefined planning 
horizon (both short and long term).
    (f) For any roads in the inventory or subset thereof, PMS reporting 
requirements shall include, but are not limited to, percentage of roads 
in good, fair, and poor condition.


<R05>
Sec. 973.210  Indian lands bridge management system (BMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 973.204, the BMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The BIA shall have a nationwide BMS for the federally and 
tribally owned IRR bridges that are funded under the FLHP and required 
to be inventoried and inspected under 23 CFR 650, subpart C, National 
Bridge Inspection Standards (NBIS).
    (b) Where a tribe collects data for the tribe's BMS, the tribe shall 
provide the data to the BIA to be used in the nationwide BMS.
    (c) The nationwide and tribal BMSs may be based on the concepts 
described in the AASHTO's ``Guidelines for Bridge Management Systems.'' 
\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ ``Guidelines for Bridge Management Systems,'' AASHTO, 1993, is 
available for inspection as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7. It is also 
available from the American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Publication Order Dept., P.O. Box 
96716, Washington, DC 20090-6716 or online at http://
www.transportation.org/publications/bookstore.nsf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) A BMS shall be designed to fit the BIA's or tribe's goals, 
policies, criteria, and needs using the following components, as a 
minimum, as a basic framework for a BMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the BMS. The minimum BMS database shall include:
    (i) The inventory data described by the NBIS (23 CFR part 650, 
subpart C);
    (ii) Data characterizing the severity and extent of deterioration of 
bridge components;
    (iii) Data for estimating the cost of improvement actions;
    (iv) Traffic information including volumes and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate); and
    (v) A history of conditions and actions taken on each bridge, 
excluding minor or incidental maintenance.
    (2) A systematic procedure for applying network level analytical 
procedures that are capable of analyzing data for all bridges in the 
inventory or any subset. The minimum analyses shall include:
    (i) A prediction of performance and estimate of the remaining 
service life of structural and other key elements of each bridge, both 
with and without intervening actions; and
    (ii) A recommendation for optimal allocation of limited funds by 
developing a prioritized list of candidate projects over a predefined 
planning horizon (both short and long term).
    (e) The BMS may include the capability to perform an investment 
analysis (as appropriate, considering size of structure, traffic volume, 
and structural condition). The investment analysis may include the 
ability to:
    (1) Identify alternative strategies to improve bridge condition, 
safety and serviceability;
    (2) Estimate the costs of any strategies ranging from maintenance of 
individual elements to full bridge replacement;
    (3) Determine maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation strategies for 
bridge elements using life cycle cost analysis or a comparable 
procedure; and
    (4) Perform short and long term budget forecasting.
    (f) For any bridge in the inventory or subset thereof, BMS reporting 
requirements shall include, but are not limited to, percentage of non-
deficient bridges.


<R05>
Sec. 973.212  Indian lands safety management system (SMS).

    In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 973.204, the SMS 
must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The BIA shall have a nationwide SMS for all federally and 
tribally owned IRR and public transit facilities included in the IRR 
inventory.
    (b) Where a tribe collects data for the tribe's SMS, the tribe shall 
provide the data to the BIA to be used in the nationwide SMS.

[[Page 441]]

    (c) The nationwide and tribal SMS may be based on the guidance in 
``Safety Management Systems: Good Practices for Development and 
Implementation.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ ``Safety Management Systems: Good Practices for Development and 
Implementation,'' FHWA and NHTSA, May 1996, may be obtained at the FHWA, 
Office of Safety, Room 3407, 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20590, 
or electronically at http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/media/documents.htm. It 
is available for inspection and copying as prescribed at 49 CFR part 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) The BIA and ITGs shall utilize the SMSs to ensure that safety is 
considered and implemented as appropriate in all phases of 
transportation system planning, design, construction, maintenance, and 
operations.
    (e) The nationwide and tribal SMSs may be utilized at various levels 
of complexity depending on the nature of the IRR facility involved.
    (f) An SMS shall be designed to fit the BIA's or ITG's goals, 
policies, criteria, and needs using, as a minimum, the following 
components as a basic framework for an SMS:
    (1) A database and an ongoing program for the collection and 
maintenance of the inventory, inspection, cost, and supplemental data 
needed to support the SMS. The minimum SMS database shall include:
    (i) Accident records;
    (ii) An inventory of safety hardware including signs, guardrails, 
and lighting appurtenances (including terminals); and
    (iii) Traffic information including volume and vehicle 
classification (as appropriate).
    (2) Development, establishment and implementation of procedures for:
    (i) Routinely maintaining and upgrading safety appurtenances 
including highway-rail crossing warning devices, signs, highway 
elements, and operational features where appropriate;
    (ii) Routinely maintaining and upgrading safety features of transit 
facilities;
    (iii) Identifying and investigating hazardous or potentially 
hazardous transportation system safety problems, roadway locations and 
features; and
    (iv) Establishing countermeasures and setting priorities to correct 
the identified hazards and potential hazards.
    (3) A process for communication, coordination, and cooperation among 
the organizations responsible for the roadway, human, and vehicle safety 
elements;
    (4) Development and implementation of public information and 
education activities on safety needs, programs, and countermeasures 
which affect safety on the BIA's and ITG's transportation systems; and
    (5) Identification of skills, resources and training needs to 
implement safety programs for highway and transit facilities and the 
development of a program to carry out necessary training.
    (g) While the SMS applies to all federally and tribally owned IRRs 
in the IRR inventory, the extent of system requirements (e.g., data 
collection, analyses, and standards) for low volume roads may be 
tailored to be consistent with the functional classification of the 
roads. However, adequate requirements should be included for each BIA 
functional classification to provide for effective inclusion of safety 
decisions in the administration of transportation by the BIA and ITGs.
    (h) For any transportation facilities in the IRR inventory or subset 
thereof, SMS reporting requirements shall include, but are not limited 
to, the following:
    (1) Accident types such as right-angle, rear-end, left turn, head-
on, sideswipe, pedestrian-related, run-off-road, fixed object, and 
parked vehicle;
    (2) Accident severity per year measured as number of accidents with 
fatalities, injuries, and property damage only; and
    (3) Accident rates measured as number of accidents (fatalities, 
injuries, and property damage only) per 100 million vehicle miles of 
travel, number of accidents (fatalities, injuries, and property damage 
only) per 1000 vehicles, or number of accidents (fatalities, injuries, 
and property damage only) per mile.


<R05>
Sec. 973.214  Indian lands congestion management system (CMS).

    (a) For purposes of this section, congestion means the level at 
which transportation system performance is no

[[Page 442]]

longer acceptable due to traffic interference. The BIA and the FHWA, in 
consultation with the tribes, shall develop criteria to determine when a 
CMS is to be implemented for a specific federally or tribally owned IRR 
transportation system that is experiencing congestion. Either the tribe 
or the BIA, in consultation with the tribe, shall consider the results 
of the CMS in the development of the IRR transportation plan and the 
IRRTIP, when selecting strategies for implementation that provide the 
most efficient and effective use of existing and future transportation 
facilities to alleviate congestion and enhance mobility.
    (b) In addition to the requirements provided in Sec. 973.204, the 
CMS must meet the following requirements:
    (1) For those BIA or tribal transportation systems that require a 
CMS, consideration shall be given to strategies that reduce private 
automobile travel and improve existing transportation system efficiency. 
Approaches may include the use of alternate mode studies and 
implementation plans as components of the CMS.
    (2) A CMS will:
    (i) Identify and document measures for congestion (e.g., level of 
service);
    (ii) Identify the causes of congestion;
    (iii) Include processes for evaluating the cost and effectiveness of 
alternative strategies;
    (iv) Identify the anticipated benefits of appropriate alternative 
traditional and nontraditional congestion management strategies;
    (v) Determine methods to monitor and evaluate the performance of the 
multi-modal transportation system; and
    (vi) Appropriately consider the following example categories of 
strategies, or combinations of strategies for each area:
    (A) Transportation demand management measures;
    (B) Traffic operational improvements;
    (C) Public transportation improvements;
    (D) ITS technologies; and
    (E) Additional system capacity.

[[Page 443]]


<R02>
 CHAPTER II--NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION AND FEDERAL 
          HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

       SUBCHAPTER A--PROCEDURES FOR STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY PROGRAMS
Part                                                                Page
1200            Uniform procedures for State highway safety 
                    programs................................         445
                        SUBCHAPTER B--GUIDELINES
1204            [Reserved]
1205            Highway safety programs; determinations of 
                    effectiveness...........................         452
1206            Rules of procedure for invoking sanctions 
                    under the Highway Safety Act of 1966....         453
1208            National minimum drinking age...............         454
1210            Operation of motor vehicles by intoxicated 
                    minors..................................         455
1215            Use of safety belts--compliance and 
                    transfer-of-funds procedures............         457
1225            Operation of motor vehicles by intoxicated 
                    persons.................................         459
1235            Uniform system for parking for persons with 
                    disabilities............................         463
1240            Safety incentive grants for use of seat 
                    belts--allocations based on seat belt 
                    use rates...............................         469
                    SUBCHAPTER C--GENERAL PROVISIONS
1250            Political subdivision participation in State 
                    highway safety programs.................         475
1251            State highway safety agency.................         476
1252            State matching of planning and 
                    administration costs....................         477
              SUBCHAPTER D--TRANSFER AND SANCTION PROGRAMS
1270            Open container laws.........................         480

[[Page 444]]

1275            Repeat intoxicated driver laws..............         483

[[Page 445]]


<R03>
        SUBCHAPTER A_PROCEDURES FOR STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY PROGRAMS




<R03>
PART 1200_UNIFORM PROCEDURES FOR STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY PROGRAMS--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
1200.1 Purpose.
1200.2 Applicability.
1200.3 Definitions.

   Subpart B_Application, Approval, and Funding of the Highway Safety 
                                 Program

1200.10 Application.
1200.11 Special funding conditions.
1200.12 Due date.
1200.13 Approval.
1200.14 Apportionment and obligation of Federal funds.

  Subpart C_Implementation and Management of the Highway Safety Program

1200.20 General.
1200.21 Equipment.
1200.22 Changes.
1200.23 Vouchers and project agreements.
1200.24 Program income.
1200.25 Improvement plan.
1200.26 Non-compliance.
1200.27 Appeals.

                           Subpart D_Closeout

1200.30 Expiration of the right to incur costs.
1200.31 Extension of the right to incur costs.
1200.32 Final voucher.
1200.33 Annual report.
1200.34 Disposition of unexpended balances.
1200.35 Post-grant adjustments.
1200.36 Continuing requirements.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 402; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 
and 1.50.

    Source: 62 FR 34402, June 26, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 1200.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes uniform application, approval, implementation, 
and closeout procedures for State highway safety programs authorized 
under 23 U.S.C. 402.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.2  Applicability.

    The provisions of this part apply to highway safety programs 
conducted by States under 23 U.S.C. 402.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.3  Definitions.

    As used in this subchapter--
    Approving Official means a Regional Administrator of the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, with the concurrence of a 
Division Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration as 
necessary.
    Carry-forward funds means those funds that a State has obligated but 
not expended in the fiscal year in which they were apportioned, that are 
being reprogrammed to fund activities in a subsequent fiscal year.
    Contract authority means the statutory language that authorizes the 
agencies to incur an obligation without the need for a prior 
appropriation or further action from Congress and which, when exercised, 
creates a binding obligation on the United States for which Congress 
must make subsequent liquidating appropriations.
    Equipment means any tangible personal property acquired for use 
under the State's approved highway safety program.
    FHWA means the Federal Highway Administration.
    Fiscal year means the Federal fiscal year, consisting of twelve 
months beginning each October 1 and ending the following September 30.
    Governor means the Governor of any of the fifty States, Puerto Rico, 
the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, or the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands, the Mayor of the District of Columbia, or, for 
the application of this part to Indians as provided in 23 U.S.C. 402(i), 
the Secretary of the Interior.
    Governor's Representative for Highway Safety means the official 
appointed by the Governor to implement the State's highway safety 
program or, for the application of this part to Indians as provided in 
23 U.S.C. 402(i), an official of the Bureau of Indian Affairs who is

[[Page 446]]

duly designated by the Secretary of the Interior to implement the Indian 
highway safety program.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    Program area means a National Priority Program Area identified in 
Sec. 1205.3 of this chapter or a program area identified by the State 
in the highway safety plan as encompassing a major highway safety 
problem in the State and for which effective countermeasures have been 
identified.
    Program income means gross income received by the State or any of 
its subgrantees or contractors that is directly or indirectly generated 
by a Federally-supported project during the project performance period.
    Section 402 means section 402 of title 23 of the United States Code.
    State means any of the fifty States of the United States, the 
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or, for the 
application of this part to Indians as provided in 23 U.S.C. 402(i), the 
Secretary of the Interior.


<R04>
   Subpart B_Application, Approval, and Funding of the Highway Safety 
                                 Program


<R05>
Sec. 1200.10  Application.

    Each fiscal year, a State's application for funds for its highway 
safety program shall consist of the following components:
    (a) A Performance Plan, containing the following elements:
    (1) A list of objective and measurable highway safety goals, within 
the National Priority Program Areas and other program areas, based on 
highway safety problems identified by the State during the processes 
under paragraph (a)(2) of this section. Each goal must be accompanied by 
at least one performance measure that enables the State to track 
progress, from a specific baseline, toward meeting the goal (e.g., a 
goal to ``increase safety belt use from XX percent in 19-- to YY percent 
in 20--,'' using a performance measure of ``percent of restrained 
occupants in front outboard seating positions in passenger motor 
vehicles'').
    (2) A brief description of the processes used by the State to 
identify its highway safety problems, define its highway safety goals 
and performance measures, and develop projects and activities to address 
its problems and achieve its goals. In describing these processes, the 
State shall identify the participants in the processes (e.g., highway 
safety committees, community and constituent groups), discuss the 
strategies for project or activity selection (e.g., constituent 
outreach, public meetings, solicitation of proposals), and list the 
information and data sources consulted.
    (b) A Highway Safety Plan, approved by the Governor's Representative 
for Highway Safety, describing the projects and activities the State 
plans to implement to reach the goals identified in the Performance 
Plan. The Highway Safety Plan must, at a minimum, describe one year of 
Section 402 program activities (and may include activities funded from 
other sources, so long as the source of funding is clearly 
distinguished).
    (c) A Certification Statement, signed by the Governor's 
Representative for Highway Safety, providing assurances that the State 
will comply with applicable laws and regulations, financial and 
programmatic requirements, and in accordance with Sec. 1200.11 of this 
part, the special funding conditions of the Section 402 program.
    (d) A Program Cost Summary (HS Form 217 or its electronic 
equivalent), completed to reflect the State's proposed allocations of 
funds (including carry-forward funds) by program area, based on the 
goals identified in the Performance Plan and the projects and activities 
identified in the Highway Safety Plan. The funding level used shall be 
an estimate of available funding for the upcoming fiscal year.

[62 FR 34402, June 26, 1997, as amended at 64 FR 40764, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 1200.11  Special funding conditions.

    The State's highway safety program under Section 402 shall be 
subject to the following conditions, and approval under Sec. 1200.13 of 
this part shall in no event be deemed to waive these conditions:

[[Page 447]]

    (a) Responsibility of the Governor--The Governor of the State shall 
be responsible for the administration of the Section 402 program through 
a State highway safety agency that shall have adequate powers and be 
suitably equipped and organized to carry out the program.
    (b) Participation by Political Subdivisions--Political subdivisions 
shall be authorized to carry out local highway safety programs, approved 
by the Governor, as a part of the State highway safety program, and at 
least 40 percent of all Federal funds provided under this part shall be 
used by or for the benefit of political subdivisions, in accordance with 
the provisions of part 1250 of this chapter.
    (c) Access for Persons with Disabilities--Adequate and reasonable 
access shall be provided for the safe and convenient movement of persons 
with physical disabilities, including those in wheelchairs, across curbs 
constructed or replaced on or after July 1, 1976, at all pedestrian 
crosswalks throughout the State.
    (d) Use of Safety Belts--Programs shall be provided (which may 
include financial incentives and disincentives) to encourage the use of 
safety belts by drivers and passengers in motor vehicles.
    (e) Planning and Administration Costs--Funding and matching 
requirements for planning and administration costs shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of part 1252 of this chapter.
    (f) Purchase and Disposition of Equipment--Major purchases and 
dispositions of equipment shall require prior approval by the approving 
official, in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1200.21(d) of this 
part.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.12  Due date.

    Three copies of the application documents identified in Sec. 
1200.10 of this part must be received by the NHTSA regional office no 
later than September 1 preceding the fiscal year to which the documents 
apply. The NHTSA regional office will forward copies to NHTSA 
headquarters and the FHWA division office. Failure to meet this deadline 
may result in delayed approval and funding.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.13  Approval.

    (a) Upon receipt of application documents complying with the 
provisions of Sec. 1200.10 and Sec. 1200.11 of this part, the 
Approving Official will issue a letter of approval to the Governor and 
the Governor's Representative for Highway Safety.
    (b) The approval letter identified in paragraph (a) of this section 
will contain the following statement:

    We have reviewed (STATE)'s ------------ fiscal year 19-- Performance 
Plan, Highway Safety Plan, Certification Statement, and Cost Summary (HS 
Form 217), as received on (DATE) --------. Based on these submissions, 
we find your State's highway safety program to be in compliance with the 
requirements of the Section 402 program. This determination does not 
constitute an obligation of Federal funds for the fiscal year identified 
above or an authorization to incur costs against those funds. The 
obligation of Section 402 program funds will be effected in writing by 
the NHTSA Administrator at the commencement of the fiscal year 
identified above. However, Federal funds reprogrammed from the prior-
year Highway Safety Program (carry-forward funds) will be available for 
immediate use by the State on October 1. Reimbursement will be 
contingent upon the submission of an updated HS Form 217 (or its 
electronic equivalent), consistent with the requirements of 23 CFR 
1200.14(d), within 30 days after either the beginning of the fiscal year 
identified above or the date of this letter, whichever is later.

    (c) If approval is withheld, for reasons of non-compliance with 
Sec. 1200.10 or Sec. 1200.11 of this part or other applicable law, the 
Approving Official shall identify in writing the specific area(s) of 
non-compliance which formed the basis for withholding approval.

[62 FR 34402, June 26, 1997, as amended at 64 FR 40764, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 1200.14  Apportionment and obligation of Federal funds.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, on October 
1 of each fiscal year the NHTSA Administrator shall, in writing, 
distribute funds available for obligation under Section 402 to the 
States and specify any conditions or limitations imposed by law on the 
use of the funds.
    (b) In the event that authorizations exist but no applicable 
appropriation act has been enacted by October 1 of a

[[Page 448]]

fiscal year the NHTSA and FHWA Administrators shall, in writing, 
distribute a part of the funds authorized under Section 402 contract 
authority to ensure program continuity and shall specify any conditions 
or limitations imposed by law on the use of the funds. Upon 
appropriation of Section 402 funds, the NHTSA Administrator shall, in 
writing, promptly adjust the obligation limitation, and specify any 
conditions or limitations imposed by law on the use of the funds.
    (c) The funds distributed under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section 
shall be available for expenditure by the states to satisfy the Federal 
share of expenses under the approved highway safety program, and shall 
constitute a contractual obligation of the Federal Government, subject 
to any conditions or limitations identified in the distributing 
document.
    (d)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (c) of this 
section, reimbursement of State expenses shall be contingent upon the 
submission of an updated HS Form 217 (or its electronic equivalent), 
within 30 days after either the beginning of the fiscal year or the date 
of the written approval required under Sec. 1200.13 of this part, 
whichever is later.
    (2) The updated HS Form 217 (or its electronic equivalent) required 
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section shall reflect the State's 
allocation of Section 402 funds made available for expenditure during 
the fiscal year, including known carry-forward funds.

[62 FR 34402, June 26, 1997, as amended at 64 FR 40764, July 28, 1999]


<R04>
  Subpart C_Implementation and Management of the Highway Safety Program


<R05>
Sec. 1200.20  General.

    Except as otherwise provided in this subpart and subject to the 
provisions herein, the requirements of 49 CFR part 18 and applicable 
cost principles govern the implementation and management of State 
highway safety programs carried out under 23 U.S.C. 402. Cost principles 
include those referenced in 49 CFR 18.22 and those set forth in 
applicable Department of Transportation, NHTSA, or FHWA Orders.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.21  Equipment.

    (a) Title. Except as provided in paragraphs (e) and (f) of this 
section, title to equipment acquired under the Section 402 program will 
vest upon acquisition in the State or its subgrantee, as appropriate.
    (b) Use. All equipment shall be used for the originally authorized 
grant purposes for as long as needed for those purposes, as determined 
by the Approving Official, and neither the State nor any of its 
subgrantees or contractors shall encumber the title or interest while 
such need exists.
    (c) Management and disposition. Subject to the requirement of 
paragraphs (b), (d), (e) and (f) of this section, States and their 
subgrantees and contractors shall manage and dispose of equipment 
acquired under the Section 402 program in accordance with State laws and 
procedures.
    (d) Major Purchases and dispositions. All purchases and dispositions 
of equipment with a useful life of more than one year and an acquisition 
cost of $5,000 or more must receive prior written approval from the 
Approving Official.
    (e) Right to transfer title. The Approving Official may reserve the 
right to transfer title to equipment acquired under the Section 402 
program to the Federal Government or to a third party when such third 
party is otherwise eligible under existing statutes. Any such transfer 
shall be subject to the following requirements:
    (1) The equipment shall be identified in the grant or otherwise made 
known to the State in writing;
    (2) The Approving Official shall issue disposition instructions 
within 120 calendar days after the equipment is determined to be no 
longer needed in the Section 402 program, in the absence of which the 
State shall follow the applicable procedures in 49 CFR part 18.
    (f) Federally-owned equipment. In the event a State or its 
subgrantee is provided Federally-owned equipment:
    (1) Title shall remain vested in the Federal Government;

[[Page 449]]

    (2) Management shall be in accordance with Federal rules and 
procedures, and an annual inventory listing shall be submitted;
    (3) The State or its subgrantee shall request disposition 
instructions from the Approving Official when the item is no longer 
needed in the Section 402 program.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.22  Changes.

    States shall provide documentary evidence of any reallocation of 
funds between program areas by submitting to the NHTSA regional office 
an amended HS form 217 (or its electronic equivalent), reflecting the 
changed allocation of funds, within 30 days of implementing the change.

[62 FR 34402, June 26, 1997, as amended at 64 FR 40764, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 1200.23  Vouchers and project agreements.

    Each State shall submit official vouchers for total expenses 
incurred to the Approving Official. Copies of the project agreement(s) 
and supporting documentation for the vouchers, and any amendments 
thereto, shall be made available for review by the Approving Official 
upon request.
    (a) Content of vouchers. At a minimum, each voucher shall provide 
the following information for expenses claimed in each program area:
    (1) Program Area;
    (2) Federal funds obligated;
    (3) Amount of Federal funds allocated to local benefit (provided 
mid-year (by March 31) and with the final voucher);
    (4) Cumulative Total Cost to Date;
    (5) Cumulative Federal Funds Expended;
    (6) Previous Amount Claimed;
    (7) Amount Claimed this Period;
    (8) Matching rate (or Special matching writeoff used, i.e., sliding 
scale rate authorized under 23 U.S.C. 120(a), determined in accordance 
with the applicable NHTSA Order).
    (b) Submission requirements. At a minimum, vouchers shall be 
submitted to the Approving Official on a quarterly basis, no later than 
15 working days after the end of each quarter, except that where a State 
receives funds by electronic transfer at an annualized rate of one 
million dollars or more, vouchers shall be submitted on a monthly basis, 
no later than 15 working days after the end of each month. Failure to 
meet these deadlines may result in delayed reimbursement.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.24  Program income.

    (a) Inclusions. Program income includes income from fees for 
services performed, from the use or rental of real or personal property 
acquired with grant funds, from the sale of commodities or items 
fabricated under the grant agreement, and from payments of principal and 
interest on loans made with grant funds.
    (b) Exclusions. Program income does not include interest on grant 
funds, rebates, credits, discounts, refunds, taxes, special assessments, 
levies, fines, proceeds from the sale of real property or equipment, 
income from royalties and license fees for copyrighted material, 
patents, and inventions, or interest on any of these.
    (c) Use of program income.--(1) Addition. Program income shall 
ordinarily be added to the funds committed to the Highway Safety Plan. 
Such program income shall be used to further the objectives of the 
program area under which it was generated.
    (2) Cost sharing or matching. Program income may be used to meet 
cost sharing or matching requirements only upon written approval of the 
Approving Official. Such use shall not increase the commitment of 
Federal funds.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.25  Improvement plan.

    If a review of the Annual Report required under Sec. 1200.33 of 
this part or of other relevant information indicates little or no 
progress toward meeting State goals, the Approving Official and State 
officials will jointly develop an improvement plan. This plan will 
detail strategies, program activities, and funding targets to meet the 
defined goals.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.26  Non-compliance.

    Where a State is found to be in non-compliance with the requirements 
of the Section 402 program or with applicable law, the special 
conditions for high-risk grantees and the enforcement procedures of 49 
CFR part 18, or the sanctions procedures of part 1206 of

[[Page 450]]

this chapter, may be applied as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.27  Appeals.

    Review of any written decision by an Approving Official under this 
part may be obtained by submitting a written appeal of such decision, 
signed by the Governor's Representative for Highway Safety, to the 
Approving Official. Such appeal shall be forwarded promptly to the NHTSA 
Associate Administrator for State and Community Services or the FHWA 
Regional Administrator with jurisdiction over the specific division, as 
appropriate. The decision of the NHTSA Associate Administrator or FHWA 
Regional Administrator shall be final and shall be transmitted to the 
Governor's Representative for Highway Safety through the cognizant 
Approving Official.


<R04>
                           Subpart D_Closeout


<R05>
Sec. 1200.30  Expiration of the right to incur costs.

    Unless extended in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1200.31 
of this part, the right to incur costs under Section 402 expires on the 
last day of the fiscal year to which it pertains. The State and its 
subgrantees and contractors may not incur costs for Federal 
reimbursement past the expiration date.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.31  Extension of the right to incur costs.

    Upon written request by the State, specifying the reasons therefor, 
the Approving Official may extend the right to incur costs for some 
portion of the State highway safety program by a maximum of 90 days. The 
approval of any such request for extension shall be in writing, shall 
specify the new expiration date, and shall be signed by the Approving 
Official. If an extension is granted, the State and its subgrantees and 
contractors may continue to incur costs in accordance with the Highway 
Safety Plan until the new expiration date, and the due dates for other 
submissions covered by this subpart shall be based upon the new 
expiration date. However, in no case shall any extension be deemed to 
authorize the obligation of additional Federal funds beyond those 
already obligated to the State, nor shall any extension be deemed to 
extend the due date for submission of the Annual Report. Only one 
extension shall be allowed during each fiscal year.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.32  Final voucher.

    Each State shall submit a final voucher which satisfies the 
requirements of Sec. 1200.23(a) of this part within 90 days after the 
expiration of each fiscal year, unless extended in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 1200.31 of this part. The final voucher constitutes 
the final financial reconciliation for each fiscal year.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.33  Annual report.

    Within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year, each State shall 
submit an Annual Report. This report shall describe:
    (a) The State's progress in meeting its highway safety goals, using 
performance measures identified in the Performance Plan. Both Baseline 
and most current level of performance under each measure will be given 
for each goal.
    (b) How the projects and activities funded during the fiscal year 
contributed to meeting the State's highway safety goals. Where data 
becomes available, a State should report progress from prior year 
projects that have contributed to meeting current State highway safety 
goals.

[62 FR 34402, June 26, 1997, as amended at 64 FR 40764, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 1200.34  Disposition of unexpended balances.

    Any funds which remain unexpended after final reconciliation shall 
be carried forward, credited to the State's highway safety account for 
the new fiscal year, and made immediately available for use under the 
State's new highway safety program, subject to the approval requirements 
of Sec. 1200.13 of this part. Carry-forward funds must be identified by 
the program area from which they are removed when they are reprogrammed 
from the previous fiscal year. Once so identified, such funds are 
available for use without regard to the program area from which they 
were carried forward, unless specially earmarked by the Congress.

[[Page 451]]


<R05>
Sec. 1200.35  Post-grant adjustments.

    The closeout of a highway safety program in a fiscal year does not 
affect the ability of NHTSA or FHWA to disallow costs and recover funds 
on the basis of a later audit or other review or the State's obligation 
to return any funds due as a result of later refunds, corrections, or 
other transactions.


<R05>
Sec. 1200.36  Continuing requirements.

    The following provisions shall have continuing applicability, 
notwithstanding the closeout of a highway safety program in a fiscal 
year:
    (a) The requirements governing equipment, as provided in Sec. 
1200.21 of this part;
    (b) The audit requirements and records retention and access 
requirements of 49 CFR part 18.

[[Page 452]]


<R03>
                         SUBCHAPTER B_GUIDELINES



                          PART 1204 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 1205_HIGHWAY SAFETY PROGRAMS; DETERMINATIONS OF 
EFFECTIVENESS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1205.1 Scope.
1205.2 Purpose.
1205.3 Identification of National Priority Program Areas.
1205.4 Funding requirements.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 402; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 
and 1.50.

    Source: 47 FR 15120, Apr. 8, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1205.1  Scope.

    This part identifies those highway safety programs that are eligible 
for Federal funding under the State and Community Highway Safety Grant 
Program (23 U.S.C. 402) and specifies the Federal funding requirements 
for those programs.


<R05>
Sec. 1205.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to establish national highway safety 
priorities and establish program areas within which highway safety 
programs developed by the states would be eligible to receive Federal 
funding.


<R05>
Sec. 1205.3  Identification of National Priority Program Areas.

    (a) Under statutory provisions administered by NHTSA, the following 
NHTSA-administered highway safety program areas have been identified as 
encompassing a major highway safety problem which is of national 
concern, and for which effective countermeasures have been identified. 
Programs developed in such areas are eligible for Federal funding, 
pursuant to guidelines issued by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration and the review procedure set forth in Sec. 1205.4:
    (1) Alcohol and Other Drug Countermeasures
    (2) Police Traffic Services
    (3) Occupant Protection
    (4) Traffic Records
    (5) Emergency Medical Services
    (6) Motorcycle Safety
    (b) Under statutory provisions administered by FHWA, the following 
FHWA-administered highway safety program area has been identified as 
encompassing a major highway safety problem which is of national 
concern, and for which effective countermeasures have been identified. 
The program developed in this area is eligible for Federal funding, 
pursuant to provisions of 23 U.S.C. 402(g), guidelines issued by the 
Federal Highway Administration and the review procedures set forth in 
Sec. 1205.4: Roadway Safety.
    (c) Under statutory provisions jointly administered by NHTSA and 
FHWA, the following highway safety program areas, jointly administered 
by NHTSA and FHWA, have been identified as encompassing a major highway 
safety problem which is of national concern, and for which effective 
countermeasures have been identified. Programs developed in such areas 
are eligible for Federal funding, pursuant to guidelines issued by NHTSA 
and FHWA and the review procedures set forth in Sec. 1205.4:
    (1) Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety
    (2) Speed Control

[47 FR 15120, Apr. 8, 1982, as amended at 53 FR 11270, Apr. 6, 1988; 56 
FR 50255, Oct. 4, 1991; 59 FR 64127, Dec. 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1205.4  Funding requirements.

    A State may use funds made available under 23 U.S.C. 402 to support 
projects and activities within--
    (a) Any National priority program area identified in Sec. 1205.3 of 
this part; or
    (b) Any other highway safety program area that is identified in the 
Highway Safety Plan required under Sec. 1200.10(b) of this chapter as 
encompassing a major highway safety problem in the State and for which 
effective countermeasures have been identified.

[62 FR 34405, June 26, 1997]

[[Page 453]]


<R03>
PART 1206_RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR INVOKING SANCTIONS UNDER THE HIGHWAY 
SAFETY ACT OF 1966--Table of Contents




Sec.
1206.1 Scope.
1206.2 Purpose.
1206.3 Definitions.
1206.4 Sanctions.
1206.5 Review process.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 402; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 and 
1.50.

    Source: 61 FR 28747, June 6, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1206.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures governing determinations to invoke 
the sanctions applicable to any State that does not comply with the 
highway safety program requirements in the Highway Safety Act of 1966, 
as amended (23 U.S.C. 402).


<R05>
Sec. 1206.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe procedures for determining 
whether and the extent to which the 23 U.S.C. 402 sanctions should be 
invoked, and to ensure that, should sanctions be proposed to be invoked 
against a State, the State has a full and fair opportunity to be heard 
on the issues involved.


<R05>
Sec. 1206.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Administrators means the Administrators of the Federal Highway 
Administration and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (b) Highway safety program means an approved program in accordance 
with 23 U.S.C. 402, which is designed by a State to reduce traffic 
accidents, and death, injuries and property damage resulting therefrom.
    (c) Implementing means both having and putting into effect an 
approved highway safety program.


<R05>
Sec. 1206.4  Sanctions.

    (a) The Administrators shall not apportion any funds under 23 U.S.C. 
402 to any State which is not implementing a highway safety program.
    (b) If the Administrators have apportioned funds to a State and 
subsequently determine that the State is not implementing a highway 
safety program, the Administrators shall reduce the funds apportioned 
under 23 U.S.C. 402 to the State by amounts equal to not less than 50 
per centum, until such time as the Administrators determine that the 
State is implementing a highway safety program.
    (c) The Administrators shall consider the gravity of the State's 
failure to implement a highway safety program in determining the amount 
of the reduction.
    (d) If the Administrators determine that a State has begun 
implementing a highway safety program before the end of the fiscal year 
for which the funds were withheld, they shall promptly apportion to the 
State the funds withheld from its apportionment.
    (e) If the Administrators determine that the State did not correct 
its failure before the end of the fiscal year for which the funds were 
withheld, the Administrators shall reapportion the withheld funds to the 
other States, in accordance with the formula specified in 23 U.S.C. 
402(c), not later than 30 days after such determination.


<R05>
Sec. 1206.5  Review process.

    (a) In any fiscal year, if the Administrators determine, based on a 
preliminary review, that a State is not implementing a highway safety 
program in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 402, the Administrators shall issue 
jointly to the State an advance notice, advising the State that the 
Administrators expect to either withhold funds from apportionment under 
23 U.S.C. 402, or reduce the State's apportioned funds under 23 U.S.C. 
402. The Administrators shall state the amount of the expected 
withholding or reduction. The advance notice will normally be sent not 
later than ninety days prior to final apportionment.
    (b) If the Administrators issue an advance notice to a State, based 
on a preliminary review, the State may, within 30 days of its receipt of 
the advance notice, submit documentation demonstrating that it is 
implementing a

[[Page 454]]

highway safety program. Documentation shall be submitted to the 
Administrator for NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street SW, Washington, D.C. 20590.
    (c) If the Administrators decide, after reviewing all relevant 
information, that a State is not implementing a highway safety program 
in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 402, they shall issue a final notice, 
advising the State either of the funds being withheld from apportionment 
under 23 U.S.C. 402, or of the apportioned funds being reduced under 23 
U.S.C. 402 and the amount of the withholding or reduction. The final 
notice of a withholding will normally be issued on October 1. The final 
notice of a reduction will be issued at the time of a final decision.


<R03>
PART 1208_NATIONAL MINIMUM DRINKING AGE--Table of Contents




Sec.
1208.1 Scope.
1208.2 Purpose.
1208.3 Definitions.
1208.4 Adoption of National Minimum Drinking Age.
1208.5 Unavailability of withheld funds.
1208.6 Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 158; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 and 
1.50.

    Source: 51 FR 10380, Mar. 26, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1208.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement 23 
U.S.C. 158, which establishes the National Minimum Drinking Age.


<R05>
Sec. 1208.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to clarify the provisions which a State 
must have incorporated into its laws in order to prevent the withholding 
of Federal-aid highway funds for noncompliance with the National Minimum 
Drinking Age.


<R05>
Sec. 1208.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Alcoholic beverage means beer, distilled spirits and wine containing 
one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. Beer includes, but 
is not limited to, ale, lager, porter, stout, sake, and other similar 
fermented beverages brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part or 
from any substitute therefor. Distilled spirits include alcohol, ethanol 
or spirits or wine in any form, including all dilutions and mixtures 
thereof from whatever process produced.
    Public possession means the possession of any alcoholic beverage for 
any reason, including consumption on any street or highway or in any 
public place or in any place open to the public (including a club which 
is de facto open to the public). The term does not apply to the 
possession of alcohol for an established religious purpose; when 
accompanied by a parent, spouse or legal guardian age 21 or older; for 
medical purposes when prescribed or administered by a licensed 
physician, pharmacist, dentist, nurse, hospital or medical institution; 
in private clubs or establishments; or to the sale, handling, transport, 
or service in dispensing of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to lawful 
employment of a person under the age of twenty-one years by a duly 
licensed manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer of alcoholic beverages.
    Purchase means to acquire by the payment of money or other 
consideration.


<R05>
Sec. 1208.4  Adoption of National Minimum Drinking Age.

    The Secretary shall withhold ten percent of the amount required to 
be apportioned to any State under each of Sec. Sec. 104(b)(1), 
104(b)(2), 104(b)(5) and 104(b)(6) of title 23 U.S.C. on the first day 
of each fiscal year in which the purchase or public possession in such 
State of any alcoholic beverage by a person who is less than twenty-one 
years of age is lawful.

[60 FR 66076, Dec. 21, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 1208.5  Unavailability of withheld funds.

    Funds withheld under Sec. 1208.4 from apportionment to any State 
will not be available for apportionment to the State.

[60 FR 66076, Dec. 21, 1995]

[[Page 455]]


<R05>
Sec. 1208.6  Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    (a) Every fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with the National Minimum Drinking Age, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's 
preliminary review of its statutes for compliance or non-compliance, 
will be advised of the funds expected to be withheld under Sec. 1208.4 
from apportionment, as part of the advance notice of apportionments 
required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), normally not later than ninety days 
prior to final apportionment.
    (b) If NHTSA and FHWA determine that the State is in noncompliance 
with the National Minimum Drinking Age based on their preliminary 
review, the State may, within 30 days of its receipt of the advance 
notice of apportionments, submit documentation showing why it is in 
compliance. Documentation shall be submitted to the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW, Washington, DC 
20590.
    (c) Every fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with the National Minimum Drinking Age, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's 
final determination of compliance or noncompliance, will receive notice 
of the funds being withheld under Sec. 1208.4 from apportionment, as 
part of the certification of apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 
104(e), which normally occurs on October 1 of each fiscal year.

[53 FR 31322, Aug. 18, 1988. Redesignated at 60 FR 66076, Dec. 21, 1995]


<R03>
PART 1210_OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES BY INTOXICATED MINORS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1210.1 Scope.
1210.2 Purpose.
1210.3 Definitions.
1210.4 Adoption of zero tolerance law.
1210.5 Certification requirements.
1210.6 Period of availability of withheld funds.
1210.7 Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.
1210.8 Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.
1210.9 Effect of noncompliance.
1210.10 Procedures affecting states in noncompliance.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 161; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 and 
1.50.

    Source: 61 FR 55217, Oct. 25, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement 23 
U.S.C. 161, which encourages States to enact and enforce zero tolerance 
laws.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the steps that States must 
take to avoid the withholding of Federal-aid highway funds for 
noncompliance with 23 U.S.C. 161.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Alcohol concentration means either grams of alcohol per 100 
milliliters of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath.
    (b) BAC means either blood or breath alcohol concentration.
    (c) Operating a motor vehicle means driving or being in actual 
physical control of a motor vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.4  Adoption of zero tolerance law.

    (a) The Secretary shall withhold five percent of the amount required 
to be apportioned to any State under each of sections 104(b)(1), 
104(b)(3) and 104(b)(5) of title 23, United States Code, on the first 
day of fiscal year 1999 if the State does not meet the requirements of 
this part on that date.
    (b) The Secretary shall withhold ten percent of the amount required 
to be apportioned to any State under each of sections 104(b)(1), 
104(b)(3) and 104(b)(5) of title 23, United States Code, on the first 
day of fiscal year 2000 and any subsequent fiscal year if the State does 
not meet the requirements of this part on that date.
    (c) A State meets the requirements of this section if the State has 
enacted and is enforcing a law that considers an individual under the 
age of 21 who has a BAC of 0.02 percent or greater while operating a 
motor vehicle in the State to be driving while intoxicated or driving 
under the influence of alcohol. The law must:

[[Page 456]]

    (1) Apply to all individuals under the age of 21;
    (2) Set a BAC of not higher than 0.02 percent as the legal limit;
    (3) Make operating a motor vehicle by an individual under age 21 
above the legal limit a per se offense;
    (4) Provide for primary enforcement; and
    (5) Provide that license suspensions or revocations are authorized 
for any violation of the State zero tolerance law.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.5  Certification requirements.

    (a) Until a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 161, to avoid the withholding of funds in any 
fiscal year, beginning with FY 1999, the State shall certify to the 
Secretary of Transportation, before the last day of the previous fiscal 
year, that it meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 161, and this part.
    (b) The certification shall contain:
    (1) A copy of the State zero tolerance law, regulation, or binding 
policy directive implementing or interpreting such law or regulation, 
that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 161 and Sec. 1210.4(c); and
    (2) A statement by an appropriate State official, that the State has 
enacted and is enforcing a conforming zero tolerance law. The certifying 
statement shall be worded as follows:

I, (Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, has enacted and is enforcing a zero tolerance 
law that conforms to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 161 and 23 CFR 
1210.4(c).

    (c) An original and four copies of the certification shall be 
submitted to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Administrator. Each Regional 
Administrator will forward the certifications he or she receives to 
appropriate NHTSA and FHWA offices.
    (d) Once a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 161, it is not required to submit additional 
certifications, except that the State shall promptly submit an amendment 
or supplement to its certification provided under paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of this section if the State's zero tolerance legislation changes.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.6  Period of availability of withheld funds.

    (a) Funds withheld under Sec. 1210.4 from apportionment to any 
State on or before September 30, 2000, will remain available for 
apportionment until the end of the third fiscal year following the 
fiscal year for which the funds are authorized to be appropriated.
    (b) Funds withheld under Sec. 1210.4 from apportionment to any 
State after September 30, 2000 will not be available for apportionment 
to the State.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.7  Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.

    Funds withheld from a State from apportionment under Sec. 1210.4, 
which remain available for apportionment under Sec. 1210.6(a), will be 
made available to the State if it conforms to the requirements of 
Sec. Sec. 1210.4 and 1210.5 before the last day of the period of 
availability as defined in Sec. 1210.6(a).


<R05>
Sec. 1210.8  Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.

    Funds apportioned pursuant to Sec. 1210.7 will remain available for 
expenditure until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal 
year in which the funds are apportioned.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.9  Effect of noncompliance.

    If a State has not met the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 161 and this 
part at the end of the period for which funds withheld under Sec. 
1210.4 are available for apportionment to a State under Sec. 1210.6, 
then such funds shall lapse.


<R05>
Sec. 1210.10  Procedures affecting states in noncompliance.

    (a) Each fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 161 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's 
preliminary review of its law, will be advised of the funds expected to 
be withheld under Sec. 1210.4 from apportionment, as part of the 
advance notice of apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), 
normally not later than ninety days prior to final apportionment.
    (b) If NHTSA and FHWA determine that the State is not in compliance

[[Page 457]]

with 23 U.S.C. 161 and this part, based on the agencies' preliminary 
review, the State may, within 30 days of its receipt of the advance 
notice of apportionments, submit documentation showing why it is in 
compliance. Documentation shall be submitted to the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 
20590.
    (c) Each fiscal year, each State determined not to be in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 161 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's final 
determination, will receive notice of the funds being withheld under 
Sec. 1210.4 from apportionment, as part of the certification of 
apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), which normally occurs on 
October 1 of each fiscal year.


<R03>
PART 1215_USE OF SAFETY BELTS_COMPLIANCE AND TRANSFER-OF-FUNDS 
PROCEDURES--Table of Contents




Sec.
1215.1 Scope.
1215.2 Purpose.
1215.3 Definitions.
1215.4 Compliance criteria.
1215.5 Exemptions.
1215.6 Review and notification of compliance status.
1215.7 Transfer of funds.
1215.8 Use of transferred funds.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 153; Secs. 205(e) and 355, Pub. L. 104-59; 
delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 and 1.50.

    Source: 58 FR 44759, Aug. 25, 1993, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1215.1  Scope.

    This part establishes criteria, in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 153, as 
amended, and Section 355 of the National Highway System Designation Act 
of 1995, for determining compliance with the requirement that States not 
having safety belt use laws be subject to a transfer of Federal-aid 
highway apportionments under 23 U.S.C. 104 (b)(1), (b)(2), and (b)(3) to 
the highway safety program apportionment under 23 U.S.C. 402.

[61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.2  Purpose.

    This part clarifies the provisions which a State must incorporate 
into its safety belt law to prevent the transfer of a portion of its 
Federal-aid highway funds to the section 402 highway safety program 
apportionment, describes notification and transfer procedures, 
establishes parameters for the use of transferred funds, and provides 
alternate compliance criteria for New Hampshire and Maine.

[61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    FHWA means the Federal Highway Administration.
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power 
manufactured primarily for use on public highways, except any vehicle 
operated exclusively on a rail or rails.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    Passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle which is designed for 
transporting 10 individuals or less, including the driver, except that 
such term does not include a vehicle which is constructed on a truck 
chassis, a motorcycle, a trailer, or any motor vehicle which is not 
required on the date of the enactment of this section under a Federal 
motor vehicle safety standard to be equipped with a belt system.
    Safety belt means, with respect to open-body passenger vehicles, 
including convertibles, an occupant restraint system consisting of a lap 
belt or a lap belt and a detachable shoulder belt; and with respect to 
other passenger vehicles, an occupant restraint system consisting of 
integrated lap shoulder belts.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Transportation.

[58 FR 44759, Aug. 25, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.4  Compliance criteria.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (c) or (d) of this section, in 
order to avoid the transfer or reservation (as applicable) specified in 
Sec. 1215.7, a State must have and continue in effect at all times 
during the fiscal year a law which makes unlawful throughout the State 
the operation of a passenger vehicle whenever an individual in a front 
seat of the vehicle (other than a child

[[Page 458]]

who is secured in a child restraint system) does not have a safety belt 
properly fastened about the individual's body.
    (b) A State that enacts the law specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section will be determined to comply with 23 U.S.C. 153, provided that 
any exemptions are consistent with Sec. 1215.5.
    (c) If New Hampshire or Maine enacts a law described in paragraph 
(a) of this section by January 27, 1996, the State shall be deemed as 
having that law in effect on September 30, 1995.
    (d)(1) If the Secretary certifies in a fiscal year that New 
Hampshire or Maine has achieved the safety belt use rate specified in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section, the State shall be considered as 
complying with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) The safety belt use rate must be not less than 50 percent in 
each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996, and not less than the national 
average as determined by the Secretary in each fiscal year thereafter.

[61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.5  Exemptions.

    (a) Safety belt use laws exempting persons with medical excuses, 
persons in emergency vehicles, persons in the custody of police, persons 
in public and livery conveyances, persons in parade vehicles, persons in 
positions not equipped with safety belts, and postal, utility and other 
commercial drivers who make frequent stops in the course of their 
business shall be deemed to comply with 23 U.S.C. 153.
    (b) Safety belt use laws exempting vehicles equipped with air bags 
shall be deemed not to comply with 23 U.S.C. 153.
    (c) An exemption not identified in paragraph (a) of this section 
shall be deemed to comply with 23 U.S.C. 153 only if NHTSA and FHWA 
determine that it is consistent with the intent of Sec. 1215.4(a), and 
applies to situations in which the risk to occupants is very low or in 
which there are exigent justifications.

[61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.6  Review and notification of compliance status.

    Review of each State's laws and notification of compliance status 
shall occur each fiscal year, in accordance with the following 
procedures:
    (a) NHTSA and FHWA will review appropriate State laws for compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 153. States initially found to be in non-compliance will 
be notified of such finding and of funds expected to be transferred or 
reserved (as applicable) under Sec. 1215.7, through the advance notice 
of apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), normally not later 
than ninety days prior to final apportionment.
    (b) A State notified of non-compliance under paragraph (a) of this 
section may, within 30 days after its receipt of the advance notice of 
apportionments, submit documentation showing why it is in compliance to 
the Associate Administrator for State and Community Services, NHTSA, 400 
Seventh Street, SW, Washington, D.C., 20950.
    (c) Each fiscal year, States determined to be in non-compliance with 
23 U.S.C. 153 will receive notice of the funds being transferred or 
reserved (as applicable) under Sec. 1215.7, through the certification 
of apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), normally on October 
1.

[61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.7  Transfer of funds.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, if at any 
time in a fiscal year beginning after September 30, 1994, a State does 
not have in effect a law described in Sec. 1215.4(a), the Secretary 
shall transfer 3 percent of the funds apportioned to the State for the 
succeeding fiscal year under 23 U.S.C. 104 (b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(3) to 
the apportionment of the State under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (b) For New Hampshire or Maine, except as provided in Sec. 
1215.4(c), if at any time in a fiscal year beginning after September 30, 
1994, the State does not have in effect a law described in Sec. 
1215.4(a), the Secretary shall reserve 3 percent of the funds to be 
apportioned to the State for the succeeding fiscal year under 23 U.S.C. 
104 (b)(1), (b)(2)

[[Page 459]]

and (b)(3) if the Secretary has not certified, in accordance with Sec. 
1215.4(d), that the State has achieved the applicable safety belt use 
rate.
    (c) If, at the end of a fiscal year in which the funds are reserved 
for New Hampshire or Maine under paragraph (b) of this section, the 
Secretary has not certified that the State achieved the applicable 
safety belt use rate, the Secretary shall transfer the funds reserved 
from the State to the apportionment of the State under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (d) Any obligation limitation existing on transferred funds prior to 
the transfer will apply, proportionately, to those funds after transfer.

[61 FR 28749, June 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1215.8  Use of transferred funds.

    (a) Any funds transferred under Sec. 1215.7 may be used for 
approved projects in any section 402 program area.
    (b) Any funds transferred under Sec. 1215.7 shall not be subject to 
Federal earmarking of any amounts or percentages for specific program 
activities.
    (c) The Federal share of the cost of any project carried out under 
section 402 with the transferred funds shall be 100 percent.
    (d) In the event of a transfer of funds under Sec. 1215.7, the 40 
percent political subdivision participation in State highway safety 
programs and the 10 percent limitation on the Federal contribution for 
Planning and Administration activities carried out under section 402 
shall be based upon the sum of the funds transferred and amounts 
otherwise available for expenditure under section 402.


<R03>
PART 1225_OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES BY INTOXICATED PERSONS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1225.1 Scope.
1225.2 Purpose.
1225.3 Definitions.
1225.4 Adoption of 0.08 BAC per se law.
1225.5 General requirements for incentive grant program.
1225.6 Award procedures for incentive grant program.
1225.7 Certification requirements for sanction program.
1225.8 Funds withheld from apportionment.
1225.9 Period of availability of withheld funds.
1225.10 Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.
1225.11 Notification of compliance.
1225.12 Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

Appendix A to Part 1225--Effects of the 0.08 BAC Sanction Program on 
          Non-Complying States

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 163; sec. 351, Pub. L. 106-346--Appendix, 114 
Stat. 1356A-34, 35; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 and 1.50.

    Source: 68 FR 50708, Aug. 22, 2003, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement 23 
U.S.C. 163, which encourages States to enact and enforce 0.08 BAC per se 
laws through the use of incentive grants and Section 351 of Public Law 
106-346--Appendix, which requires the withholding of Federal-aid highway 
funds from any State that has not enacted and is not enforcing a 0.08 
BAC per se law as described in 23 U.S.C. 163.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the steps that States must 
take to qualify for incentive grant funds in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 
163; and the steps that States must take to avoid the withholding of 
funds as required by Section 351 of Public Law 106-346--Appendix.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Alcohol concentration means either grams of alcohol per 100 
milliliters of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath.
    (b) ALR means either administrative license revocation or 
administrative license suspension.
    (c) BAC means either blood or breath alcohol concentration.
    (d) BAC per se law means a law that makes it an offense, in and of 
itself, to operate a motor vehicle with an alcohol concentration at or 
above a specified level.
    (e) Citations to State law means citations to all sections of the 
State's law relied on to demonstrate compliance with 23 U.S.C. 163, 
including all applicable definitions and provisions of the

[[Page 460]]

State's criminal code and, if the State has an ALR law, all applicable 
provisions of the State's ALR law.
    (f) Has enacted and is enforcing means the State's law is in effect 
and the State has begun to implement the law.
    (g) Operating a motor vehicle means driving or being in actual 
physical control of a motor vehicle.
    (h) Standard driving while intoxicated offense means the non-BAC per 
se driving while intoxicated offense in the State.
    (i) State means any one of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, 
or Puerto Rico.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.4  Adoption of 0.08 BAC per se law.

    In order to avoid the withholding of funds as specified in Sec. 
1225.8 of this part, and to qualify for an incentive grant under Sec. 
1225.5 of this part, a State must demonstrate that it has enacted and is 
enforcing a law that provides that any person with a blood or breath 
alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.08 percent or greater while operating a 
motor vehicle in the State shall be deemed to have committed a per se 
offense of driving while intoxicated or an equivalent per se offense. 
The law must:
    (a) Apply to all persons;
    (b) Set a BAC of not higher than 0.08 percent as the legal limit;
    (c) Make operating a motor vehicle by an individual at or above the 
legal limit a per se offense;
    (d) Provide for primary enforcement;
    (e) Apply the 0.08 BAC legal limit to the State's criminal code and, 
if the State has an administrative license suspension or revocation 
(ALR) law, to its ALR law; and
    (f) Be deemed to be or be equivalent to the standard driving while 
intoxicated offense in the State.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.5  General requirements for incentive grant program.

    (a) Certification requirements. (1) To qualify for a first-year 
grant under 23 U.S.C. 163, a State must submit a certification by an 
appropriate State official, that the State has enacted and is enforcing 
a 0.08 BAC per se law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 1225.4 of 
this part and that the funds will be used for eligible projects and 
programs.
    (i) If the State's 0.08 BAC per se law is currently in effect and is 
being enforced, the certification shall be worded as follows:

(Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------ has enacted and is enforcing a 0.08 BAC per se 
law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR 1225.4, (citations to 
State law), and that the funds received by the (State or Commonwealth) 
of -------- under 23 U.S.C. 163 will be used for projects eligible for 
assistance under title 23 of the United States Code, which include 
highway construction as well as highway safety projects and programs.

    (ii) If the State's 0.08 BAC per se law is not currently in effect, 
but will become effective and be enforced before the end of the current 
fiscal year, the certification shall be worded as follows:

(Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of -------- has enacted a 0.08 BAC per se law that 
conforms to 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR 1225.4, (citations to State law), 
and will become effective and be enforced as of (effective date of the 
law), and that the funds received by the (State or Commonwealth) of ----
---- under 23 U.S.C. 163 will be used for projects eligible for 
assistance under title 23 of the United States Code, which include 
highway construction as well as highway safety projects and programs.

    (2) To qualify for a subsequent-year grant under 23 U.S.C. 163, a 
State must submit a certification by an appropriate State official.
    (i) If the State's 0.08 BAC per se law has not changed since the 
State last qualified for grant funds under this program, the 
certification shall be worded as follows:

(Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of -------- has not changed and is enforcing a 0.08 BAC 
per se law, which conforms to 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR 1225.4, and that 
the funds received by the (State or Commonwealth) of -------- under 23 
U.S.C. 163 will be used for projects eligible for assistance under title 
23 of the United States Code, which include highway construction as well 
as highway safety projects and programs.


[[Page 461]]


    (ii) If the State's 0.08 BAC per se law has changed since the State 
last qualified for grant funds under this program, the certification 
shall be worded as follows:

(Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of -------- has amended and is enforcing a 0.08 BAC per se 
law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR 1225.4, (citations to 
State law), and that the funds received by the (State or Commonwealth) 
of --------, under 23 U.S.C. 163 will be used for projects eligible for 
assistance under title 23 of the United States Code, which include 
highway construction as well as highway safety projects and programs.

    (3) An original and four copies of the certification shall be 
submitted to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Administrator. Each Regional 
Administrator will forward the certifications it receives to appropriate 
NHTSA and FHWA offices.
    (4) Each State that submits a certification will be informed by the 
agencies whether or not it qualifies for funds.
    (5) To qualify for grant funds in a fiscal year, certifications must 
be received by the agencies not later than July 15 of that fiscal year.
    (b) Limitation on grants. A State may receive grant funds, subject 
to the following limitations:
    (1) The amount of a grant apportioned to a State under Sec. 1225.4 
of this part shall be determined by multiplying:
    (i) The amount authorized to carry out section 163 of 23 U.S.C. for 
the fiscal year; by
    (ii) The ratio that the amount of funds apportioned to each such 
State under section 402 for such fiscal year bears to the total amount 
of funds apportioned to all such States under section 402 for such 
fiscal year.
    (2) A State may obligate grant funds apportioned under this Part for 
any project eligible for assistance under title 23 of the United States 
Code.
    (3) The Federal share of the cost of a project funded with grant 
funds awarded under this part shall be 100 percent.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.6  Award procedures for incentive grant program.

    (a) In each Federal fiscal year, grant funds will be apportioned to 
eligible States upon submission and approval of the documentation 
required by Sec. 1225.5(a) and subject to the limitations in Sec. 
1225.5(b). The obligation authority associated with these funds is 
subject to the limitation on obligation pursuant to section 1102 of the 
Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21).
    (b) As soon as practicable after the apportionment in a fiscal year, 
but in no event later than September 30 of the fiscal year, the 
Governor's Representative for Highway Safety and the Secretary of the 
State's Department of Transportation for each State that receives an 
apportionment shall jointly identify, in writing to the appropriate 
NHTSA Regional Administrator, the amounts of the State's apportionment 
that will be obligated to highway safety program areas and to Federal-
aid highway projects. Each NHTSA Regional Administrator will forward 
copies of the joint letters to the appropriate NHTSA and FHWA offices.
    (c) Apportionments will not be made by the NHTSA and FHWA unless 
this letter from the State is received.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.7  Certification requirements for sanction program.

    (a) Beginning with FY 2004, to avoid the withholding of funds, each 
State shall certify to the Secretary of Transportation, before the last 
day of the previous fiscal year, that it meets all the requirements of 
23 U.S.C. 163 and this part.
    (b) The certification shall contain a statement from an appropriate 
State official that the State has enacted and is enforcing a 0.08 BAC 
per se law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR part 1225.
    (1) If the State's 0.08 BAC per se law is currently in effect and is 
being enforced, the certification shall be worded as follows:

I, (name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, has enacted and is enforcing a 0.08 BAC per 
se law that conforms to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR 
1225.4, (citations to State law).

    (2) If the State's 0.08 BAC per se law is not currently in effect, 
but will become effective and be enforced before

[[Page 462]]

the end of the current fiscal year, the certification shall be worded as 
follows:

I, (name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, has enacted a 0.08 BAC per se law that 
conforms to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and 23 CFR 1225.4, 
(citations to State law), and will become effective and be enforced as 
of (effective date of the law).

    (c) An original and four copies of the certification shall be 
submitted to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Administrator. Each NHTSA 
Regional Administrator will forward copies of the certifications 
received to the appropriate NHTSA and FHWA offices.
    (d) Once a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and this part, it is not required to 
submit additional certifications, except that the State shall promptly 
submit an amendment or supplement to its certification provided under 
this section if the State's 0.08 BAC per se law changes.
    (e) Certifications submitted in FY 2003. (1) Any State that submits 
a certification of compliance under Sec. 1225.5 of this part, in 
conformance with the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163, on or before July 
15, 2003, will qualify for an incentive grant in FY 2003 and will avoid 
the withholding of funds in FY 2004. All certifications submitted in 
conformance with the incentive grant program will meet the certification 
requirements of the sanction program.
    (2) Any State that submits a certification of compliance under this 
section, in conformance with the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163, between 
July 16, 2003 and September 30, 2003, will not qualify for an incentive 
grant in FY 2003, but will meet the certification requirements of the 
sanction program, thereby avoiding the withholding of funds in FY 2004.
    (f) Certifications submitted in FY 2004 or thereafter. Any State 
that has been in noncompliance with the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 
and this part, in or after FY 2004, will initially be subject to a 
withholding of funds in accordance with Sec. 1225.8 of this part. 
Following the submission of a conforming certification of compliance by 
such States, all withheld funds will be restored to a States' 
appropriate apportionment categories in accordance with Sec. 1225.9 of 
this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.8  Funds withheld from apportionment.

    (a) Beginning in fiscal year 2004, the Secretary shall withhold 2 
percent of the amount required to be apportioned for Federal-aid 
highways to any State under each of paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of 
section 104(b) of title 23, United States Code, if a State has not 
enacted and is not enforcing a law that meets the requirements of 23 
U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 1225.4 of this part.
    (b) In fiscal year 2005, the Secretary shall withhold 4 percent of 
the amount required to be apportioned for Federal-aid highways to any 
State under each of paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of section 104(b) of 
title 23, United States Code, if a State has not enacted and is not 
enforcing a law that meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 
1225.4 of this part.
    (c) In fiscal year 2006, the Secretary shall withhold 6 percent of 
the amount required to be apportioned for Federal-aid highways to any 
State under each of paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of section 104(b) of 
title 23, United States Code, if a State has not enacted and is not 
enforcing a law that meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 
1225.4 of this part.
    (d) In fiscal year 2007, and in each fiscal year thereafter, the 
Secretary shall withhold 8 percent of the amount required to be 
apportioned for Federal-aid highways to any State under each of 
paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of section 104(b) of title 23, United 
States Code, if a State has not enacted and is not enforcing a law that 
meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 1225.4 of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.9  Period of availability of withheld funds.

    If a State meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 1225.4 
of this part within 4 years from the date that a State's apportionment 
is reduced under Sec. 1225.8, the apportionment for such State shall be 
increased by an amount equal to the reduction, as illustrated

[[Page 463]]

by appendix A of this part. The restored apportionment will be available 
to a State, as quickly as possible, upon a determination by NHTSA that 
the State is in conformance and notification to the FHWA.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.10  Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.

    If a State has not met the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and Sec. 
1225.4 of this part by October 1, 2007, the funds withheld under Sec. 
1225.8 shall begin to lapse and will no longer be available for 
apportionment to the State, in accordance with appendix A of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.11  Notification of compliance.

    (a) Beginning with FY 2004, NHTSA and FHWA will notify States of 
their compliance or noncompliance with the statutory and regulatory 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 163 and this part, based on a review of 
certifications received. States will be required to submit their 
certifications on or before September 30, to avoid the withholding of 
funds in a fiscal year.
    (b) This notification of compliance will take place through FHWA's 
normal certification of apportionments process. If the agencies do not 
receive a certification from a State, by June 15 of any fiscal year, or 
if the certification does not conform to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 
163 and this part, the agencies will make an initial determination that 
the State is not in compliance.


<R05>
Sec. 1225.12  Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    (a) Each fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 163 and this part, based on NHTSA and FHWA's preliminary 
review of its certification, will be advised of the amount of funds 
expected to be withheld under Sec. 1225.8 from apportionment, as part 
of the advance notice of apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), 
which is ordinarily issued on July 1 of each fiscal year.
    (b) If NHTSA and FHWA determine that any State is not in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 163 and this part, based on the agencies' preliminary 
review, the State may submit documentation showing why it is in 
compliance. States will have until September 30 to rebut the initial 
determination or to come into compliance with 23 U.S.C. and this part. 
Documentation shall be submitted through NHTSA's Regional 
Administrators, who will refer the requests to appropriate NHTSA and 
FHWA offices for review.
    (c) Each fiscal year, each State determined not to be in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 163 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's final 
determination, will receive notice of the funds being withheld under 
Sec. 1225.8 from apportionment, as part of the certification of 
apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), which normally occurs on 
October 1 of each fiscal year.

  Appendix A to Part 1225--Effects of the 0.08 BAC Sanction Program on 
                          Non-Complying States

    Effects of the 0.08 BAC Sanction Program on Non-Complying States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Fiscal  year          Withhold                 Lapse
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2004......................          2%
2005......................           4
2006......................           6
2007......................           8
2008......................           8  2% withheld in FY04.
2009......................           8  4% withheld in FY05.
2010......................           8  6% withheld in FY06.
2011......................           8  8% withheld in FY07.
2012......................           8  8% withheld in FY08.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R03>
PART 1235_UNIFORM SYSTEM FOR PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES--Table of Contents




Sec.
1235.1 Purpose.
1235.2 Definitions.
1235.3 Special license plates.
1235.4 Removable windshield placards.
1235.5 Temporary removable windshield placards.
1235.6 Parking.
1235.7 Parking space design, construction, and designation.
1235.8 Reciprocity.

Appendix A to Part 1235--Sample Removable Windshield Placard
Appendix B to Part 1235--Sample Temporary Removable Windshield Placard

    Authority: Pub. L. 100-641, 102 Stat. 3335 (1988); 23 U.S.C. 101(a), 
104, 105, 109(d), 114(a), 135, 217, 307, 315, and 402(a); 23 CFR 1.32 
and 1204.4; and 49 CFR 1.48(b).

[[Page 464]]


    Source: 56 FR 10329, Mar. 11, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide guidelines to States for the 
establishment of a uniform system for handicapped parking for persons 
with disabilities to enhance access and the safety of persons with 
disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.2  Definitions.

    Terms used in this part are defined as follows:
    (a) International Symbol of Access means the symbol adopted by 
Rehabilitation International in 1969 at its Eleventh World Congress on 
Rehabilitation of the Disabled.
    (b) Persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to 
walk means persons who, as determined by a licensed physician:
    (1) Cannot walk two hundred feet without stopping to rest; or
    (2) Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, 
cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other 
assistive device; or
    (3) Are restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the 
person's forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when 
measured by spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen 
tension is less than sixty mm/hg on room air at rest; or
    (4) Use portable oxygen; or
    (5) Have a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's 
functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class 
IV according to standards set by the American Heart Association; or
    (6) Are severely limited in their ability to walk due to an 
arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition.
    (c) Special license plate means a license plate that displays the 
International Symbol of Access:
    (1) In a color that contrasts to the background, and
    (2) In the same size as the letters and/or numbers on the plate.
    (d) Removable windshield placard means a two-sided, hanger-style 
placard which includes on each side:
    (1) The International Symbol of Access, which is at least three 
inches in height, centered on the placard, and is white on a blue 
shield;
    (2) An identification number;
    (3) A date of expiration; and
    (4) The seal or other identification of the issuing authority.
    (e) Temporary removable windshield placard means a two-sided, 
hanger-style placard which includes on each side:
    (1) The International Symbol of Access, which is at least three 
inches in height, centered on the placard, and is white on a red shield;
    (2) An identification number;
    (3) A date of expiration; and
    (4) The seal or other identification of the issuing authority.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.3  Special license plates.

    (a) Upon application of a person with a disability which limits or 
impairs the ability to walk, each State shall issue special license 
plates for the vehicle which is registered in the applicant's name. The 
initial application shall be accompanied by the certification of a 
licensed physician that the applicant meets the Sec. 1235.2(b) 
definition of persons with disabilities which limit or impair the 
ability to walk. The issuance of a special license plate shall not 
preclude the issuance of a removable windshield placard.
    (b) Upon application of an organization, each State shall issue 
special license plates for the vehicle registered in the applicant's 
name if the vehicle is primarily used to transport persons with 
disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk. The application 
shall include a certification by the applicant, under criteria to be 
determined by the State, that the vehicle is primarily used to transport 
persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk.
    (c) The fee for the issuance of a special license plate shall not 
exceed the fee charged for a similar license plate for the same class 
vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.4  Removable windshield placards.

    (a) The State system shall provide for the issuance and periodic 
renewal of a removable windshield placard, upon

[[Page 465]]

the application of a person with a disability which limits or impairs 
the ability to walk. The State system shall require that the issuing 
authority shall, upon request, issue one additional placard to 
applicants who do not have special license plates.
    (b) The initial application shall be accompanied by the 
certification of a licensed physician that the applicant meets the Sec. 
1235.2(b) definition of persons with disabilities which limit or impair 
the ability to walk.
    (c) The State system shall require that the removable windshield 
placard is displayed in such a manner that it may be viewed from the 
front and rear of the vehicle by hanging it from the front windshield 
rearview mirror of a vehicle utilizing a parking space reserved for 
persons with disabilities. When there is no rearview mirror, the placard 
shall be displayed on the dashboard.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.5  Temporary removable windshield placards.

    (a) The State system shall provide for the issuance of a temporary 
removable windshield placard, upon the application of a person with a 
disability which limits or impairs the ability to walk. The State system 
shall require that the issuing authority issue, upon request, one 
additional temporary removable windshield placard to applicants.
    (b) The State system shall require that the application shall be 
accompanied by the certification of a licensed physician that the 
applicant meets the Sec. 1235.2(b) definition of persons with 
disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk. The 
certification shall also include the period of time that the physician 
determines the applicant will have the disability, not to exceed six 
months.
    (c) The State system shall require that the temporary removable 
windshield placard is displayed in such a manner that it may be viewed 
from the front and rear of the vehicle by hanging it from the front 
windshield rearview mirror of a vehicle utilizing a parking space 
reserved for persons with disabilities. When there is no rearview 
mirror, the placard shall be displayed on the dashboard.
    (d) The State system shall require that the temporary removable 
windshield placard shall be valid for a period of time for which the 
physician has determined that the applicant will have the disability, 
not to exceed six months from the date of issuance.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.6  Parking.

    Special license plates, removable windshield placards, or temporary 
removable windshield placards displaying the International Symbol of 
Access shall be the only recognized means of identifying vehicles 
permitted to utilize parking spaces reserved for persons with 
disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk.


<R05>
Sec. 1235.7  Parking space design, construction, and designation.

    (a) Each State shall establish design, construction, and designation 
standards for parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities, 
under criteria to be determined by the State. These standards shall:
    (1) Ensure that parking spaces are accessible to, and usable by, 
persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk;
    (2) Ensure the safety of persons with disabilities which limit or 
impair the ability to walk who use these spaces and their accompanying 
accessible routes; and
    (3) Ensure uniform sign standards which comply with those prescribed 
by the ``Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and 
Highways'' (23 CFR part 655, subpart F) to designate parking spaces 
reserved for persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability 
to walk.
    (b) The design, construction, and alteration of parking spaces 
reserved for persons with disabilities for which Federal funds 
participate must meet the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

[[Page 466]]


<R05>
Sec. 1235.8  Reciprocity.

    The State system shall recognize removable windshield placards, 
temporary removable windshield placards and special license plates which 
have been issued by issuing authorities of other States and countries, 
for the purpose of identifying vehicles permitted to utilize parking 
spaces reserved for persons with disabilities which limit or impair the 
ability to walk.

[[Page 467]]

      Appendix A to Part 1235--Sample Removable Windshield Placard
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.014


[[Page 468]]



 Appendix B to Part 1235--Sample Temporary Removable Windshield Placard
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC14OC91.015


[[Page 469]]




<R03>
PART 1240_SAFETY INCENTIVE GRANTS FOR USE OF SEAT BELTS_ALLOCATIONS 
BASED ON SEAT BELT USE RATES--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
1240.1 Purpose.
1240.2 Applicability.
1240.3 Definitions.

                 Subpart B_Determination of Allocations

1240.10 Identification of eligible States.
1240.11 Determination of State seat belt use rate for calendar years 
          1996 and 1997.
1240.12 Determination of State seat belt use rate for calendar year 1998 
          and beyond.
1240.13 Determination of national average seat belt use rate.
1240.14 Determination of Federal medical savings and notification of 
          proposed allocations.
1240.15 Allocations.

Appendix A to Part 1240--Adjustment Procedures for State-Submitted 
          Information (Calendar Years 1996 and 1997)
Appendix B to Part 1240--Procedures for Missing or Inadequate State-
          Submitted Information (Calendar Years 1996 and 1997)
Appendix C to Part 1240--Certification (Calendar Year 1998 Survey Based 
          on Survey Approved Under 23 U.S.C. 153)
Appendix D to Part 1240--Determination of National Average Seat Belt Use 
          Rate
Appendix E to Part 1240--Determination of Federal Medical Savings

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 157; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 
and 1.50.

    Source: 63 FR 57909, Oct 29, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 1240.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes requirements and procedures governing the 
allocation of funds to States made under 23 U.S.C. 157(c), based on seat 
belt use rates.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.2  Applicability.

    These procedures apply to all allocations of funds to States, based 
on seat belt use rates, beginning with allocations for fiscal year 1999.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part--
    Base seat belt use rate means the highest State seat belt use rate 
for the State for any calendar year during the period from 1996 through 
the calendar year preceding the previous calendar year;
    Federal medical savings means the amount of Federal budget savings 
relating to Federal medical costs (including savings under the Medicare 
and Medicaid programs under titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C.1395 et seq.)), as determined under this part;
    FHWA means the Federal Highway Administration;
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration;
    Passenger motor vehicle means a passenger car, pickup truck, van, 
minivan, or sport utility vehicle;
    State means any of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, or 
Puerto Rico.
    State seat belt use rate means the seat belt use rate for a State, 
rounded to the nearest tenth of one percent, after any required 
weighting, adjustment, or substitution under this part, that is used in 
determining eligibility for and the amount of an allocation under this 
part.


<R04>
                 Subpart B_Determination of Allocations


<R05>
Sec. 1240.10  Identification of eligible States.

    (a) On or about September 1, 1998, and each September 1 thereafter, 
NHTSA will identify, on the basis of seat belt use rates determined, as 
applicable, under Sec. Sec. 1240.11, 1240.12, and 1240.13 of this 
part--
    (1) Each State that had a State seat belt use rate during the 
previous calendar year and the year preceding the previous calendar year 
that exceeded the national average seat belt use rate for each of those 
years; and
    (2) Each State that does not meet the requirements of paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section and that had a State seat belt use rate during 
the previous calendar year that exceeded the State's base seat belt use 
rate.
    (b) Any seat belt use rate used in making the determinations under 
this

[[Page 470]]

part shall be rounded to the nearest tenth of one percent.
    (c) A State identified under paragraph (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this 
section, and not ineligible under Sec. 1240.12(a)(2) of this part, 
shall receive an allocation of funds reflecting the Federal medical 
savings, in accordance with the procedures of Sec. Sec. 1240.14 and 
1240.15 of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.11  Determination of State seat belt use rate for calendar 
years 1996 and 1997.

    (a) Review of State-submitted information. NHTSA will review 
available seat belt use rate information submitted by each State for 
calendar years 1996 and 1997 to determine whether--
    (1) Measurements of seat belt use were based on direct observation;
    (2) At least 70 percent of observation sites were surveyed during 
the calendar year for which the seat belt use rate is reported;
    (3) All passenger motor vehicles were sampled; and
    (4) All front seat outboard occupants in the sampled vehicles were 
counted.
    (b) Determination of State seat belt use rate. Seat belt use rate 
information submitted by a State for calendar year 1996 or 1997 will 
be--
    (1) Accepted as the State seat belt use rate if it satisfies 
paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), and (a)(4) of this section.
    (2) Accepted after adjustment in accordance with the procedures of 
Appendix A of this part, as the State seat belt use rate, if it 
satisfies paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, but fails to 
satisfy paragraph (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section.
    (3) Rejected, and the procedures of Appendix B of this part shall 
apply, if it fails to satisfy paragraph (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this 
section.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.12  Determination of State seat belt use rate for calendar 
year 1998 and beyond.

    (a) State seat belt use survey.
    (1) Beginning in calendar year 1998, State seat belt use rates used 
for determining allocations under this part shall be based on a survey 
conducted each calendar year by each State that satisfies all the 
requirements of Part 1340 of this title (the Uniform Criteria for State 
Observational Surveys of Seat Belt Use).
    (2) A State that does not conduct a survey required under paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section in any calendar year, or that conducts a survey 
that does not satisfy all the requirements of part 1340 of chapter III 
of this title, shall be ineligible for an allocation of funds on the 
basis of both Sec. 1240.10(a)(1) and Sec. 1240.10(a)(2) of this part 
during the second and third succeeding fiscal years (e.g., if a State 
fails to conduct a conforming survey in calendar year 1998, the State is 
ineligible for an allocation of funds during FY 2000 and FY 2001).
    (b) Submission of survey information. (1) Each State shall submit to 
NHTSA, no later than March 1st after the calendar year during which a 
survey required under paragraph (a)(1) of this section is conducted, the 
seat belt use rate determined under the survey, reported as a percentage 
to one decimal place, accompanied by a survey report, consisting of all 
documentation identified in Sec. 1340.5 of chapter III of this title 
and summarizing the results of any analyses conducted under the survey.
    (2) NHTSA will review a survey report submitted under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section to determine whether the survey complies with all 
the requirements of Sec. 1340 of chapter III of this title. Written 
notice of approval or disapproval of a survey will be sent to the 
Governor's Representative for Highway Safety within 30 days of receipt 
of the survey report. Any notice of disapproval will be accompanied by a 
detailed statement of the reasons for disapproval.
    (3) A State may elect to submit a description of its proposed survey 
methodology, consisting of all documentation identified in Sec. 1340.5 
(a), (b) and (c)(3) of chapter III of this title for advance review, 
prior to conducting the survey.
    (4) NHTSA will review a proposed survey methodology submitted under 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section and inform the Governor's 
Representative for Highway Safety in writing within 30 days of receipt 
of the proposed methodology whether the survey, if conducted in 
accordance with the methodology,

[[Page 471]]

would comply with all the requirements of Sec. 1340 of chapter III of 
this title. Any notice indicating non-compliance will be accompanied by 
a detailed statement of the reasons.
    (5) A State that submits a description of its proposed survey 
methodology under paragraph (b)(3) of this section continues to be 
required to submit all information required under paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, after the State conducts its survey, for review under 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (c) Submission of Certification--calendar year 1998 surveys.
    (1) A survey conducted by a State in calendar year 1998 shall be 
deemed to comply with the requirements of Sec. 1340 of chapter III of 
this title, if--
    (i) The survey's design was approved by the agency, in writing, on 
or after June 29, 1992, for the purposes of the grant program authorized 
under 23 U.S.C. 153;
    (ii) The survey design has remained unchanged since the survey was 
approved (except to the extent that the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(1)(iii) constitute a change); and
    (iii) The survey samples all passenger motor vehicles, measures seat 
belt use by all front seat outboard occupants in the sampled vehicles, 
and counts seat belt use only within the calendar year for which the 
seat belt use rate is reported.
    (2) A State that meets the requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section shall submit a certification signed by the Governor's 
Representative for Highway Safety, in the form prescribed in Appendix C 
of this part, accompanied by the information required under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section.
    (3) Written notice of acceptance or rejection of a certification 
will be sent to the Governor's Representative for Highway Safety within 
30 days of receipt of the information required under paragraph (c)(2) of 
this section. Any notice of rejection will be accompanied by a detailed 
statement of the reasons for rejection.
    (d) Determination of State seat belt use rate. The seat belt use 
rate submitted by the State for a calendar year will be accepted as the 
State seat belt use rate for that calendar year if--
    (1) It was determined under a survey whose survey report was 
approved under paragraph (b)(2) of this section; or
    (2) For calendar year 1998 only, the State satisfies the 
requirements of paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section, and its 
certification is accepted under paragraph (c)(3) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.13  Determination of national average seat belt use rate.

    The national average seat belt use rate for a calendar year shall be 
the sum of the individual State seat belt use rates for all the States, 
after weighting each individual State seat belt use rate in accordance 
with the procedures of Appendix D of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.14  Determination of Federal medical savings and notification 
of proposed allocations.

    On or about September 1, 1998, and each September 1 thereafter, 
NHTSA will--
    (a) Calculate, in accordance with the procedures in Appendix E of 
this part, the Federal medical savings and each State's share of those 
savings, due to the amount by which the State seat belt use rate for the 
previous calendar year--
    (1) Exceeds the national average seat belt use rate for that 
calendar year, for each State described in Sec. 1240.10(a)(1) of this 
part; or
    (2) Exceeds the State's base seat belt use rate, for each State 
described in Sec. 1240.10(a)(2) of this part; and
    (b) Notify the States described in Sec. 1240.10(c) of this part of 
their proposed allocations, which shall be equal to the amount of the 
Federal medical savings calculated under paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of 
this section, as applicable, reduced proportionately across all States 
if the allocations would exceed the total amount authorized for 
allocation during the fiscal year.


<R05>
Sec. 1240.15  Allocations.

    (a) Funds allocated under this part shall be available for any 
projects eligible for assistance under title 23, United States Code.
    (b) Not later than 25 days after notification under Sec. 1240.14(b) 
of this part, the Governor's Representative for

[[Page 472]]

Highway Safety and the Secretary of the State's Department of 
Transportation for each State that receives notification shall jointly 
identify, in writing to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Administrator and 
FHWA Division Administrator, the amounts of the State's proposed 
allocations that will be used in highway safety programs and in Federal-
aid highway programs.
    (c) On or about October 1, 1998, and each October 1 thereafter, the 
funds to which a State is entitled under this part will be allocated in 
the proportions identified by the State under paragraph (b) of this 
section, reduced proportionately across all States if the allocations 
would, in the aggregate, exceed total obligation limitations applicable 
to 23 U.S.C. 157.
    (d) Thereafter, each State shall identify specific NHTSA program 
areas and FHWA projects for which the allocated funds will be used.

   Appendix A to Part 1240--Adjustment Procedures for State-Submitted 
               Information (Calendar Years 1996 and 1997)

    A. In States where State-submitted information on seat belt use 
rates does not include data for Front outboard occupants in passenger 
motor vehicles (FOPV), an adjustment will be made based on the national 
ratio of seat belt use rates for FOPV to the seat belt use rate for the 
group of occupants and vehicles that were included in the State-
submitted information. The national seat belt use rates will be derived 
from the most recent National Occupant Protection Use Survey (NOPUS). 
For each affected State, the adjustment will be made by dividing the 
NOPUS seat belt use rate for FOPV by the NOPUS seat belt use rate for 
the surveyed group, or the seat belt use rate for the closest available 
group to the surveyed group. The NOPUS seat belt use rate for FOPV will 
be derived for each affected State by weighting the NOPUS seat belt use 
rates for passenger cars and for passenger motor vehicles that are not 
passenger cars (hereafter LTVs) by the relative number of registrations 
of passenger cars and LTVs in each State. This method will produce a 
factor which will be multiplied by the State's survey-based seat belt 
use rate to produce an adjusted seat belt use rate reflecting the 
required vehicle and occupant population.
    B. The process may be expressed mathematically as follows:

U<INF>a</INF> = U<INF>s</INF>((N<INF>pc</INF> * R<INF>pc</INF> + 
N<INF>ltv</INF> * R<INF>ltv</INF>) / N<INF>s</INF>)

Where:

U<INF>a</INF> = the adjusted State seat belt use rate
U<INF>s</INF> = the State-submitted seat belt use rate
N<INF>pc</INF> = the national front outboard passenger car seat belt use 
rate from NOPUS
N<INF>ltv</INF> = the national front outboard LTV seat belt use rate 
from NOPUS
R<INF>pc</INF> = the portion of State passenger motor vehicle 
registrations that are passenger cars
R<INF>ltv</INF> = the portion of State passenger motor vehicle 
registrations that are LTVs
N<INF>s</INF> = the national seat belt use rate for the State-surveyed 
vehicle and occupant population (or closest available group from NOPUS)

  Appendix B to Part 1240--Procedures for Missing or Inadequate State-
          Submitted Information (Calendar Years 1996 and 1997)

    A. If State-submitted seat belt use rate information is unavailable 
or inadequate for both calendar years 1996 and 1997, State seat belt use 
rates for calendars year 1996 and 1997 will be estimated based on seat 
belt use rates of fatally-injured occupants. Data from the Fatality 
Analysis Reporting System (FARS) will be translated into estimated 
observed seat belt use rates using an algorithm that relates historical 
belt use by fatally-injured occupants to observed use.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Blincoe, L.J. Estimating the Benefits of Increased Safety Belt 
Use. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, NHTSA, DOT HS 
808 133, June, 1994.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. The algorithm is as follows:

u = (-.221794 + [radic].049193 + .410769F) / .456410

Where:

u = the estimated observed seat belt use
F = the seat belt use in potentially fatal crashes

    In the above formula, F is calculated as follows:

F = (f / (1 - e)) / ((f / (1 - e)) + 1 - f)

Where:

F = the seat belt use in potentially fatal crashes
e = State-specific weighted average effectiveness of seat belts in 
passenger cars and passenger motor vehicles that are not passenger cars
f = State-specific seat belt use rate of fatally-injured occupants of 
passenger vehicles

    C. If State-submitted seat belt use rate information is available 
for either calendar year 1996 or 1997, but not both, a State seat belt 
use rate for the year for which information is missing will be estimated 
by calculating the percent change in the FARS-based observed seat belt 
use rate (derived from the

[[Page 473]]

above algorithm) between the two years. This factor will then be applied 
to the seat belt use rate from the known year to derive an estimate of 
the seat belt use rate for the unknown year.

Appendix C to Part 1240--Certification (Calendar Year 1998 Survey Based 
                 on Survey Approved Under 23 U.S.C. 153)

       State Certification-Calendar Year 1998 Seat Belt Use Survey

 State of_______________________________________________________________

    Seat Belt Use Rate Reported for Calendar Year -------- : -------- %.
    In accordance with the provisions of 23 CFR 1240.12(c)(2), I hereby 
certify as follows:
    1. The seat belt use rate reported above is based on a survey whose 
design was approved by NHTSA, in writing, on or after June 29, 1992, 
under the provisions of the grant program authorized by 23 U.S.C. 153.
    2. The survey design has remained unchanged since the survey was 
approved (except to the extent that the requirements of paragraph 3 
constitute a change).
    3. The survey samples all passenger motor vehicles (including cars, 
pickup trucks, vans, minivans, and sport utility vehicles), measures 
seat belt use by all front outboard occupants in the sampled vehicles, 
and counts seat belt use completely within the calendar year for which 
the seat belt use rate is reported.

________________________________________________________________________
Governor's Representative for Highway Safety

________________________________________________________________________
(Date)

Appendix D to Part 1240--Determination of National Average Seat Belt Use 
                                  Rate

    A. To determine the national average seat belt use rate in a 
calendar year, each State seat belt use rate for the calendar year will 
be weighted to reflect the percentage of total national vehicle miles 
traveled attributable to that State.
    B. If a State seat belt use rate is unavailable for a State during a 
calendar year (either because the State did not conduct a seat belt use 
survey or a survey was conducted but does not comply with the Uniform 
Criteria for State Observational Surveys of Seat Belt Use, 23 CFR Part 
1340), NHTSA will calculate a State seat belt use rate, using the last 
available State seat belt use rate determined under Sec. 1240.11 or 
Sec. 1240.12 of this part, as applicable, along with information on 
seat belt use rates from the FARS, and an algorithm relating FARS seat 
belt use rates to observed seat belt use rates (see Appendix 1, note). 
This procedure will produce an estimated State seat belt use rate for 
the unknown calendar year. The estimated State seat belt use rate will 
then be weighted in the manner described in paragraph A of this 
appendix.
    C. The national average seat belt use rate for the calendar year 
will be determined by adding the weighted State seat belt use rates for 
each of the States (i.e., the national average seat belt use rate is the 
weighted average of all the State seat belt use rates).
    D. NHTSA may elect to use a seat belt use survey that does not 
comply with the Uniform Criteria for State Observational Surveys of Seat 
Belt Use in determining the national average seat belt use rate (even 
though the State that submitted the survey is ineligible to receive an 
allocation of funds), if in NHTSA's judgment, the deficiencies in the 
survey are not so substantial as to render the survey less accurate than 
the FARS estimate.

    Appendix E to Part 1240--Determination of Federal Medical Savings

    A. To determine the savings to the Federal Government from reduced 
medical costs attributable to seat belt use, NHTSA will first estimate 
the impact of seat belt use on the number of fatalities and injuries, 
using methods described in the report ``Estimating the Benefits from 
Increased Safety Belt Use.'' \1\ These methods establish a relationship 
between the effectiveness of seat belts, current use rates, and existing 
injury levels to determine the impact of increasing seat belt use on 
motor vehicle safety. Using these methods, NHTSA will estimate the 
fatalities prevented and the non-fatal injuries avoided by increased 
seat belt use.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Blincoe, L.J. Estimating the Benefits of Increased Safety Belt 
Use. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, NHTSA, DOT HS 
808 133, June, 1994.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. In the 1996 report ``The Economic Cost of Motor Vehicle Crashes, 
1994,'' \2\ NHTSA measured both the medical costs and payment sources 
for motor vehicle crashes. NHTSA will adjust the national medical cost 
figures from this report to individual State income levels to reflect 
local cost levels.

[[Page 474]]

These per-case costs will be further adjusted for inflation, using the 
most recent annual average Consumer Price Index for medical care, and 
then multiplied by the injuries and fatalities prevented in each State 
to derive the total medical care savings from increased seat belt use. 
The Federal portion of these costs will be derived from the best 
available data found in the same cost report or in other sources, as 
they may become available.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ Blincoe, L.J. The Economic Cost of Motor Vehicle Crashes, 1994. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, NHTSA, DOT HS 808 
425, July, 1996.

[[Page 475]]


<R03>
                     SUBCHAPTER C_GENERAL PROVISIONS




<R03>
PART 1250_POLITICAL SUBDIVISION PARTICIPATION IN STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY 
PROGRAMS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1250.1 Scope.
1250.2 Purpose.
1250.3 Policy.
1250.4 Determining local share.
1250.5 Waivers.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 315, 402(b); and delegations of authority at 49 
CFR 1.48 and 1.50.

    Source: 41 FR 23948, June 14, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1250.1  Scope.

    This part establishes guidelines for the States to assure their 
meeting the requirements for 40 percent political subdivision 
participation in State highway safety programs under 23 U.S.C. 402 
(b)(1)(C).


<R05>
Sec. 1250.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide guidelines to determine 
whether a State is in compliance with the requirement that at least 40 
percent of all Federal funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 402 will be 
expended by political subdivisions of such State.


<R05>
Sec. 1250.3  Policy.

    To assure that the provisions of 23 U.S.C. 402(b)(1)(C) are complied 
with, the NHTSA and FHWA field offices will:
    (a) Prior to approving the State's Annual Work Program (AWP), review 
the AWP and each of the subelement plans which make up the AWP. The 
NHTSA Regional Administrator will review the 14\1/2\ safety standard 
areas for which NHTSA is responsible and the FHWA Division Administrator 
will review the 3\1/2\ safety standard areas for which FHWA is 
responsible. The narrative description for each subelement plan should 
contain sufficient information to identify the funds to be expended by, 
or for the benefit of the political subdivisions.
    (b) Withhold approval of a State's AWP, as provided in Highway 
Safety Program Manual volume 103, chapter III, paragraph 3c, where the 
program does not provide at least 40 percent of Federal funds for 
planned local program expenditures.
    (c) During the management review of the State's operations, 
determine if the political subdivisions had an active voice in the 
initiation, development and implementation of the programs for which 
such sums were expended.


<R05>
Sec. 1250.4  Determining local share.

    (a) In determining whether a State meets the requirement that at 
least 40 percent of Federal 402 funds be expended by political 
subdivisions, FHWA and NHTSA will apply the 40 percent requirement 
sequentially to each fiscal year's apportionments, treating all 
apportionments made from a single fiscal year's authorizations as a 
single entity for this purpose. Therefore, at least 40 percent of each 
State's apportionments from each year's authorizations must be used in 
the highway safety programs of its political subdivisions prior to the 
period when funds would normally lapse. The 40 percent requirement is 
applicable to the State's total federally funded safety program 
irrespective of Standard designation or Agency responsibility.
    (b) When Federal funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 402 are expended 
by a political subdivision, such expenditures are clearly part of the 
local share. Local safety project related expenditures and associated 
indirect costs, which are reimbursable to the grantee local governments, 
are classifiable as the local share of Federal funds. Illustrations of 
such expenditures are the cost incurred by a local government in 
planning and administration of project related safety activities, driver 
education activities, traffic court programs, traffic records system 
improvements, upgrading emergency medical services, pedestrian safety 
activities, improved traffic enforcement, alcohol countermeasures, 
highway debris removal programs, pupil transportation programs, accident 
investigation, surveillance of high accident locations, and traffic 
engineering services.

[[Page 476]]

    (c) When Federal funds apportioned under 23 U.S.C. 402 are expended 
by the State or a State agency for the benefit of a political 
subdivision, such funds may be considered as part of the local share, 
provided that the political subdivision benefitted has had an active 
voice in the initiation, development, and implementation of the programs 
for which such funds are expended. In no case may the State arbitrarily 
ascribe State agency expenditures as ``benefitting local government.'' 
Where political subdivisions have had an active voice in the initiation, 
development, and implementation of a particular program, and a political 
subdivision which has not had such active voice agrees in advance of 
implementation to accept the benefits of the program, the Federal share 
of the cost of such benefits may be credited toward meeting the 40 
percent local participation requirement. Where no political subdivisions 
have had an active voice in the initiation, development, and 
implementation of a particular program, but a political subdivision 
requests the benefits of the program as part of the local government's 
highway safety program, the Federal share of the cost of such benefits 
may be credited toward meeting the 40 percent local participation 
requirement. Evidence of consent and acceptance of the work, goods or 
services on behalf of the local government must be established and 
maintained on file by the State, until all funds authorized for a 
specific year are expended and audits completed.
    (d) State agency expenditures which are generally not classified as 
local are within such standard areas as vehicle inspection, vehicle 
registration and driver licensing. However, where these Standards 
provide funding for services such as: driver improvement tasks 
administered by traffic courts, or where they furnish computer support 
for local government requests for traffic record searches, these 
expenditures are classifiable as benefitting local programs.


<R05>
Sec. 1250.5  Waivers.

    While the 40 percent requirement may be waived in whole or in part 
by the Secretary or his delegate, it is expected that each State program 
will generate political subdivision participation to the extent required 
by the Act so that requests for waivers will be minimized. Where a 
waiver is requested, however, it will be documented at least by a 
conclusive showing of the absence of legal authority over highway safety 
activities at the political subdivision levels of the State and will 
recommend the appropriate percentage participation to be applied in lieu 
of the 40 percent.


<R03>
PART 1251_STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY AGENCY--Table of Contents




Sec.
1251.1 Purpose.
1251.2 Policy.
1251.3 Authority.
1251.4 Functions.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 402; 23 U.S.C. 315; 49 CFR 1.48 and 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 59145, Sept. 8, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1251.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe the minimum authority and 
functions of the State Highway Safety Agency established in each State 
by the Governor under the authority of the Highway Safety Act (23 U.S.C. 
402).


<R05>
Sec. 1251.2  Policy.

    In order for a State to receive funds under the Highway Safety Act, 
the Governor shall exercise his or her responsibilities through a State 
Highway Safety Agency that has ``adequate powers and is suitably 
equipped and organized to carry out the program to the satisfaction of 
the Secretary.'' 23 U.S.C. 402(b)(1)(A). Accordingly, it is the policy 
of this part that approval of a State's Highway Safety Plan will depend 
upon the State's compliance with Sec. Sec. 1251.3 and 1251.4 of this 
part.


<R05>
Sec. 1251.3  Authority.

    Each State Highway Safety Agency shall be authorized to:
    (a) Develop and implement a process for obtaining information about 
the highway safety programs administered by other State and local 
agencies.
    (b) Periodically review and comment to the Governor on the 
effectiveness of highway safety plans and activities in the State 
regardless of funding source.

[[Page 477]]

    (c) Provide or facilitate the provision of technical assistance to 
other State agencies and political subdivisions to develop highway 
safety programs.
    (d) Provide financial and technical assistance to other State 
agencies and political subdivisions in carrying out highway safety 
programs.


<R05>
Sec. 1251.4  Functions.

    Each State Highway Safety Agency shall:
    (a) Develop and prepare the Highway Safety Plan prescribed by volume 
102 of the Highway Safety Program Manual (23 CFR 1204.4, Supplement B), 
based on evaluation of highway accidents and safety problems within the 
State.
    (b) Establish priorities for highway safety programs funded under 23 
U.S.C. 402 within the State.
    (c) Provide information and assistance to prospective aid recipients 
on program benefits, procedures for participation, and development of 
plans.
    (d) Encourage and assist local units of government to improve their 
highway safety planning and administration efforts.
    (e) Review the implementation of State and local highway safety 
plans and programs, regardless of funding source, and evaluate the 
implementation of those plans and programs funded under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (f) Monitor the progress of activities and the expenditure of 
section 402 funds contained in the State's approved Highway Safety Plan.
    (g) Assure that independent audits are made of the financial 
operations of the State Highway Safety Agency and of the use of section 
402 funds by any subrecipient.
    (h) Coordinate the State Highway Safety Agency's Highway Safety Plan 
with other federally and non-federally supported programs relating to or 
affecting highway safety.
    (i) Assess program performance through analysis of data relevant to 
highway safety planning.


<R03>
PART 1252_STATE MATCHING OF PLANNING AND ADMINISTRATION COSTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1252.1 Purpose.
1252.2 Definitions.
1252.3 Applicability.
1252.4 Policy.
1252.5 Procedures.
1252.6 Responsibilities.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 402 and 315; 49 CFR 1.48(b) and 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 47145, July 14, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1252.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 
policy on planning and administration (P&A) costs for State highway 
safety agencies. It defines planning and administration costs, describes 
the expenditures that may be used to satisfy the State matching 
requirement, prescribes how the requirement will be met, and when States 
will have to comply with the requirement.


<R05>
Sec. 1252.2  Definitions.

    (a) Fiscal year means the twelve months beginning each October 1, 
and ending the following September 30.
    (b) Direct costs are those costs which can be identified 
specifically with a particular planning and administration or program 
activity. The salary of a data analyst on the State highway safety 
agency staff is an example of a direct cost attributable to P&A. The 
salary of an emergency medical technician course instructor is an 
example of direct cost attributable to a program activity.
    (c) Indirect costs are those costs (1) incurred for a common or 
joint purpose benefiting more than one program activity and (2) not 
readily assignable to the program activity specifically benefited. For 
example, centralized support services such as personnel, procurement, 
and budgeting would be indirect costs.
    (d) Planning and administration (P&A) costs are those direct and 
indirect costs that are attributable to the overall development and 
management of the Highway Safety Plan. Such costs could include 
salaries, related personnel benefits, travel expenses, and rental costs.
    (e) Program management costs are those costs attributable to a 
program

[[Page 478]]

area (e.g., salary of an emergency medical services coordinator, the 
impact evaluation of an activity, or the travel expenses of a local 
traffic engineer).
    (f) State highway safety agency is the agency directly responsible 
for coordinating the State's highway safety program authorized by 23 
U.S.C. 402.


<R05>
Sec. 1252.3  Applicability.

    The provisions of this part apply to obligations incurred after 
November 6, 1978, for planning and administration costs under 23 U.S.C. 
402.


<R05>
Sec. 1252.4  Policy.

    Federal participation in P&A activities shall not exceed 50 percent 
of the total cost of such activities, or the applicable sliding scale 
rate in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 120. The Federal contribution for P&A 
activities shall not exceed 10 percent of the total funds the State 
receives under 23 U.S.C. 402. In accordance with 23 U.S.C. 120(i), the 
Federal share payable for projects in the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
Samoa and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands shall be 100 
percent. The Indian State, as defined by 23 U.S.C. 402 (d) and (i), is 
exempt from the provisions of this part. NHTSA funds shall be used only 
to finance P&A activities attributable to NHTSA programs and FHWA funds 
shall be used only to finance P&A costs attributable to FHWA programs.

[47 FR 15121, Apr. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1252.5  Procedures.

    (a) P&A tasks and related costs shall be described in the P&A module 
of the State's Highway Safety Plan. The State's matching share shall be 
determined on the basis of the total P&A costs in the module. Federal 
participation shall not exceed 50 percent (or the applicable sliding 
scale) of the total P&A costs. A State shall not use NHTSA funds to pay 
more than 50 percent of the P&A costs attributable to NHTSA programs nor 
use FHWA funds to pay more than 50 percent of the P&A costs attributable 
to FHWA programs. In addition, the Federal contribution for P&A 
activities shall not exceed 10 percent of the total funds in the State 
received under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (b) FHWA and NHTSA funds may be used to pay for the Federal share of 
P&A costs up to the amounts determined by multiplying the Federal share 
by the ratio between the P&A costs attributable to FHWA programs and the 
P&A costs attributable to NHTSA programs. For example: A State's total 
P&A costs are $40,000. The State's share is 50 percent or $20,000. To 
pay the remaining $20,000, the State first ascertains the amount spent 
out of the total costs for each agency's programs, then applies the 
ratio between these two amounts to the $20,000. If $36,000 of the total 
costs are spent for NHTSA programs and $4,000 for FHWA programs, the 
ratio would be 9/1 and the corresponding allocation of the Federal share 
would be $18,000 to NHTSA and $2,000 to FHWA.
    (c) A State at its option may allocate salary and related costs of 
State highway safety agency employees to one of the following:
    (1) The administration and planning functions in the P&A module;
    (2) The program management functions in one or more Program modules; 
or
    (3) A combination of administration and planning functions in the 
P&A module and the program management functions in one or more program 
modules.
    (d) If an employee is principally performing administration and 
planning functions under a P&A module, the total salary and related 
costs may be allocated to the P&A module. If the employee is principally 
performing program management functions under one or more program 
modules, the total salary and related costs may be charged directly to 
the appropriate module(s). If an employee is spending time on a 
combination of administration and planning functions and program 
management functions, the total salary and related costs may be charged 
to the appropriate module(s) based on the actual time worked under each 
module. If the State highway safety agency elects to allocate costs 
based on acutal time spent on an activity, the State highway safety 
agency must keep accurate time records showing the work activities for 
each employee. The State's record keeping system

[[Page 479]]

must be approved by the appropriate FHWA and NHTSA officials.
    (e) Those tasks and related costs contained in the P&A module, not 
defined as P&A costs under Sec. 1252.2(d) of this part, are not subject 
to the planning and administration cost matching requirement.

[45 FR 47145, July 14, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 15121, Apr. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1252.6  Responsibilities.

    During the Highway Safety Plan approval process, the responsible 
FHWA and NHTSA officials shall approve a P&A module only if the 
projected State expenditure is at least 25 percent (or the appropriate 
sliding scale rate) of the total P&A costs identified in the module. If 
a State elects to prorate P&A and program management costs, the 
appropriate NHTSA and FHWA officials must approve the method that the 
State highway safety agency will use to record the time spent on these 
activities. During the process of reimbursement, the responsible FHWA 
and NHTSA officials shall assure that Federal reimbursement for P&A 
costs at no time exceeds 75 percent (of the applicable sliding scale 
rate) of the costs accumulated at the time of reimbursement.

[[Page 480]]


<R03>
               SUBCHAPTER D_TRANSFER AND SANCTION PROGRAMS




<R03>
PART 1270_OPEN CONTAINER LAWS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1270.1 Scope.
1270.2 Purpose.
1270.3 Definitions.
1270.4 Compliance criteria.
1270.5 Certification requirements.
1270.6 Transfer of funds.
1270.7 Use of transferred funds.
1270.8 Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 154; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.48 and 
1.50.

    Source: 63 FR 53585, Oct. 6, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1270.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement Section 
154 of Title 23 of the United States Code which encourages States to 
enact and enforce open container laws.


<R05>
Sec. 1270.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the steps that States must 
take to avoid the transfer of Federal-aid highway funds for 
noncompliance with 23 U.S.C. 154.


<R05>
Sec. 1270.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Alcoholic beverage means:
    (1) Beer, ale, porter, stout, and other similar fermented beverages 
(including sake or similar products) of any name or description 
containing one-half of 1 percent or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or 
produced from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefor;
    (2) Wine of not less than one-half of 1 per centum of alcohol by 
volume; or
    (3) Distilled spirits which is that substance known as ethyl 
alcohol, ethanol, or spirits of wine in any form (including all 
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever 
process produced).
    (b) Enact and enforce means the State's law is in effect and the 
State has begun to implement the law.
    (c) Motor vehicle means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical 
power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways, but does 
not include a vehicle operated solely on a rail or rails.
    (d) Open alcoholic beverage container means any bottle, can, or 
other receptacle that:
    (1) Contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and
    (2)(i) Is open or has a broken seal; or
    (ii) The contents of which are partially removed.
    (e) Passenger area means the area designed to seat the driver and 
passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is 
readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating 
positions, including the glove compartment.
    (f) Public highway or right-of-way of a public highway means the 
width between and immediately adjacent to the boundary lines of every 
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the 
public for purposes of vehicular travel; inclusion of the roadway and 
shoulders is sufficient.
    (g) State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, or 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

[63 FR 53585, Oct. 6, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 51538, Aug. 24, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1270.4  Compliance criteria.

    (a) To avoid the transfer of funds as specified in Sec. 1270.6 of 
this part, a State must enact and enforce a law that prohibits the 
possession of any open alcoholic beverage container, and the consumption 
of any alcoholic beverage, in the passenger area of any motor vehicle 
(including possession or consumption by the driver of the vehicle) 
located on a public highway, or the right-of-way of a public highway, in 
the State.
    (b) The law must apply to:
    (1) The possession of any open alcoholic beverage container and the 
consumption of any alcoholic beverage;
    (2) The passenger area of any motor vehicle;
    (3) All alcoholic beverages;
    (4) All occupants of a motor vehicle; and (5) All motor vehicles 
located a

[[Page 481]]

public highway or the right-of-way of a public highway.
    (c) The law must provide for primary enforcement.
    (d) Exceptions. (1) If a State has in effect a law that makes 
unlawful the possession of any open alcoholic beverage container and the 
consumption of any alcoholic beverage in the passenger area of any motor 
vehicle, but permits the possession of an open alcoholic beverage 
container in a locked glove compartment, or behind the last upright seat 
or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger in a 
motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk, the State shall be 
deemed to have in effect a law that applies to the passenger area of any 
vehicle, as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (2) If a State has in effect a law that makes unlawful the 
possession of any open alcoholic beverage container or the consumption 
of any alcoholic beverage by the driver (but not by a passenger) in the 
passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used 
primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation, or in the 
living quarters of a house coach or house trailer, the State shall be 
deemed to have in effect a law that applies to all occupants of a motor 
vehicle, as provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 1270.5  Certification requirements.

    (a) Until a State has been determined to be in compliance, or after 
a State has been determined to be in non-compliance, with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 154, to avoid the transfer of funds in any 
fiscal year, beginning with FY 2001, the State shall certify to the 
Secretary of Transportation, on or before September 30 of the previous 
fiscal year, that it meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 154 and this 
part.
    (b) The certification shall be made by an appropriate State 
official, and it shall provide that the State has enacted and is 
enforcing an open container law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 154 and Sec. 
1270.4 of this part.
    (1) If the State's open container law is currently in effect and is 
being enforced, the certification shall be worded as follows:

(Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, has enacted and is enforcing a open container 
law that conforms to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 154 and 23 CFR 
1270.4, (citations to pertinent State statutes, regulations, case law or 
other binding legal requirements, including definitions, as needed).

    (2) If the State's open container law is not currently in effect, 
but will become effective and be enforced by October 1 of the following 
fiscal year, the certification shall be worded as follows:

    (Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, has enacted an open container law that conforms 
to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 154 and 23 CFR 1270.4, (citations to 
pertinent State statutes, regulations, case law or other binding legal 
requirements, including definitions, as needed), and will become 
effective and be enforced as of (effective date of the law).

    (c) An original and four copies of the certification shall be 
submitted to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Administrator. Each Regional 
Administrator will forward the certifications to the appropriate NHTSA 
and FHWA offices.
    (d) Once a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 154, it is not required to submit additional 
certifications, except that the State shall promptly submit an amendment 
or supplement to its certification provided under paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of this section if the State's open container law changes or the State 
ceases to enforce such law.

[63 FR 53585, Oct. 6, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 51538, Aug. 24, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1270.6  Transfer of funds.

    (a) On October 1, 2000, and October 1, 2001, if a State does not 
have in effect or is not enforcing the law described in Sec. 1270.4, 
the Secretary shall transfer an amount equal to 1\1/2\ percent of the 
funds apportioned to the State for that fiscal year under each of 23 
U.S.C. 104(b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) to the apportionment of the State 
under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (b) On October 1, 2002, and each October 1 thereafter, if a State 
does not have in effect or is not enforcing the

[[Page 482]]

law described in Sec. 1270.4, the Secretary shall transfer an amount 
equal to 3 percent of the funds apportioned to the State for that fiscal 
year under each of 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) to the 
apportionment of the State under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (c) On October 1, the transfers to Section 402 apportionments will 
be made based on proportionate amounts from each of the apportionments 
under Sections 104(b)(1), (b)(3) and (b)(4). Then the State's Department 
of Transportation will be given until October 30 to notify FHWA, through 
the appropriate Division Administrator, if they would like to change the 
distribution among Section 104(b)(1), (b)(3) and (b)(4).

[63 FR 53585, Oct. 6, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 51538, Aug. 24, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1270.7  Use of transferred funds.

    (a) Any funds transferred under Sec. 1270.6 may:
    (1) Be used for approved projects for alcohol-impaired driving 
countermeasures; or
    (2) Be directed to State and local law enforcement agencies for 
enforcement of laws prohibiting driving while intoxicated or driving 
under the influence and other related laws (including regulations), 
including the purchase of equipment, the training of officers, and the 
use of additional personnel for specific alcohol-impaired driving 
countermeasures, dedicated to enforcement of the laws (including 
regulations).
    (b) States may elect to use all or a portion of the transferred 
funds for hazard elimination activities eligible under 23 U.S.C. 152.
    (c) No later than 60 days after the funds are transferred under 
Sec. 1270.6, the Governor's Representative for Highway Safety and the 
Secretary of the State's Department of Transportation for each State 
shall jointly identify, in writing to the appropriate NHTSA 
Administrator and FHWA Division Administrator, how the funds will be 
programmed among alcohol-impaired driving programs, hazard elimination 
programs and planning and administration costs.
    (d) The Federal share of the cost of any project carried out with 
the funds transferred under Sec. 1270.6 of this part shall be 100 
percent.
    (e) The amount to be transferred under Sec. 1270.6 of this part may 
be derived from one or more of the following:
    (1) The apportionment of the State under Sec. 104(b)(1);
    (2) The apportionment of the State under Sec. 104(b)(3); or
    (3) The apportionment of the State under Sec. 104(b)(4).
    (f)(1) If any funds are transferred under Sec. 1270.6 of this part 
to the apportionment of a State under Section 402 for a fiscal year, an 
amount, determined under paragraph (e)(2) of this section, of obligation 
authority will be distributed for the fiscal year to the State for 
Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction programs for 
carrying out projects under Section 402.
    (2) The amount of obligation authority referred to in paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section shall be determined by multiplying:
    (i) The amount of funds transferred under Sec. 1270.6 of this part 
to the apportionment of the State under Section 402 for the fiscal year; 
by
    (ii) The ratio that:
    (A) The amount of obligation authority distributed for the fiscal 
year to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety 
construction programs; bears to
    (B) The total of the sums apportioned to the State for Federal-aid 
highways and highway safety construction programs (excluding sums not 
subject to any obligation limitation) for the fiscal year.
    (g) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no limitation on the 
total obligations for highway safety programs under Section 402 shall 
apply to funds transferred under Sec. 1270.6 to the apportionment of a 
State under such section.

[63 FR 53585, Oct. 6, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 51538, Aug. 24, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1270.8  Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    (a) Each fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 154 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's 
preliminary review of its certification, will be advised of the funds 
expected to be transferred

[[Page 483]]

under Sec. 1270.4 from apportionment, as part of the advance notice of 
apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), normally not later than 
ninety days prior to final apportionment.
    (b) If NHTSA and FHWA determine that the State is not in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 154 and this part, based on the agencies' preliminary 
review, the State may, within 30 days of its receipt of the advance 
notice of apportionments, submit documentation showing why it is in 
compliance. Documentation shall be submitted to the appropriate National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration Regional office.
    (c) Each fiscal year, each State determined not to be in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 154 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's final 
determination, will receive notice of the funds being transferred under 
Sec. 1270.6 from apportionment, as part of the certification of 
apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), which normally occurs on 
October 1 of each fiscal year.


<R03>
PART 1275_REPEAT INTOXICATED DRIVER LAWS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1275.1 Scope.
1275.2 Purpose.
1275.3 Definitions.
1275.4 Compliance criteria.
1275.5 Certification requirements.
1275.6 Transfer of funds.
1275.7 Use of transferred funds.
1275.8 Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 164; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
Sec. Sec. 1.48 and 1.50.

    Source: 63 FR 55802, Oct. 19, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1275.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement Section 
164 of Title 23, United States Code, which encourages States to enact 
and enforce repeat intoxicated driver laws.


<R05>
Sec. 1275.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the steps that States must 
take to avoid the transfer of Federal-aid highway funds for 
noncompliance with 23 U.S.C. 164.


<R05>
Sec. 1275.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Alcohol concentration means grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters 
of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath.
    (b) Driver's motor vehicle means a motor vehicle with a title or 
registration on which the repeat intoxicated driver's name appears.
    (c) Driving while intoxicated means driving or being in actual 
physical control of a motor vehicle while having an alcohol 
concentration above the permitted limit as established by each State, or 
an equivalent non-BAC intoxicated driving offense.
    (d) Driving under the influence has the same meaning as ``driving 
while intoxicated.''
    (e) Enact and enforce means the State's law is in effect and the 
State has begun to implement the law.
    (f) Ignition interlock system means a State-certified system 
designed to prevent drivers from starting their car when their breath 
alcohol concentration is at or above a preset level.
    (g) Impoundment or immobilization means the removal of a motor 
vehicle from a repeat intoxicated driver's possession or the rendering 
of a repeat intoxicated driver's motor vehicle inoperable. For the 
purpose of this regulation, ``impoundment or immobilization'' also 
includes the forfeiture or confiscation of a repeat intoxicated driver's 
motor vehicle or the revocation or suspension of a repeat intoxicated 
driver's motor vehicle license plate or registration.
    (h) Imprisonment means confinement in a jail, minimum security 
facility, community corrections facility, house arrest with electronic 
monitoring, inpatient rehabilitation or treatment center, or other 
facility, provided the individual under confinement is in fact being 
detained.
    (i) License suspension means a hard suspension of all driving 
privileges.
    (j) Motor vehicle means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical 
power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways, but does 
not include a vehicle operated solely on a rail line or a commercial 
vehicle.

[[Page 484]]

    (k) Repeat intoxicated driver means a person who has been convicted 
of driving while intoxicated or driving under the influence of alcohol 
more than once in any five-year period.
    (l) Repeat intoxicated driver law means a State law that imposes the 
minimum penalties specified in Sec. 1275.4 of this part for all repeat 
intoxicated drivers.
    (m) State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia or 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

[63 FR 55802, Oct. 19, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 59124, Oct. 4, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1275.4  Compliance criteria.

    (a) To avoid the transfer of funds as specified in Sec. 1275.6 of 
this part, a State must enact and enforce a law that establishes, as a 
minimum penalty, that all repeat intoxicated drivers shall:
    (1) Receive a driver's license suspension of not less than one year;
    (2) Be subject to either--
    (i) The impoundment of each of the driver's motor vehicles during 
the one-year license suspension;
    (ii) The immobilization of each of the driver's motor vehicles 
during the one-year license suspension; or
    (iii) The installation of a State-approved ignition interlock system 
on each of the driver's motor vehicles at the conclusion of the one-year 
license suspension;
    (3) Receive an assessment of their degree of alcohol abuse, and 
treatment as appropriate; and
    (4) Receive a mandatory sentence of--
    (i) Not less than five days of imprisonment or 30 days of community 
service for a second offense; and
    (ii) Not less than ten days of imprisonment or 60 days of community 
service for a third or subsequent offense.
    (b) Exceptions. (1) A State may provide limited exceptions to the 
impoundment or immobilization requirements contained in paragraphs 
(a)(2)(i) and (a)(2)(ii) of this section on an individual basis, to 
avoid undue hardship to any individual who is completely dependent on 
the motor vehicle for the necessities of life, including any family 
member of the convicted individual, and any co-owner of the motor 
vehicle, but not including the offender.
    (2) A State may provide limited exceptions to the requirement to 
install an ignition interlock system on each of the offender's motor 
vehicles, contained in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section, on an 
individual basis, to avoid undue financial hardship, provided the State 
law requires that the offender may not operate a motor vehicle without 
an ignition interlock system.
    (3) Such exceptions may be issued only in accordance with a State 
law, regulation or binding policy directive establishing the conditions 
under which vehicles may be released by the State or under Statewide 
published guidelines and in exceptional circumstances specific to the 
offender's motor vehicle, and may not result in the unrestricted use of 
the vehicle by the repeat intoxicated driver.

[63 FR 55802, Oct. 19, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 59124, Oct. 4, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1275.5  Certification requirements.

    (a) Until a State has been determined to be in compliance, or after 
a State has been determined to be in non-compliance, with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 164, to avoid the transfer of funds in any 
fiscal year, beginning with FY 2001, the State shall certify to the 
Secretary of Transportation, on or before September 30 of the previous 
fiscal year, that it meets the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 164 and this 
part.
    (b) The certification shall be made by an appropriate State 
official, and it shall provide that the State has enacted and is 
enforcing a repeat intoxicated driver law that conforms to 23 U.S.C. 164 
and Sec. 1275.4 of this part.
    (1) If the State's repeat intoxicated driver law is currently in 
effect and is being enforced, the certification shall be worded as 
follows:

    (Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, has enacted and is enforcing a repeat 
intoxicated driver law that conforms to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 
164 and 23 CFR 1275.4, (citations to pertinent State statutes, 
regulations, case law or other binding legal requirements, including 
definitions, as needed).

    (2) If the State's repeat intoxicated driver law is not currently in 
effect,

[[Page 485]]

but will become effective and be enforced by October 1 of the following 
fiscal year, the certification shall be worded as follows:

    (Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of ------, has enacted a repeat intoxicated driver law 
that conforms to the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 164 and 23 CFR 1275.4, 
(citations to pertinent State statutes, regulations, case law or other 
binding legal requirements, including definitions, as needed), and will 
become effective and be enforced as of (effective date of the law).

    (c) An original and four copies of the certification shall be 
submitted to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Administrator. Each Regional 
Administrator will forward the certifications to the appropriate NHTSA 
and FHWA offices.
    (d) Once a State has been determined to be in compliance with the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 164, it is not required to submit additional 
certifications, except that the State shall promptly submit an amendment 
or supplement to its certification provided under paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of this section if the State's repeat intoxicated driver legislation 
changes or the State ceases to enforce its law.

[63 FR 55802, Oct. 19, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 59124, Oct. 4, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1275.6  Transfer of funds.

    (a) On October 1, 2000, and October 1, 2001, if a State does not 
have in effect or is not enforcing the law described in Sec. 1275.4, 
the Secretary shall transfer an amount equal to 1\1/2\ percent of the 
funds apportioned to the State for the fiscal year under each of 23 
U.S.C. 104(b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) to the apportionment of the State 
under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (b) On October 1, 2002, and each October 1 thereafter, if a State 
does not have in effect or is not enforcing the law described in Sec. 
1275.4, the Secretary shall transfer an amount equal to 3 percent of the 
funds apportioned to the State for the fiscal year under each of 23 
U.S.C. 104(b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) to the apportionment of the State 
under 23 U.S.C. 402.
    (c) On October 1, the transfers to section 402 apportionments will 
be made based on proportionate amounts from each of the apportionments 
under 23 U.S.C. 104(b)(1),(b)(3) and (b)(4). Then the States will be 
given until October 30 to notify FHWA, through the appropriate Division 
Administrator, if they would like to change the distribution among 23 
U.S.C. 104(b)(1),(b)(3) and (b)(4).

[63 FR 55802, Oct. 19, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 59124, Oct. 4, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1275.7  Use of transferred funds.

    (a) Any funds transferred under Sec. 1275.6 may:
    (1) Be used for approved projects for alcohol-impaired driving 
countermeasures; or
    (2) Be directed to State and local law enforcement agencies for 
enforcement of laws prohibiting driving while intoxicated or driving 
under the influence and other related laws (including regulations), 
including the purchase of equipment, the training of officers, and the 
use of additional personnel for specific alcohol-impaired driving 
countermeasures, dedicated to enforcement of the laws (including 
regulations).
    (b) States may elect to use all or a portion of the transferred 
funds for hazard elimination activities eligible under 23 U.S.C. 152.
    (c) The Governor's Representative for Highway Safety and the 
Secretary of the State's Department of Transportation for each State 
shall jointly identify, in writing to the appropriate NHTSA 
Administrator and FHWA Division Administrator, how the funds will be 
programmed among alcohol-impaired driving programs, hazard elimination 
programs, and planning and administration costs, no later than 60 days 
after the funds are transferred.
    (d) The Federal share of the cost of any project carried out with 
the funds transferred under Sec. 1275.6 of this part shall be 100 
percent.
    (e) The amount to be transferred under Sec. 1275.6 of this Part may 
be derived from one or more of the following:
    (1) The apportionment of the State under Sec. 104(b)(1);
    (2) The apportionment of the State under Sec. 104(b)(3); or
    (3) The apportionment of the State under Sec. 104(b)(4).

[[Page 486]]

    (f)(1) If any funds are transferred under Sec. 1275.6 of this part 
to the apportionment of a State under Section 402 for a fiscal year, an 
amount, determined under paragraph (e)(2) of this section, of obligation 
authority will be distributed for the fiscal year to the State for 
Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction programs for 
carrying out projects under Section 402.
    (2) The amount of obligation authority referred to in paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section shall be determined by multiplying:
    (i) The amount of funds transferred under Sec. 1275.6 of this Part 
to the apportionment of the State under Section 402 for the fiscal year; 
by
    (ii) The ratio that:
    (A) The amount of obligation authority distributed for the fiscal 
year to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety 
construction programs; bears to
    (B) The total of the sums apportioned to the State for Federal-aid 
highways and highway safety construction programs (excluding sums not 
subject to any obligation limitation) for the fiscal year.
    (g) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no limitation on the 
total obligations for highway safety programs under Section 402 shall 
apply to funds transferred under Sec. 1275.6 to the apportionment of a 
State under such section.

[63 FR 55802, Oct. 19, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 59124, Oct. 4, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1275.8  Procedures affecting States in noncompliance.

    (a) Each fiscal year, each State determined to be in noncompliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 164 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's 
preliminary review of its certification, will be advised of the funds 
expected to be transferred under Sec. 1275.4 from apportionment, as 
part of the advance notice of apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 
104(e), normally not later than ninety days prior to final 
apportionment.
    (b) If NHTSA and FHWA determine that the State is not in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 164 and this part, based on the agencies' preliminary 
review, the State may, within 30 days of its receipt of the advance 
notice of apportionments, submit documentation showing why it is in 
compliance. Documentation shall be submitted to the appropriate National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration Regional office.
    (c) Each fiscal year, each State determined not to be in compliance 
with 23 U.S.C. 164 and this part, based on NHTSA's and FHWA's final 
determination, will receive notice of the funds being transferred under 
Sec. 1275.6 from apportionment, as part of the certification of 
apportionments required under 23 U.S.C. 104(e), which normally occurs on 
October 1 of each fiscal year.

[[Page 487]]


<R02>
CHAPTER III--NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT 
                            OF TRANSPORTATION


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
Part                                                                Page
1313            Incentive grant criteria for alcohol-
                    impaired driving prevention programs....         489
1327            Procedures for participating in and 
                    receiving information from the National 
                    Driver Register Problem Driver Pointer 
                    System..................................         500
1335            State highway safety data improvements......         510
1340            Uniform criteria for State observational 
                    surveys of seat belt use................         513
1345            Incentive grant criteria for occupant 
                    protection programs.....................         516
1346-1399       [Reserved]

[[Page 489]]


<R03>
PART 1313_INCENTIVE GRANT CRITERIA FOR ALCOHOL-IMPAIRED DRIVING PREVENTION 
PROGRAMS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1313.1 Scope.
1313.2 Purpose.
1313.3 Definitions.
1313.4 General requirements.
1313.5 Requirements for a programmatic basic grant.
1313.6 Requirements for a performance basic grant.
1313.7 Requirements for a supplemental grant.
1313.8 Award procedures.

Appendix A to Part 1313--Tamper Resistant Driver's License

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 410; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 63 FR 71700, Dec. 29, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1313.1  Scope.

    This part establishes criteria, in accordance with 23 U.S.C. 410, 
for awarding incentive grants to States that adopt and implement 
effective programs to reduce traffic safety problems resulting from 
individuals driving motor vehicles while under the influence of alcohol.


<R05>
Sec. 1313.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to encourage States to adopt and 
implement effective programs to reduce traffic safety problems resulting 
from individuals driving motor vehicles while under the influence of 
alcohol. The criteria established are intended to ensure that State 
alcohol-impaired driving prevention programs for which incentive grants 
are awarded meet or exceed minimum levels designed to improve the 
effectiveness of such programs.


<R05>
Sec. 1313.3  Definitions.

    (a) Alcoholic beverage means wine containing one-half of one percent 
or more of alcohol by volume, beer and distilled spirits. Beer includes, 
but is not limited to, ale, lager, porter, stout, sake, and other 
similar fermented beverages brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in 
part, or from any substitute therefor. Distilled spirits include 
alcohol, ethanol, or spirits or wine in any form, including all 
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever process produced.
    (b) Blood alcohol concentration or BAC means grams of alcohol per 
deciliter or 100 milliliters blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of 
breath.
    (c) Controlled substance has the meaning given such term under 
section 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 802(6).
    (d) FARS means NHTSA's Fatality Analysis Reporting System, 
previously called the Fatal Accident Reporting System.
    (e) Motor vehicle means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical 
power and manufactured primarily for use on public streets, roads and 
highways, but does not include a vehicle operated only on a rail line.
    (f) Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol 
means operating a vehicle while the alcohol concentration in the blood 
or breath, as determined by chemical or other tests, equals or exceeds 
the level established by the State that would be deemed to be or 
equivalent to the standard driving while intoxicated offense in the 
State.
    (g) Standard driving while intoxicated (DWI) offense means the law 
in the State that makes it a criminal offense to operate a motor vehicle 
while under the influence of or intoxicated by alcohol, but does not 
require a measurement of alcoholic content.


<R05>
Sec. 1313.4  General requirements.

    (a) Qualification requirements. To qualify for a grant under 23 
U.S.C. 410, a State must, for each fiscal year it seeks to qualify:
    (1) Submit an application to the appropriate NHTSA Regional Office 
that demonstrates that it meets the requirements of Sec. 1313.5 and/or 
Sec. 1313.6 and, if applicable, Sec. 1313.7, and includes 
certifications that:
    (i) It has an alcohol-impaired driving prevention program that meets 
the requirements of 23 U.S.C. 410 and 23 CFR Part 1313;
    (ii) It will use the funds awarded under 23 U.S.C. 410 only for the 
implementation and enforcement of alcohol-impaired driving prevention 
programs;

[[Page 490]]

    (iii) It will administer the funds in accordance with 49 CFR Part 18 
and OMB Circulars A-102 and A-87; and
    (iv) It will maintain its aggregate expenditures from all other 
sources for its alcohol-impaired driving prevention programs at or above 
the average level of such expenditures in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 
(either State or Federal fiscal year 1996 and 1997 can be used); and
    (2) After being informed by NHTSA that it is eligible for a grant, 
submit to the agency, within 30 days, a Program Cost Summary (HS Form 
217) obligating the Section 410 funds to alcohol-impaired driving 
prevention programs.
    (3) Submit a State Highway Safety Plan by September 1 of each year, 
pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 402 and 23 CFR part 1200, that documents how the 
State intends to use the Section 410 grant funds.
    (4) Submit an application for grant funds, which must be received by 
the agency not later than August 1 of the fiscal year for which the 
State is applying for funds.
    (b) Limitation on grants. A State may receive grants for up to six 
fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1997, subject to the 
following limitations:
    (1) After September 30, 1998, the amount of each basic grant in a 
fiscal year, under Sec. 1313.5 or Sec. 1313.6, shall equal 25 percent 
of the State's apportionment under 23 U.S.C. 402 for FY 1997, subject to 
the availability of funds. If a State qualifies for basic grants in a 
fiscal year under both Sec. 1313.5 and Sec. 1313.6, the total amount 
of basic grants in the fiscal year shall equal 50 percent of the State's 
23 U.S.C. 402 apportionment for FY 1997, subject to the availability of 
funds.
    (2) After September 30, 1998, the amount of a State's supplemental 
grant in a fiscal year, under Sec. 1313.7, shall be determined by 
multiplying the number of supplemental grant criteria the State meets by 
five percent of the State's 23 U.S.C. 402 apportionment for FY 1997, 
except that the amount shall be subject to the availability of funds. 
The amount available for supplemental grants for all States in a fiscal 
year, under Sec. 1313.7, shall not exceed ten percent of the total 
amount made available under 23 U.S.C. 410 for the fiscal year.
    (3) In the first and second fiscal years a State receives a basic or 
supplemental grant, it shall be reimbursed for up to 75 percent of the 
cost of its alcohol-impaired driving prevention program adopted pursuant 
to 23 U.S.C. 410.
    (4) In the third and fourth fiscal years a State receives a basic or 
supplemental grant, it shall be reimbursed for up to 50 percent of the 
cost of its alcohol-impaired driving prevention program adopted pursuant 
to 23 U.S.C. 410.
    (5) In the fifth and sixth fiscal years a State receives a basic or 
supplemental grant, it shall be reimbursed for up to 25 percent of the 
cost of its alcohol-impaired driving prevention program adopted pursuant 
to 23 U.S.C. 410.


<R05>
Sec. 1313.5  Requirements for a programmatic basic grant.

    To qualify for a programmatic basic incentive grant of 25 percent of 
the State's 23 U.S.C. 402 apportionment for FY 1997, a State must adopt 
and demonstrate compliance with at least five of the following criteria:
    (a) Administrative license suspension or revocation system--(1) 
Criterion. An administrative driver's license suspension or revocation 
system for individuals who operate motor vehicles while under the 
influence of alcohol that requires that:
    (i) In the case of an individual who, in any five-year period 
beginning after June 9, 1998, is determined on the basis of a chemical 
test to have been operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of 
alcohol or is determined to have refused to submit to such a test as 
proposed by a law enforcement officer, the State entity responsible for 
administering driver's licenses, upon receipt of the report of the law 
enforcement officer, shall:
    (A) Suspend all driving privileges for a period of not less than 90 
days if the individual refused to submit to a chemical test and is a 
first offender;
    (B) Suspend all driving privileges for a period of not less than 90 
days, or not less than 30 days followed immediately by a period of not 
less than 60 days of a restricted, provisional or conditional license, 
if the individual was determined on the basis of a chemical test to have 
been operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol,

[[Page 491]]

and is a first offender. A restricted, provisional or conditional 
license may be issued only in accordance with a State law, regulation or 
binding policy directive establishing the conditions under which such a 
license may be issued, or with statewide published guidelines, and in 
exceptional circumstances specific to the offender; and
    (C) Suspend or revoke all driving privileges for a period of not 
less than one year if the individual was determined on the basis of a 
chemical test to have been operating a motor vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol or refused to submit to such a test, and is a 
repeat offender; and
    (ii) The suspension or revocation shall take effect not later than 
30 days after the day on which the individual refused to submit to a 
chemical test or received notice of having been determined to be 
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, in 
accordance with the procedures of the State.
    (2) Definitions--(i) First offender means an individual who a law 
enforcement officer has probable cause under State law to believe has 
committed an alcohol-related traffic offense, and who is determined on 
the basis of a chemical test to have been operating a motor vehicle 
while under the influence of alcohol or who refused to submit to such a 
test, once in any five-year period beginning after June 9, 1998.
    (ii) Repeat offender means an individual who a law enforcement 
officer has probable cause under State law to believe has committed an 
alcohol-related traffic offense, and who is determined on the basis of a 
chemical test to have been operating a motor vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol or who refused to submit to such a test, more than 
once in any five-year period beginning after June 9, 1998.
    (3) Demonstrating compliance for Law States. (i) To demonstrate 
compliance in the first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on 
this criterion, a Law State shall submit a copy of the law, regulation 
or binding policy directive implementing or interpreting the law or 
regulation, which provides for each element of this criterion.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, a Law 
State shall submit a copy of any changes to the State's law, regulation 
or binding policy directive or, if there have been no changes, the State 
shall submit a statement certifying that there have been no changes in 
the State's laws, regulations or binding policy directives.
    (iii) For purposes of this paragraph, Law State means a State that 
has a law, regulation or binding policy directive implementing or 
interpreting an existing law or regulation that provides for each 
element of this criterion.
    (4) Demonstrating compliance for Data States. (i) To demonstrate 
compliance in the first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on 
this criterion, a Data State shall submit a copy of the law, regulation 
or binding policy directive implementing or interpreting the law or 
regulation, which provides for an administrative license suspension or 
revocation system, and data showing that the State substantially 
complies with each element of this criterion not specifically provided 
for in the State's law, regulation or binding policy directive.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, a Data 
State shall submit, in addition to the information identified in 
paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section, data showing that the State 
substantially complies with each element of this criterion not 
specifically provided for in the State's law, regulation or binding 
policy directive.
    (iii) The State can provide the necessary data based on a 
representative sample, on the average number of days it took to suspend 
or revoke a driver's license and on the average lengths of suspension or 
revocation periods, except that data on the average lengths of 
suspension or revocation periods must not include license suspension 
periods that exceed the terms actually prescribed by the State, and must 
reflect terms only to the extent that they are actually completed.
    (iv) For the purpose of this paragraph, Data State means a State 
that has a law, regulation or binding policy directive implementing or 
interpreting

[[Page 492]]

an existing law or regulation that provides for an administrative 
license suspension or revocation system, but the State's laws, 
regulations or binding policy directives do not specifically provide for 
each element of this criterion.
    (b) Underage drinking prevention program--(1) Criterion. An 
effective underage drinking prevention program designed to prevent 
persons under the age of 21 from obtaining alcoholic beverages and to 
prevent persons of any age from making alcoholic beverages available to 
persons under the age of 21, that provides for:
    (i) The issuance of tamper resistant driver's licenses to persons 
under age 21 that are easily distinguishable in appearance from driver's 
licenses issued to persons 21 years of age and older;
    (ii) Public information programs targeted to underage drivers 
regarding drinking age laws, zero tolerance laws, and respective 
penalties;
    (iii) A program to educate alcoholic beverage retailers and servers 
about both on- and off-premise consumption, and the civil, 
administrative and/or criminal penalties associated with the illegal 
sale of alcoholic beverages to underage drinkers;
    (iv) An overall enforcement strategy directed at the sale and 
purchase of alcoholic beverages involving persons under the age of 21 
that can be implemented locally throughout the State; and
    (v) A prevention program that enlists the aid of persons under the 
age of 21.
    (2) Definitions--(i) Tamper resistant driver's license means a 
driver's license that has one or more of the security features listed in 
Appendix A.
    (3) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a description and sample materials documenting an 
underage drinking prevention program that covers each element of 
paragraphs (b)(1) (ii) through (v) of this section. The State shall also 
submit sample driver's licenses issued to persons both under and over 21 
years of age that demonstrate the distinctive appearance of licenses for 
drivers under age 21 and the tamper resistance of these licenses.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall document any changes to the State's driver's licenses or underage 
drinking prevention program or, if there have been no changes, a 
statement certifying that there have been no changes in the State's 
driver's licenses or its underage drinking prevention program.
    (c) Statewide traffic enforcement program--(1) Criterion. A 
Statewide traffic enforcement program that emphasizes publicity and is 
either:
    (i) A program for stopping motor vehicles on a non-discriminatory, 
lawful basis for the purpose of determining whether or not the operators 
of such motor vehicles are driving under the influence of alcohol; or
    (ii) A special traffic enforcement program to detect impaired 
drivers operating motor vehicles while under the influence of alcohol.
    (2) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a comprehensive plan to conduct a program under 
which:
    (A) Motor vehicles are stopped or special traffic enforcement is 
conducted on a Statewide basis, in major areas covering at least 50 
percent of the State's population;
    (B) Stops are made or special traffic enforcement is conducted not 
less than monthly;
    (C) Stops are made or special traffic enforcement is conducted by 
both State and local (county and city) law enforcement agencies; and
    (D) Effective public information efforts are conducted to inform the 
public about these enforcement programs.
    (ii) The plan shall include guidelines, policies or operation 
procedures governing the Statewide enforcement program and provide 
approximate dates and locations of programs planned in the upcoming 
year, and the names of the law enforcement agencies expected to 
participate. The plan shall describe the public information efforts to 
be conducted.
    (iii) to demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the 
State shall submit an updated plan for conducting a Statewide 
enforcement program in the following year and information

[[Page 493]]

documenting that the prior year's plan was effectively implemented.
    (d) Graduated driver's licensing system--(1) Criterion. A graduated 
driver's licensing system for young drivers that consists of the 
following three stages:
    (i) Stage I. A learner's permit may be issued after an applicant 
passes vision and knowledge test, including tests about the rules of the 
road, signs and signals. The State I learner's permit must be subject to 
the following conditions:
    (A) Stage I learner's permit holders under the age of 21 are 
prohibited from operating a motor vehicle with a BAC of 0.02 or greater;
    (B) Stage I learner's permit holders are prohibited from operating a 
motor vehicle while any occupant in the vehicle is not properly 
restrained in accordance with State or local safety belt and child 
restraint laws;
    (C) A licensed driver who is 21 years of age or older must be in any 
motor vehicle operated by the Stage I learner's permit holder at all 
times;
    (D) Stage I learner's permit holders must remain conviction free for 
not less than three months; and
    (E) The Stage I learner's permit must be distinguishable from Stage 
II and III driver's licenses;
    (ii) Stage II. An intermediate driver's license may be issued after 
an applicant has successfully complied with the conditions of the Stage 
I learner's permit for not less than three months and passed a driving 
skills test. The Stage II intermediate driver's license must be subject 
to the following conditions:
    (A) Stage II intermediate driver's license holders under the age of 
21 are prohibited from operating a motor vehicle with a BAC of 0.02 or 
greater;
    (B) Stage II intermediate driver's license holders are prohibited 
from operating a motor vehicle while any occupant in the vehicle is not 
properly restrained in accordance with state or local safety belt and 
child restraint laws;
    (C) A licensed driver who is 21 years of age or older must be in any 
motor vehicle operated by the Stage II intermediate driver's license 
holder, during some period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 
6:00 a.m.. as specified by the State, unless covered by a State-approved 
exception;
    (D) Stage II intermediate driver's license holders must have 
remained conviction free during Stages I and II for a combined period of 
not less than one year; and
    (E) The Stage II intermediate driver's license must be 
distinguishable from Stage I learner's permits and Stage III driver's 
licenses; and
    (iii) Stage III. A driver's license may be issued after an applicant 
has successfully complied with the conditions of the Stage I learner's 
permit and the Stage II intermediate driver's license for a combined 
period of not less than one year. The Stage III driver's license must be 
distinguishable from Stage I learner's permits and Stage II intermediate 
driver's licenses.
    (2) Definitions.
    (i) Conviction free means that, during the term of the permit or 
license, the driver has not been charged with and subsequently convicted 
of any offense under State or local law relating to the use or operation 
of a motor vehicle, to the extent required by State law.
    (ii) Successfully complied means that the driver:
    (A) Did not violate any of the conditions of the previous stage(s), 
or
    (B) Has been subject to the consequences prescribed by State or 
local law for violating the conditions of the previous stage(s).
    (3) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a copy of the law, regulation or binding policy 
directive implementing or interpreting the law or regulation, which 
provides for each element of this criterion. If the State's law, 
regulation or binding policy directive does not provide that Stage I 
permits and Stage II and Stage III licenses must be distinguishable, the 
State shall submit either:
    (A) Sample permits and licenses, which contain visual features that 
would enable a law enforcement officer to distinguish between the permit 
and the licenses; or
    (B) A description of the State's system, which enables law 
enforcement officers in the State during traffic stops

[[Page 494]]

to distinguish between the permit and the licenses.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit a copy of any changes to the State's law, regulation, 
binding policy directive, permit or licenses, or State system or, if 
there have been no changes, the State shall submit a statement 
certifying that there have been no changes in the State's laws, 
regulations, binding policy directives, permit or licenses, or State 
system.
    (e) Program for drivers with high BAC--(1) Criterion. Programs to 
target individuals with a high BAC who operate a motor vehicle.
    (i) The programs shall establish a system of graduated sanctions for 
individuals convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol, under which enhanced or additional sanctions apply 
to such individuals if they were determined to have a high BAC.
    (ii) The threshold level at which the high BAC sanctions must begin 
to apply may be any BAC level that is higher than the BAC level 
established by the State that is deemed to be or equivalent to the 
standard driving while intoxicated (DWI) offense, and less than or equal 
to 0.20 BAC.
    (2) Definitions. Enhanced or additional sanctions means the 
imposition of longer terms of license suspension, increased fines, 
additional or extended sentences of confinement, vehicle sanctions, 
mandatory assessment and treatment as appropriate, or other consequences 
that do not apply to individuals who were not determined to have a high 
BAC.
    (3) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a copy of the law, regulation or binding policy 
directive implementing or interpreting the law or regulation, which 
provides for each element of this criterion. In addition, the State 
shall submit the provisions that set forth the sanctions under its 
standard DWI offense.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit a copy of any changes to the State's law, regulation or 
binding policy directive or, if there have been no changes, the State 
shall submit a statement certifying that there have been no changes in 
the State's laws, regulations or binding policy directives.
    (f) Young Adult Drinking and Driving Program--(1) Criterion A young 
adult drinking and driving program designed to reduce the incidence of 
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol by 
individuals between the ages of 21 and 34 that provides for:
    (i) A Statewide public information and awareness campaign for young 
adult drivers regarding alcohol-impaired driving laws, and the legal and 
economic consequences of alcohol-impaired driving; and
    (ii) Activities, implemented at the State and local levels, designed 
to reduce the incidence of alcohol-impaired driving by drivers between 
the ages of 21 and 34 that involve:
    (A) The participation of employers;
    (B) The participation of colleges or universities;
    (C) The participation of the hospitality industry; or
    (D) The participation of appropriate State officials to encourage 
the assessments and incorporation of treatment as appropriate into 
judicial sentencing for drivers between the ages for 21 and 34 who have 
been convicted for the first time of operating a motor vehicle while 
under the influence of alcohol.
    (2) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit:
    (A) A description and sample materials documenting the State's 
Statewide public information and awareness campaign;
    (B) A description and sample materials documenting activities 
designed to reduce the incidence of alcohol-impaired driving by young 
drivers, which must involve at least one of the four components 
contained in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this section; and
    (C) A plan that outlines proposed efforts to involve in these 
activities all four components contained in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this 
section.

[[Page 495]]

    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit:
    (A) An updated description of its Statewide public information and 
awareness campaign;
    (B) A description and sample materials documenting activities 
designed to reduce the incidence of alcohol-impaired driving by young 
drivers, which must involve:
    (1) At least two of the four components contained in paragraph 
(f)(1)(ii) of this section in the second fiscal year the State receives 
Section 410 funds based on this criterion;
    (2) At least three of the four components contained in paragraph 
(f)(1)(ii) of this section in the third fiscal year the State receives 
Section 410 funds based on this criterion; and
    (3) All four components contained in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this 
section in the fourth or subsequent fiscal year the State receives 
Section 410 funds based on this criterion; and
    (C) An updated plan that outlines proposed efforts to involve all 
four components contained in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this section, until 
the State's activities involve all four components.
    (g) Testing for BAC--(1) Criterion. (i) In FY 1999 and FY 2000, an 
effective system for increasing the percentage of BAC testing among 
drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes, under which:
    (A) BAC testing law. The State's law provides for mandatory BAC 
testing for any driver involved in a fatal motor vehicle crash;
    (B) BAC testing data. The State's percentage of BAC testing among 
drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes is equal to or greater 
than the national average, as determined by the most recently available 
final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for which grant funds 
are being sought.
    (C) BAC testing symposium. The State has plans to conduct, or 
conducted no more than two years prior to the date of its application, a 
symposium or workshop designed to increase the percentage of BAC testing 
for drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes. The symposium or 
workshop must be attended by law enforcement officials, prosecutors, 
hospital officials, medical examiners, coroners, physicians, and judges; 
and must address the medical, ethical, and legal impediments to 
increasing the percentage of BAC testing among drivers involved in fatal 
motor vehicle crashes.
    (ii) In FY 2001 and each subsequent fiscal year, a percentage of BAC 
testing among drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes that is 
equal to or greater than the national average, as determined by the most 
recently available final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for 
which grant funds are being sought.
    (2) Definitions--(i) Drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes 
includes both drivers who are fatally injured in motor vehicle crashes 
and drivers who survive a motor vehicle crash in which someone else is 
killed.
    (ii) Mandatory BAC testing means a law enforcement officer must 
request each driver involved in a fatal motor vehicle crash to submit to 
BAC testing.
    (3) Demonstrating compliance in FY 1999 and FY 2000. (i) To 
demonstrate compliance based on this criterion in FY 1999 or FY 2000, 
the State shall submit:
    (A) A copy of the law, regulation or binding policy directive 
implementing or interpreting the law or regulation, which provides for 
each element of the mandatory BAC testing requirement, as provided in 
paragraph (g)(1)(i)(A) of this section;
    (B) A statement certifying that the percentage of BAC testing among 
drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes in the State is equal to 
or greater than the national average, as determined by the most recently 
available final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for which 
grant funds are being sought; or
    (C) A description of the planned or completed symposium or workshop, 
including a copy of the actual or proposed agenda and a list of the 
names and affiliations of the individuals who attended or who are 
expected to be invited to attend, except as provided in paragraph 
(g)(3)(ii)(C).
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in FY 2000:
    (A) If in the first fiscal year the State demonstrated compliance 
under

[[Page 496]]

paragraph (g)(3)(i)(A), the State may submit instead a copy of any 
changes to the State's law, regulation or binding policy directive or, 
if there have been no changes, the State shall submit a statement 
certifying that there have been no changes in the States laws, 
regulations or binding policy directives.
    (B) If in the first fiscal year the State demonstrated compliance 
under paragraph (g)(3)(i)(B), the State may submit instead a statement 
certifying that the percentage of BAC testing among drivers involved in 
fatal motor vehicle crashes in the State continues to be equal to or 
greater than the national average, as determined by the most recently 
available final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for which 
grant funds are being sought.
    (C) If in the first fiscal year the State demonstrated compliance 
under paragraph (g)(3)(i)(C), the State shall submit instead a copy of 
the report or other documentation that was generated as a result of the 
symposium or workshop, with recommendations designed to increase BAC 
testing for drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes, and a plan 
that outlines how the recommendations will be implemented in the State.
    (4) Demonstrating compliance beginning in FY 2001. To demonstrate 
compliance for a grant based on this criterion in FY 2001 or any 
subsequent fiscal year, the State shall submit a statement certifying 
that the percentage of BAC testing among drivers involved in fatal motor 
vehicle crashes in the State is equal to or greater than the national 
average, as determined by the most recently available final FARS data as 
of August 1 of the fiscal year for which grant funds are being sought.

[63 FR 71700, Dec. 29, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 46355, July 28, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1313.6  Requirements for a performance basic grant.

    (a) Criterion. A State will qualify for a performance basic 
incentive grant of 25 percent of the State's 23 U.S.C. 402 apportionment 
for FY 1997 if:
    (1) The percentage of fatally injured drivers in the State with a 
BAC of 0.10 percent or greater has decreased in each of the three most 
recent calendar years for which statistics for determining such 
percentages are available as determined by the most recently available 
final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for which grant funds 
are being sought; and
    (2) The percentage of fatally injured drivers in the State with a 
BAC of 0.10 percent or greater has been lower than the average 
percentage for all States in each of the same three calendar years.
    (b) Calculating percentages. (1) The percentage of fatally injured 
drivers with a BAC of 0.10 percent or greater in each State is 
calculated by NHTSA for each calendar year, using the most recently 
available final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for which 
grant funds are being sought and NHTSA's method for estimating alcohol 
involvement.
    (2) The average percentage of fatally injured drivers with a BAC of 
0.10 percent or greater for all States is calculated by NHTSA for each 
calendar year, using the most recently available final FARS data as of 
August 1 of the fiscal year for which grant funds are being sought and 
NHTSA's method for estimating alcohol involvement.
    (3) Any State with a percentage of BAC testing among fatally injured 
drivers of 85 percent or greater in each of the three most recent 
calendar years, as determined by the most recently available final FARS 
data as of August 1 of the fiscal year for which grant funds are being 
sought, may calculate for submission to NHTSA the percentage of fatally 
injured drivers with a BAC of 0.10 percent or greater in that State for 
those calendar years, using State data.
    (c) Demonstrating compliance. (1) To demonstrate compliance with 
this criterion, a State shall submit a statement certifying that the 
State meets each element of this criterion, based on the percentages 
calculated in accordance with paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (2) Alternatively, a State with a percentage of BAC testing among 
fatally injured drivers of 85 percent or greater, as determined by the 
most recently available final FARS data as of August 1 of the fiscal 
year for which grant funds are being sought, may demonstrate compliance 
with this criterion

[[Page 497]]

by submitting its calculations developed under paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section and a statement certifying that the State meets each element of 
this criterion, based on the percentages calculated in accordance with 
paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section.

[63 FR 71700, Dec. 29, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 46356, July 28, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1313.7   Requirements for a supplemental grant.

    To qualify for a supplemental grant under this section, a State must 
qualify for a programmatic basic grant under Sec. 1313.5, a performance 
basic grant under Sec. 1313.6, or both, and meet one or more of the 
following criteria:
    (a) Video equipment program--(1) Criterion. A program:
    (i) To acquire video equipment to be installed in law enforcement 
vehicles and used in detecting persons who operate motor vehicles while 
under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance;
    (ii) To effectively prosecute those persons; and
    (iii) To train personnel in the use of that equipment.
    (2) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a plan for the acquisition and use of video 
equipment in law enforcement vehicles for the enforcement of impaired 
driving laws, including:
    (A) A schedule for the areas where the equipment has been and will 
be installed and used;
    (B) A plan for training law enforcement personnel, prosecutors and 
judges in the use of this equipment; and
    (C) A plan for public information and education programs to enhance 
the general deterrent effect of the equipment.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit information on the use and effectiveness of the equipment 
and an updated plan for any acquisition and use of additional equipment.
    (b) Self-sustaining drunk driving prevention program--(1) Criterion. 
A self-sustaining drunk driving prevention program under which a 
significant portion of the fines or surcharges collected from 
individuals apprehended and fined for operating a motor vehicle while 
under the influence of alcohol are returned to communities with 
comprehensive programs for the prevention of such operations of motor 
vehicles.
    (2) Definitions--(i) A comprehensive drunk driving prevention 
program means a program that includes, as a minimum, the following 
components:
    (A) Regularly conducted, peak-hour traffic enforcement efforts 
directed at impaired driving;
    (B) Prosecution, adjudication and sanctioning resources are adequate 
to handle increased levels of arrests for operating a motor vehicle 
while under the influence of alcohol;
    (C) Other programs directed at prevention other than enforcement and 
adjudication activities, such as school, worksite or community 
education; server training; or treatment programs; and
    (D) A public information program designed to make the public aware 
of the problem of impaired driving and of the efforts in place to 
address it.
    (ii) Fines or surcharges collected means fines, penalties, fees or 
additional assessments collected.
    (3) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, a 
State shall submit:
    (A) A copy of the law, regulation or biding policy directive 
implementing or interpreting the law or regulation, which provides:
    (1) For fines or surcharges to be imposed on individuals apprehended 
for operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol; and
    (2) For such fines or surcharges collected to be returned to 
communities with comprehensive drunk driving prevention programs; and
    (B) Statewide data (or a representative sample) showing:
    (1) The aggregate amount of fines or surcharges collected;
    (2) The aggregate amount of revenues returned to communities with 
comprehensive drunk driving prevention programs under the State's self-
sustaining system; and

[[Page 498]]

    (3) The aggregate cost of the State's comprehensive drunk driving 
prevention programs.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit, in addition to the data identified in paragraph 
(b)(3)(i)(B) of this section, a copy of any changes to the State's law, 
regulation or binding policy directive or, if there have been no 
changes, the State shall submit a statement certifying that there have 
been no changes in the State's laws, regulations or binding policy 
directives.
    (c) Reduction of driving with a suspended license--(1) Criterion. A 
law to reduce driving with a suspended driver's license. The law must 
impose one of the following sanctions on any individual who has been 
convicted of driving with a driver's license that was suspended or 
revoked by reason of a conviction for an alcohol-related traffic 
offense. Such sanctions must include at least one of the following for 
some period of time during the term of the individual's driver's license 
suspension or revocation, as specified by the State:
    (i) The suspension of the registration of, and the return to such 
State of the license plates for, any motor vehicle owned by the 
individual;
    (ii) The impoundment, immobilization, forfeiture or confiscation of 
any motor vehicle owned by the individual; or
    (iii) The placement of a distinctive license plate on any motor 
vehicle owned by the individual.
    (2) Definitions. Suspension and return means the temporary debarring 
of the privilege to operate or maintain a particular registered motor 
vehicle on the public highways and the confiscation or impoundment of 
the motor vehicle's license plates.
    (3) Exceptions. (i) A State may provide limited exceptions to the 
sanctions listed in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) and (c)(1)(ii) of this section 
on an individual basis, to avoid undue hardship to any individual who is 
completely dependent on the motor vehicle for the necessities of life, 
including any family member of the convicted individual, and any co-
owner of the motor vehicle, but not including the offender.
    (ii) Such exceptions may be issued only in accordance with a State 
law, regulation or binding policy directive establishing the conditions 
under which motor vehicles or license plates may be released by the 
State or under Statewide published guidelines and in exceptional 
circumstances specific to the offender's motor vehicle, and may not 
result in the unrestricted use of the motor vehicle by the individual.
    (4) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a copy of the law, regulation or binding policy 
directive implementing or interpreting the law or regulation, which 
provides for each element of this criterion.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit a copy of any changes to the State's law, regulation or 
binding policy directive or, if there have been no changes, the State 
shall submit a statement certifying that there have been no changes in 
the State's laws, regulations or binding policy directives.
    (d) Passive alcohol sensor program--(1) Criterion. A program:
    (i) To acquire passive alcohol sensors to be used during enforcement 
activities to enhance the detection of the presence of alcohol in the 
breath of drivers; and
    (ii) To train law enforcement personnel and inform judges and 
prosecutors about the purpose and use of the equipment.
    (2) Definitions. Passive alcohol sensor means a screening device 
used to sample the ambient air in the vicinity of the driver's exhaled 
breath to determine whether or not it contains alcohol.
    (3) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a plan for the acquisition and use of passive 
alcohol sensors to enhance the enforcement of impaired driving laws, 
including:
    (A) A schedule for the areas where the equipment has been and will 
be used;

[[Page 499]]

    (B) A plan for training law enforcement personnel in the recommended 
procedures for use of these devices in the field, and for informing 
prosecutors and judges about the purpose and use of the equipment; and
    (C) A plan for public information and education programs to enhance 
the general deterrent effect of the equipment.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit information on the use and effectiveness of the equipment 
and an updated plan for any acquisition and use of additional equipment.
    (e) Effective DWI tracking system--(1) Criterion. An effective 
driving while intoxicated (DWI) tracking system containing the ability 
to:
    (i) Collect, store, and retrieve data on individual DWI cases from 
arrest, through case prosecution and court disposition and sanction 
(including fines assessed and paid), until dismissal or until all 
applicable sanctions have been completed;
    (ii) Link the DWI tracking system to appropriate data and traffic 
records systems in jurisdictions and offices within the State to provide 
prosecutors, judges, law enforcement officers, motor vehicle 
administration personnel, and other officials with timely and accurate 
information concerning individuals charged with an alcohol-related 
driving offense; and
    (iii) Provide aggregate data, organized by specific categories 
(geographic locations, demographic groups, sanctions, etc.), suitable 
for allowing legislators, policymakers, treatment professionals, and 
other State officials to evaluate the DWI environment in the State.
    (2) Demonstrating compliance. (i) To demonstrate compliance in the 
first fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, 
the State shall submit a description of its DWI tracking system, 
including:
    (A) A description of the means used for the collection, storage and 
retrieval of data;
    (B) An explanation of how the system is linked to data and traffic 
records systems in appropriate jurisdictions and offices within the 
State;
    (C) An example of available statistical reports and analyses; and
    (D) A sample data run showing tracking of a DWI arrest through final 
disposition.
    (ii) To demonstrate compliance in subsequent fiscal years, the State 
shall submit a report or analysis using the DWI tracking system data, 
demonstrating that the system is still in operation.
    (f) Other innovative programs--(1) Criterion. An innovative program 
to reduce traffic safety problems resulting from individuals operating 
motor vehicles while under the influence of alcohol or controlled 
substances, through legal judicial, enforcement, educational, 
technological or other approaches. The program must:
    (i) Have been implemented within the last two years;
    (ii) Contain one or more substantial components that:
    (A) Make this program different from programs previously conducted 
in the State; and
    (B) Have not been used by the State to qualify for a grant in a 
previous fiscal year based on this criterion or in any fiscal year based 
on any other criterion contained in Sec. Sec. 1313.5, 1313.6 or 1313.7 
of this part; and
    (iii) Be shown to have been effective.
    (2) Demonstrating compliance. To demonstrate compliance for a grant 
based on this criterion, the State shall submit a description of the 
innovative program, which includes:
    (i) The name of the program;
    (ii) The area or jurisdiction where it has been implemented and the 
population(s) targeted;
    (iii) The specific condition or problem the program was intended to 
address, the goals and objectives of the program and the strategies or 
means used to achieve those goals;
    (iv) The actual results of the program and the means used to measure 
the results;
    (v) All sources of funds that were applied to the problem; and
    (vi) The name, address and telephone number of a contact person.


<R05>
Sec. 1313.8   Award procedures.

    (a) In each Federal fiscal year, grants will be made to eligible 
States upon

[[Page 500]]

submission and approval of the application required by Sec. 1313.4(a) 
and subject to the limitations in Sec. 1313.4(b). The release of grant 
funds under this part shall be subject to the availability of funding 
for that fiscal year. If there are expected to be insufficient funds to 
award full grant amounts to all eligible States in any fiscal year, 
NHTSA may release less than the full grant amounts upon initial approval 
of the State's application and documentation and the remainder of the 
full grant amounts up to the State's proportionate share of available 
funds, before the end of that fiscal year. Project approval, and the 
contractual obligation of the Federal government to provide grant funds, 
shall be limited to the amount of funds released.
    (b) If any amounts authorized for grants under this part for a 
fiscal year are expected to remain unobligated in that fiscal year, the 
Administrator may transfer such amounts to the programs authorized under 
23 U.S.C. 405 and 23 U.S.C. 411, to ensure to the extent possible that 
each State receives the maximum incentive funding for which it is 
eligible.
    (c) If any amounts authorized for grants under 23 U.S.C. 405 and 23 
U.S.C. 411 are transferred to the grant program under this part in a 
fiscal year, the Administrator shall distribute the transferred amounts 
so that each eligible State receives a proportionate share of these 
amounts, subject to the conditions specified in Sec. 1313.4.

       Appendix A to Part 1313--Tamper Resistant Driver's License

    A tamper resistant driver's license or permit is a driver's license 
or permit that has one or more of the following security features:

(1) Ghost image.
(2) Ghost graphic.
(3) Hologram.
(4) Optical variable device.
(5) Microline printing.
(6) State seal or a signature which overlaps the individual's photograph 
or information.
(7) Security laminate.
(8) Background containing color, pattern, line or design.
(9) Rainbow printing.
(10) Guilloche pattern or design.
(11) Opacity mark.
(12) Out of gamut colors (i.e., pastel print).
(13) Optical variable ultra-high-resolution lines.
(14) Block graphics.
(15) Security fonts and graphics with known hidden flaws.
(16) Card stock, layer with colors.
(17) Micro-graphics.
(18) Retroflective security logos.
(19) Machine readable technologies such as magnetic strips, a 1D bar 
code or a 2D bar code.


<R03>
PART 1327_PROCEDURES FOR PARTICIPATING IN AND RECEIVING INFORMATION 
FROM THE NATIONAL DRIVER REGISTER PROBLEM DRIVER POINTER SYSTEM--Table of Contents




Sec.
1327.1 Scope.
1327.2 Purpose.
1327.3 Definitions.
1327.4 Certification, termination and reinstatement procedures.
1327.5 Conditions for becoming a participating State.
1327.6 Conditions and procedures for other authorized users of the NDR.
1327.7 Procedures for NDR information requests.

Appendix A to Part 1327--Abridged Listing of the American Association of 
          Motor Vehicle Administrators Violations Exchange Code, Used by 
          the NDR for Recording Driver License Denials and Withdrawals
Appendix B to Part 1327--OMB Clearance

    Authority: Pub.L. 97-364, 96 Stat. 1740, as amended (49 U.S.C. 30301 
et seq.); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 56 FR 41403, Aug. 20, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1327.1  Scope.

    This part provides procedures for States to participate in the 
National Driver Register (NDR) Problem Driver Pointer System (PDPS) and 
for other authorized parties to receive information from the NDR. It 
includes, in accordance with section 204(c) of the NDR Act of 1982 (Pub. 
L. 97-364), procedures for a State to notify the Secretary of 
Transportation of its intention to be bound by the requirements of 
section 205 of the Act (i.e. requirements for reporting by chief driver 
licensing officials) and for a State to notify the Secretary in the 
event it becomes necessary to withdraw from participation.

[[Page 501]]

The rule also contains the conditions for becoming a participating State 
as well as conditions and procedures for other authorized users of the 
NDR.


<R05>
Sec. 1327.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to implement the NDR Act of 1982, as 
amended.


<R05>
Sec. 1327.3  Definitions.

    (a) Any officer, chief warrant officer, or enlisted member of the 
Coast Guard or Coast Guard Reserve includes a cadet or an applicant for 
appointment or enlistment of any of the foregoing and any member of a 
uniformed service who is assigned to the Coast Guard.
    (b) Driver History Record means a detailed description of an 
individual's driver record, used in the American Association of Motor 
Vehicle Administrators' Commercial Driver's License Information System 
(CDLIS).
    (c) Driver Improvement Purposes means information requests made by 
chief driver licensing officials in connection with the control and 
rehabilitation of drivers who are, based on their records, suspected of 
being or known to be problem drivers.
    (d) Driver License Abstract means the complete driver history of a 
driver's convictions, revocations, suspensions, denials, cancellations, 
accidents and interactions with the driver control and driver 
improvement authorities. Also known as Motor Vehicle Record (MVR) or 
Transcript.
    (e) Driver Licensing Purposes means information requests made by 
chief driver licensing officials to determine if individuals applying 
for original, renewal, temporary, or duplicate licenses have had their 
driving privileges withdrawn in some other State.
    (f) Driver Status Response means a response which indicates whether 
a driver currently holds a valid license.
    (g) For Cause as used in Sec. 1327.5(a) means that an adverse 
action taken by a State against an individual was based on any violation 
listed in Appendix A, an Abridged Listing of the American Association of 
Motor Vehicle Administration (AAMVA) Violations Exchange Code, which is 
used by the NDR for recording license denials and withdrawals.
    (h) Fully Electronic Register System means an NDR system in which 
all States that are participating in the NDR have been certified by the 
agency as participating States.
    (i) Interactive Communication means an active two-way computer 
connection which allows requesters to receive a response from the NDR 
almost immediately.
    (j) Match means the occurrence when the personal identifying 
information in an inquiry compares with the personal identifying 
information on a record in the NDR file such that there is a high 
probability that the individual identified on both records is the same 
person. See Probable Identification.
    (k) Non-Minimum Age Driver License Applicant means a driver license 
applicant who is past the minimum age to apply for a license in the 
State making an NDR inquiry.
    (l) Non-PDPS State means a State which operates under the old NDR by 
submitting complete substantive adverse driver licensing data to the 
NDR.
    (m) Participating State means a State that has notified the agency 
of its intention to participate in the PDPS and has been certified by 
the agency as being in compliance with the requirements of the NDR Act 
of 1982 and Sec. 1327.5 of this part.
    (n) Pointer Record means a report containing the following data:
    (1) The legal name, date of birth (including month, day, and year), 
sex, (and if the State collects such data) height, weight, and color of 
eyes;
    (2) The name of the State transmitting such information; and
    (3) The social security account number, if used by the reporting 
State for driver record or motor vehicle license purposes, and the motor 
vehicle operator's license number of such individual (if that number is 
different from the operator's social security account number).
    (o) Probable Identification means the occurrence when the personal 
identifying information in an inquiry compares with the identifying 
information on a record in the NDR file such that there is a high 
probability that the individual identified on both records is the same 
person. See Match.

[[Page 502]]

    (p) Problem Driver Pointer System (PDPS) means a system whereby the 
NDR causes information regarding the motor vehicle driving records of 
individuals to be exchanged between the State which took adverse action 
against a driver (State of Record) and the State requesting the 
information (State of Inquiry).
    (q) PDPS State means a State which participates in the PDPS by 
submitting pointer records for inclusion in the NDR file and by 
providing information to States of Inquiry as a State of Record.
    (r) Rapid Response System means an interactive inquiry capability of 
the NDR system used by non-PDPS States.
    (s) Remote Job Entry means an automated communication method in 
which information is transmitted in batches (usually a large number of 
records) and responses are also transmitted in batches, all within a 24-
hour period.
    (t) State of Inquiry means the State submitting an inquiry to the 
NDR to determine if it contains information regarding a driver license 
applicant.
    (u) State of Record means the State which took an adverse action 
against a driver and transmitted identification data regarding the 
driver to the NDR, in accordance with Sec. 1327.5(a) of this part.
    (v) Substantive Adverse Action Data, substantive adverse driver 
licensing data and substantive data mean data which give the details 
regarding a State's revocation, suspension, denial or cancellation of a 
driver's license, or the conviction of a driver, such as date, reason, 
eligible/restoration date, etc.
    (w) Transportation Safety Purposes means information requests 
submitted on behalf of other parties authorized by the NDR Act of 1982, 
as amended, to receive NDR information.
    (x) Transition Period means the period which began on July 11, 1985 
and will continue until a fully electronic register system is 
established, but not later than April 30, 1995.

[56 FR 41403, Aug. 20, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 63657, Dec. 2, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1327.4  Certification, termination and reinstatement procedures.

    (a) Certification requirement. Only States that have been certified 
by NHTSA as participating States under PDPS may participate in the NDR. 
NHTSA will remove all records on file and will not accept any inquiries 
or reports from a State that has not been certified as a participating 
State.
    (b) Termination or cancellation. (1) If a State finds it necessary 
to discontinue participation, the chief driver licensing official of the 
participating State shall notify NHTSA in writing, providing the reason 
for terminating its participation.
    (2) The effective date of termination will be no less than 30 days 
after notification of termination.
    (3) NHTSA will notify any participating State that changes its 
operations such that it no longer meets statutory and regulatory 
requirements, that its certification to participate in the NDR will be 
withdrawn if it does not come back into compliance within 30 days from 
the date of notification.
    (4) If a participating State does not come back into compliance with 
statutory and regulatory requirements within the 30-day period, NHTSA 
will send a letter to the chief driver licensing official cancelling its 
certification to participate in the NDR.
    (5) NHTSA will remove all records on file and will not accept any 
inquiries or reports from a State whose participation in the NDR has 
been terminated or cancelled.
    (6) To be reinstated as a participating State after being terminated 
or cancelled, the chief driver licensing official shall follow the 
notification procedures in paragraphs (c)(1) and (3) of this section and 
must be re-certified by NHTSA as a participating State under PDPS, upon 
a determination by NHTSA that the State complies with the statutory and 
regulatory requirements for participation, in accordance with paragraphs 
(c)(2) and (4) of this section.
    (c) Reinstatement. (1) The chief driver licensing official of a 
State that wishes to be reinstated as a participating State in the NDR 
under the PDPS, shall send a letter to NHTSA certifying that the State 
wishes to be reinstated

[[Page 503]]

as a participating State and that it intends to be bound by the 
requirements of section 205 of the NDR Act of 1982 and Sec. 1327.5 of 
this part. It shall also describe the changes necessary to meet the 
statutory and regulatory requirements of PDPS.
    (2) Within 20 days after receipt of the State's notification, NHTSA 
will acknowledge receipt of the State's certification to be reinstated.
    (3) The chief driver licensing official of a State that has notified 
NHTSA of its intention to be reinstated as a participating State will, 
at such time as it has completed all changes necessary to meet the 
statutory and regulatory requirements of PDPS, certify this fact to the 
agency.
    (4) Upon receipt, review and approval of certification from the 
State, NHTSA will recertify the State as a participating State under 
PDPS.

[65 FR 45716, July 25, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1327.5  Conditions for becoming a participating State.

    (a) Reporting requirements. (1) The chief driver licensing official 
in each participating State shall transmit to the NDR a report regarding 
any individual--
    (i) Who is denied a motor vehicle operator's license by such State 
for cause;
    (ii) Whose motor vehicle operator's license is canceled, revoked, or 
suspended by such State for cause; or
    (iii) Who is convicted under the laws of such State of the following 
motor vehicle-related offenses or comparable offenses--
    (A) Operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of, or 
impaired by, alcohol or a controlled substance;
    (B) A traffic violation arising in connection with a fatal traffic 
accident, reckless driving, or racing on the highways;
    (C) Failure to render aid or provide identification when involved in 
an accident which results in a fatality or personal injury; or
    (D) Perjury or the knowledgeable making of a false affidavit or 
statement to officials in connection with activities governed by a law 
or regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle.
    (2) Any report regarding any individual which is transmitted by a 
chief driver licensing official pursuant to this requirement shall 
contain the following data:
    (i) The legal name, date of birth (including day, month, and year), 
sex, (and if the State collects such data) height, weight, and color of 
eyes;
    (ii) The name of the State transmitting such information; and
    (iii) The social security account number, if used by the reporting 
State for driver record or motor vehicle license purposes, and the motor 
vehicle operator's license number of such individual (if that number is 
different from the operator's social security account number); except 
that
    (iv) Any report concerning an occurrence identified in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section which occurs during the two-year period preceding 
the date on which such State becomes a participating State shall be 
sufficient if it contains all such information as is available to the 
chief driver licensing official on such date.
    (3) These records, defined as pointer records, shall be transmitted 
by the chief driver licensing official to the NDR not later than 31 days 
after the adverse action information is received by the motor vehicle 
department or 6 months after the date on which such State becomes a 
participating State.
    (4) No State will be required to report information concerning an 
occurrence which happened before the two-year period preceding the date 
on which the State becomes a participating State.
    (b) State of inquiry function for driver licensing and driver 
improvement purposes. (1) The chief driver licensing official of a 
participating State shall submit an inquiry to the NDR for each first-
time, non-minimum age driver license applicant before issuing a license 
to the applicant.
    (2) The chief driver licensing official of a participating State may 
submit inquiries for other driver licensing and driver improvement 
purposes.
    (c) State of inquiry function for transportation safety purposes (on 
behalf of other authorized users). The chief driver licensing official 
of a participating

[[Page 504]]

State shall provide for and establish routine procedures and forms to 
accept requests for NDR file checks from the following groups which are 
authorized to receive information from the NDR file through 
participating States:
    (1) National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) for accident investigation purposes. The Chairman 
of the NTSB and/or the Administrator of the FHWA shall submit requests 
for NDR searches in writing through the participating State with which 
previous arrangements have been made to process these requests. The 
chief driver licensing official shall provide to the requesting agency 
the NDR response indicating either Probable Identification (match) or No 
Record Found. In the case of a probable identification, the State of 
Record will also be identified in the response so that the NTSB or FHWA 
may obtain additional information regarding the individual's driving 
record.
    (2) Employers and Prospective Employers of individuals licensed to 
drive a motor vehicle in the State (including Federal Agencies); Federal 
Aviation Administration regarding any individual who has applied for or 
received an airman's certificate; the Federal Railroad Administration 
and employers/prospective employers regarding individuals who are 
employed or seeking employment as railroad locomotive operators; and the 
U.S. Coast Guard regarding any individual who holds or who has applied 
for a license or certificate of registry under section 7101 of title 46 
of the U.S. Code, or a merchant mariner's document under section 7302 of 
that title, or regarding any officer, chief warrant officer, or enlisted 
member of the Coast Guard or Coast Guard Reserve. Information may not be 
obtained from the National Driver Register under this paragraph (c) if 
the information was entered in the Register more than three years before 
the date of the request unless the information is about a revocation or 
suspension still in effect on the date of the request.
    (i) The procedures or forms developed by the chief driver licensing 
official to facilitate NDR searches for these authorized users shall 
provide for the request to be made by the individual or by the 
authorized user if the individual first consented to the search in 
writing. Any request to the chief driver licensing official and any 
written consent by the individual shall:
    (A) State that NDR records are to be released:
    (B) Specifically state who is authorized to receive the records;
    (C) Be signed and dated by the individual or the individual's legal 
representative;
    (D) Specifically state that the authorization is valid for only one 
search of the NDR; and
    (E) Specifically state that the NDR identifies probable matches that 
require further inquiry for verification; that it is recommended, but 
not required, that the authorized recipient of the information verify 
matches with the State of Record; and that individuals have the right to 
request records regarding themselves from the NDR to verify their 
accuracy.
    (ii) Any request made by an authorized user may include, in lieu of 
the actual information described in paragraphs (c)(2)(i) (C) through (E) 
of this section, a certification that a written consent was signed and 
dated by the individual or the individual's legal representative, 
specifically stated that the authorization is valid for only one search 
of the NDR, and specifically stated that the NDR identifies probable 
matches that require further inquiry for verification; that it is 
recommended, but not required, that the authorized recipient of the 
information verify matches with the State of Record; and that 
individuals have the right to request records regarding themselves from 
the NDR to verify their accuracy.
    (iii) The chief driver licensing official shall provide to the 
authorized user a response indicating either Probable Identification 
(match) or No Record Found. In the case of probable identification, the 
State of Record will also be included in the response so that the 
authorized user may obtain additional information regarding the 
individual's driving record.
    (3) The head of a Federal department or agency that issues motor 
vehicle operator's licenses about an individual

[[Page 505]]

applicant for a motor vehicle operator's license from such department or 
agency. The head of the department or agency may request NDR information 
through the chief driver licensing official of a State and may receive 
the information, provided the requesting Federal department or agency 
participates in the NDR as a reporting agency.
    (i) A reporting agency is an agency that transmits to the NDR a 
report regarding any individual who has been denied a motor vehicle 
operator's license for cause; whose motor vehicle operator's license is 
revoked, suspended, or canceled by that department or agency for cause; 
or about whom the department or agency has been notified of a conviction 
of any of the motor vehicle related offenses listed in paragraph 
(a)(1)(iii) of this section and Appendix A to this part and over whom 
the department or agency has licensing authority.
    (ii) All reports transmitted by a reporting agency shall contain the 
following data:
    (A) The legal name, date of birth (including day, month, and year), 
sex, and, if available to the agency, height, weight, and eye color;
    (B) The name of the agency transmitting such information; and
    (C) The social security account number, if used by the reporting 
agency for driver record or motor vehicle license purposes, and the 
motor vehicle operator's license number of such individual (if that 
number is different from the operator's social security account number); 
except that
    (D) Any report concerning an occurrence identified in paragraph 
(c)(3)(i) of this section which occurs during the two-year period 
preceding the date on which the agency becomes a participating agency 
shall be sufficient if it contains all such information as is available 
to the agency on such date.
    (4) Individuals who wish to learn what information about themselves, 
if any, is in the NDR file, or whether and to whom such information has 
been disclosed.
    (i) Upon receiving a request for an NDR search from an individual 
for information concerning himself or herself, the chief driver 
licensing official shall inform the individual of the procedure for 
conducting such a search and provide the individual a request form 
which, when properly completed, will be forwarded to the NDR either by 
the chief driver licensing official or by the individual.
    (ii) The request form provided by the chief driver licensing 
official to the individual must provide for the following:
    (A) Full legal name;
    (B) Other names used (nicknames, professional name, maiden name, 
etc.);
    (C) Month, day and year of birth;
    (D) Sex;
    (E) Height;
    (F) Weight;
    (G) Color of eyes;
    (H) Social Security Number (SSN) and/or driver license number 
(provision of SSN is voluntary);
    (I) Individual's full address;
    (J) Home and office telephone number (provision of telephone number 
is voluntary);
    (K) Signature;
    (L) Proof of identification--Acceptable forms of identification are 
driver's license, birth certificate, credit card, employee 
identification card, and other forms of identification normally accepted 
by the State; and
    (M) Notarization--This is required only if the individual chooses to 
mail the request directly to the NDR.
    (iii) Upon receipt of the individual's request for a NDR file check, 
NHTSA will search its computer file and mail the results (i.e., 
notification of no record found or copies of any records found) directly 
to the individual.
    (iv) The chief driver licensing official shall advise the requesting 
individual to contact the Chief, National Driver Register by mail or 
telephone for guidance regarding the procedure for alteration or 
correction of NDR-maintained records in the event he or she believes 
they are incorrect.
    (d) State of record functions. The chief driver licensing official 
of a participating State shall implement the necessary computer system 
and procedures to respond to requests for driver record information. 
When a request to the NDR results in a match, the chief driver licensing 
official of a participating State shall also:

[[Page 506]]

    (1) Provide a driver status response interactively to the State of 
Inquiry or the NDR upon receipt of a request for this response from the 
NDR;
    (2) Provide a Driver History Record from its file to the State of 
Inquiry upon receipt of a request for this record from the State of 
Inquiry; and
    (3) Forward a driver license abstract (full motor vehicle record) to 
the State of Inquiry upon receipt of a request for this record either 
from the NDR or directly from the State of Inquiry, and to other 
authorized users upon receipt of a request directly from the user.

[56 FR 41403, Aug. 20, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 63657, Dec. 2, 1997; 64 
FR 19271, Apr. 20, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 1327.6  Conditions and procedures for other authorized users of the NDR.

    (a) NTSB and FHWA. To initiate an NDR file check before a fully 
electronic Register system has been established, the National 
Transportation Safety Board or the Federal Highway Administration 
(Office of Motor Carriers) shall submit a request for such check to the 
State with which previous arrangements have been made, in accordance 
with procedures established by that State for this purpose. To initiate 
an NDR file check once a fully electronic Register system has been 
established, the NTSB or FHWA shall submit a request for such check to 
the participating State with which previous arrangements have been made, 
in accordance with procedures established by that State for this 
purpose. The NTSB or FHWA may also submit a request for an NDR file 
check to the NDR directly.
    (b) Federal departments or agencies that issue motor vehicle 
operator's licenses. To initiate an NDR file check, a Federal department 
or agency that issues motor vehicle operator's licenses shall submit a 
request for such check to a participating State, in accordance with 
procedures established by that State for this purpose. The Federal 
department or agency that issues motor vehicle operator's licenses may 
also submit a request for an NDR file check to the NDR directly, in 
accordance with procedures established by the NDR for that purpose.
    (c) Employers or prospective employers of motor vehicle operators 
(including Federal Agencies). (1) To initiate an NDR file check, the 
individual who is employed or seeking employment as a motor vehicle 
operator shall follow the procedures specified in Sec. 1327.7.
    (2) Upon receipt of the NDR response, the employer/prospective 
employer shall make the information available to the employee/
prospective employee.
    (3) In the case of a match (probable identification), the employer/
prospective employer should obtain the substantive data relating to the 
record from the State of Record and verify that the person named on the 
probable identification is in fact the employee/prospective employee 
before using the information as the basis for any action against the 
individual.
    (d) Federal Aviation Administration. (1) To initiate an NDR file 
check, the individual who has applied for or received an airman's 
certificate shall follow the procedures specified in Sec. 1327.7.
    (2) Upon receipt of the NDR response, the FAA shall make the 
information available to the airman for review and written comment.
    (3) In the case of a match (probable identification), the FAA should 
obtain the substantive data relating to the record from the State of 
Record and verify that the person named on the probable identification 
is in fact the airman concerned before using the information as the 
basis of any action against the individual.
    (e) Federal Railroad Administration and/or employers or prospective 
employers of railroad locomotive operators. (1) To initiate an NDR file 
check, the individual employed or seeking employment as a locomotive 
operator shall follow the procedures specified in Sec. 1327.7.
    (2) Upon receipt of the NDR response, the FRA or the employer/
prospective employer, as applicable, shall make the information 
available to the individual.
    (3) In the case of a match (probable identification), the FRA or the 
employer/prospective employer, as applicable, should obtain the 
substantive data relating to the record from the State of Record and 
verify that the

[[Page 507]]

person named on the probable identification is in fact the individual 
concerned before using the information as the basis of any action 
against the individual.
    (f) U.S. Coast Guard. (1) To initiate an NDR file check, the 
individual who holds or who has applied for a license, certificate of 
registry, or a merchant mariner's document or the officer, chief warrant 
officer, or enlisted member of the Coast Guard or Coast Guard Reserve 
shall follow the procedures specified in Sec. 1327.7.
    (2) Upon receipt of the NDR response, the U.S. Coast Guard shall 
make the information available to the individual for review and written 
comment before denying, suspending or revoking the license, certificate 
of registry, or merchant mariner's document of the individual based on 
that information and before using that information in any action taken 
under chapter 77 of title 46, U.S. Code.
    (3) In the case of a match (probable identification), the U.S. Coast 
Guard should obtain the substantive data relating to the record from the 
State of Record and verify that the person named on the probable 
identification is in fact the individual concerned before using the 
information as the basis of any action against the individual.
    (g) Air carriers. (1) To initiate an NDR file check, the individual 
seeking employment as a pilot with an air carrier shall follow the 
procedures specified in Sec. 1327.7 and also must specifically state 
that, pursuant to Section 502 of the Pilot Records Improvement Act of 
1996, Public Law 104-264, 110 Stat. 3259 (49 U.S.C. 30305), the request 
(or written consent) serves as notice of a request for NDR information 
concerning the individual's motor vehicle driving record and of the 
individual's right to receive a copy of such information.
    (2) Air carriers that maintain, or request and receive NDR 
information about an individual must provide the individual a reasonable 
opportunity to submit written comments to correct any inaccuracies 
contained in the records before making a final hiring decision with 
respect to the individual.
    (3) In the case of a match (probable identification), the air 
carrier should obtain the substantive data relating to the record from 
the State of Record and verify that the person named on the probable 
identification is in fact the individual concerned before using the 
information as the basis of any action against the individual.
    (h) Third Parties. If a third party is used by any of the above 
authorized users to request the NDR check, both the individual concerned 
and an authorized representative of the authorized user organization 
shall sign a written consent authorizing the third party to act in this 
role. The written consent must:
    (1) State that NDR records are to be released;
    (2) State as specifically as possible who is authorized to request 
the records, and that such party is not authorized to receive NDR 
information;
    (3) Be signed and dated by the individual (or legal representative 
as appropriate) and an authorized representative of the authorized user 
organization;
    (4) Specifically state that the request authorization is valid for 
only one search of the NDR; and
    (5) Specifically state that the NDR identifies probable matches that 
require further inquiry for verification; that it is recommended, but 
not required, that the authorized recipient of the information verify 
matches with the State of Record; and that individuals have the right to 
request records regarding themselves from the NDR to verify their 
accuracy. The third party may not, however, receive the NDR response to 
a file search.
    (i) Individuals. (1) When a check of the NDR is desired by any 
individual in order to determine whether the NDR is disclosing any data 
regarding him or her or the accuracy of such data, or to obtain a copy 
of the data regarding him or her, the individual shall submit his or her 
request to a participating State in accordance with the procedures 
established by that State for this purpose.
    (2) The individual will be asked to provide the following 
information to the chief driver licensing official in order to establish 
positive identification:
    (i) Full legal name;

[[Page 508]]

    (ii) Other names used (nickname, professional name, maiden name, 
etc.);
    (iii) Month, day and year of birth;
    (iv) Sex;
    (v) Height;
    (vi) Weight;
    (vii) Color of eyes;
    (viii) Driver license number and/or Social Security Number (SSN) 
(provision of SSN is optional);
    (ix) Full address;
    (x) Signature;
    (xi) Proof of identification (acceptable forms of identification are 
driver's license, birth certificate, credit card, employee 
identification card, and other forms of identification normally accepted 
by the State); and
    (xii) Notarization (this is required only if the individual chooses 
to mail the request directly to the NDR).
    (3) Individuals are authorized also, under the Privacy Act of 1974, 
to request such information directly from the NDR.
    (4) Individuals seeking to correct an NDR-maintained record should 
address their request to the chief of the National Driver Register. When 
any information contained in the Register is confirmed by the State of 
Record to be in error, the NDR will correct the record accordingly and 
advise all previous recipients of the information that a correction has 
been made.

[56 FR 41403, Aug. 20, 1991; 56 FR 57255, 57374, Nov. 8, 1991; 62 FR 
27195, May 19, 1997; 62 FR 63657, Dec. 2, 1997; 63 FR 153, Jan. 5, 1998; 
64 FR 19272, Apr. 20, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 1327.7  Procedures for NDR information requests.

    (a) To initiate an NDR file check, an individual who is employed or 
seeking employment as a motor vehicle operator; who has applied for or 
received an airman's certificate; who is employed or seeking employment 
as a locomotive operator; who holds or has applied for a license, 
certificate of registry, or a merchant mariner's document or is an 
officer, chief warrant officer, or enlisted member of the U.S. Coast 
Guard or Coast Guard Reserve; or who is seeking employment as a pilot 
with an air carrier; shall either:
    (1) Complete, sign and submit a request for an NDR file check 
directly to the chief driver licensing official of a participating State 
in accordance with procedures established by that State for this 
purpose; or
    (2) Authorize, by completing and signing a written consent, the 
authorized NDR user to request a file check through the chief driver 
licensing official of a participating State in accordance with the 
procedures established by that State for this purpose.
    (b) If the authorized NDR user is an employer or prospective 
employer of a motor vehicle operator, the request for an NDR file check 
must be submitted through the chief driver licensing official of the 
State in which the individual is licensed to operate a motor vehicle.
    (c) If the authorized NDR user is the head of a Federal department 
or agency, the request for an NDR file check may be submitted instead 
directly to the NDR in accordance with procedures established by the NDR 
for this purpose.
    (d) The request for an NDR file check or the written consent, 
whichever is used, must:
    (1) State that the NDR records are to be released;
    (2) State as specifically as possible who is authorized to receive 
the records;
    (3) Be signed and dated by the individual (or the individual's legal 
representative as appropriate);
    (4) Specifically state that the authorization is valid for only one 
search of the NDR; and
    (5) Specifically state that the NDR identifies probable matches that 
require further inquiry for verification; that it is recommended, but 
not required, that the employer/prospective employer verify matches with 
the State of Record; and that individuals have the right to request 
records regarding themselves from the NDR to verify their accuracy.

[64 FR 19273, Apr. 20, 1999]

[[Page 509]]

Appendix A to Part 1327--Abridged Listing of the American Association of 
 Motor Vehicle Administrators Violations Exchange Code, Used by the NDR 
          for Recording Driver License Denials and Withdrawals

                                  Code

DI Driving While Intoxicated Violations Pertaining to Intoxicants
DI1 Driving while under the intoxicating influence of alcohol, 
narcotics, or pathogenic drugs.
DI2 Driving while under the intoxicating influence of medication or 
other substances not intended to produce intoxication as a result of 
normal use.
DI3 Refusal to submit to test for alcohol after arrest for driving while 
intoxicated or suspicion of intoxication.
DI4 Illegal possession of alcohol or drugs in motor vehicle.
DI5* Administrative per se.
DI6* Driving while impaired.
DI7* Driving a commercial motor vehicle while under the influence of 
alcohol or a controlled substance.
DS Disability
DS1 Inability to pass one or more tests required for driver license.
DS2 Operating a motor vehicle improperly because of physical or mental 
disability.
DS3 Failure to discontinue operating vehicle after onset of physical or 
mental disability (including uncontrollable drowsiness).
FA Fatality
FA1 Violation of a motor vehicle law resulting in the death of another 
person.
FE Felony
FE1 Using a motor vehicle as the device for committing a felony.
FE2 Using a motor vehicle in connection with a felony.
FE3 Using a motor vehicle to aid and abet a felon.
FE4* Using a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a felony.
FE5* Using a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a felony 
while transporting a hazardous material.
FR Financial Responsibility
FR1 Unsatisfied judgment.
FR2 Failure to meet requirements for the security-following-accident 
provisions of the FR law.
FR3 Failure to file future proof of financial responsibility following 
conviction for violation of motor vehicle law.
HR Hit and Run
 Leaving the Scene
 Evading Arrest
HR1 Failure to stop and render aid after involvement in accident 
resulting in bodily injury.
HR2 Failure to stop and reveal identity after involvement in accident 
resulting in property damage only.
HR3 Leaving the scene of an accident after providing aid or identity but 
before arrival of police.
HR4 Evading arrest by fleeing the scene of citation or roadblock.
HR5 Evading arrest by extinguishing lights (when lights required).
HR6* Leaving the scene of an accident involving a commercial motor 
vehicle operated by such person.
HV** Habitual Violator
 Not an AAMVA code. For NDR use only.
MR Misrepresentation
 Contributory Violations
MR1 Misrepresentation of identity or other facts to obtain a driver 
license. (If registration or title involved, see RT.)
MR2 Displaying a driver license which is invalid because of alteration, 
counterfeiting, or withdrawal (revocation, suspension, etc.).
MR3 Displaying the driver license of another person.
MR4 Loaning a driver license.
MR5 Obtaining or applying for a duplicate driver license during 
withdrawal.
MR6 Misrepresentation of identity or other facts to avoid arrest or 
prosecution.
RK Reckless, Careless, or Negligent Driving
RK1 Heedless, willful, wanton, or reckless disregard of the rights or 
safety of others in operating a motor vehicle, endangering persons or 
property.
RK2 Operating a motor vehicle without the exercise of care and caution 
required to avoid danger to persons or property.
RK3 Transporting hazardous substances without required safety devices or 
precautions.
RV Repeated Violations
RV1 Recurrence of violations requiring mandatory action of the licensing 
authority as specified by law.
RV2 Accumulation of violations resulting in mandatory action of the 
licensing authority because of statutory point system.
RV3 Accumulation of violations resulting in discretionary action by the 
licensing authority.
RV4 Committing serious traffic violation involving a commercial motor 
vehicle operated by such person.
SP Speeding
SP1 Contest racing on public trafficway.
SP2 Prima facie speed violation or driving too fast for conditions.
SP3 Speed in excess of posted maximum.
SP5 Operating at erratic or suddenly changing speeds.
SP6* Excessive speeding in a commercial vehicle.
 Unsatisfied Judgment (See FR)
VR Violation of Restriction
 Licensing Requirements

[[Page 510]]

VR1 Driving while revoked.
VR2 Driving while suspended.
VR3 Driving while license denied.
VR5 Operating without being licensed or without license required for 
type of vehicle operated.
VR6 Allowing an unlicensed operator to drive.

    *Recommended to AAMVA in response to a ballot on approval of a 
revision to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) D20.1, 
``States' Model Motorist Data Base''.
    **Habitual Violator (HV) code was added to the AAMVA Violations 
Exchange Code by the NDR to accommodate the many States who enacted an 
HV law after the AAMVA Violations Exchange Code was developed. To be 
adjudged a Habitual Violator normally requires having been convicted of 
three major violations.

[56 FR 41403, Aug. 20, 1991; 56 FR 57256, Nov. 8, 1991]

                 Appendix B to Part 1327--OMB Clearance

    The OMB clearance number of this regulation is OMB 2127-0001.


<R03>
PART 1335_STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY DATA IMPROVEMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1335.1 Scope.
1335.2 Purpose.
1335.3 Definitions.
1335.4 Coordinating committee.
1335.5 Assessment.
1335.6 Strategic plan.
1335.7 Grant requirements.
1335.8 Grant amounts.
1335.9 Availability of funds.
1335.10 Grant limitations.
1335.11 Application procedures.
1335.12 Contents of application.

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 411; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.48.

    Source: 63 FR 54048, Oct. 8, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes the requirements necessary to implement Section 
411 of Title 23, United States Code, which encourages States to adopt 
and implement effective data improvement programs.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to improve the timeliness, accuracy, 
completeness, uniformity, and accessibility of the data needed by each 
State to identify highway safety priorities; to evaluate the 
effectiveness of these improvements; to link highway safety data systems 
with other data systems within each State; and to improve the 
compatibility of the data system of each State with national data 
systems and data systems of other States to enhance the observation and 
analysis of national trends in crash occurrences, rates, outcomes, and 
circumstances.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Highway safety data and traffic records means data and records 
relating to crashes, roadways, drivers, vehicles, traffic offense 
citations/convictions, emergency medical services, locations and other 
data and records relating to highway safety.
    (b) Coordinating committee means a committee that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 1335.4 of this part.
    (c) Assessment means a review of a State's highway safety data and 
traffic records system that meets the requirements of Sec. 1335.5 of 
this part. For the purpose of this Part, an assessment includes an audit 
or a strategic planning analysis.
    (d) Strategic plan means a multi-year plan that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 1335.6 of this part.
    (e) Model data elements means the data elements contained in the 
final Model Minimum Uniform Crash Criteria (MMUCC) published by the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the Federal Highway 
Administration (DOT HS 808 745, August 1998).
    (f) State means any of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.4  Coordinating committee.

    A coordinating committee shall--
    (a) Include representatives from the administrators, collectors, and 
users of State highway safety data and traffic records, including 
representatives of highway safety, highway infrastructure, traffic 
enforcement, public

[[Page 511]]

health, injury control, and motor carrier organizations;
    (b) Have authority to review any of the State's highway safety data 
and traffic records systems and to review any changes to such systems 
before the changes are implemented;
    (c) Provide a forum for the discussion of highway safety data and 
traffic records issues and report on any such issues to the 
organizations in the State that create, maintain, and use highway safety 
data and traffic records;
    (d) Consider the views of the organizations in the State that are 
involved in the administration, collection and use of the highway safety 
data and traffic records system; coordinate these views among the 
organizations; and represent the interests of the organizations within 
the traffic records system to outside organizations;
    (e) Review and evaluate new technologies to keep the highway safety 
data and traffic records systems up-to-date; and
    (f) Develop, implement, and administer the strategic plan specified 
in Sec. 1335.6 of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.5  Assessment.

    An assessment shall--
    (a) Be an in-depth, formal review of a State's highway safety data 
and traffic records system that considers the criteria contained in the 
model data elements;
    (b) Generate an impartial report of the status of the highway safety 
data and traffic records system in the State; and
    (c) Be conducted by an organization or group that is knowledgeable 
about highway safety data and traffic records systems, but independent 
from the organizations involved in the administration, collection and 
use of the highway safety data and traffic records systems in the State.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.6  Strategic plan.

    A strategic plan shall--
    (a) Be a multi-year plan that identifies and prioritizes the highway 
safety data and traffic records needs and goals based upon an 
assessment;
    (b) Identify performance-based measures by which progress toward 
those goals will be determined; and
    (c) Be submitted to the coordinating committee for approval.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.7  Grant requirements.

    (a) Start-up grant. To receive a start-up grant in a fiscal year 
under this part, a State shall submit an application that complies with 
Sec. 1335.12, and must have--
    (1) Not met the requirements of paragraph (b) or (c) of this 
section; and
    (2) Not received any grant under this Part in a previous fiscal 
year.
    (b) Initiation grant. To qualify for an initiation grant in a fiscal 
year under this part, a State shall submit an application that complies 
with Sec. 1335.12, and must have--
    (1) Established a coordinating committee;
    (2) Completed or updated an assessment within the five years 
preceding the date of its application;
    (3) Initiated the development of a strategic plan; and
    (4) Not received an initiation or an implementation grant under this 
part in a previous fiscal year.
    (c) Implementation grant. To qualify for an implementation grant in 
a fiscal year under this part, a State shall submit an application that 
complies with Sec. 1335.12, and must have--
    (1) Established a coordinating committee;
    (2) Completed or updated an assessment within the five years 
preceding the date of its application; and
    (3) Developed a strategic plan.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.8  Grant amounts.

    (a) Start-up grant. A State that qualifies for a start-up grant 
under Sec. 1335.7(a) of this part shall be eligible to receive $25,000.
    (b) Initiation grant. A State that qualifies for an initiation grant 
under Sec. 1335.7(b) of this part shall be eligible to receive 
$125,000.
    (c) Implementation grant. A State that qualifies for an 
implementation grant under Sec. 1335.7(c) of this part shall be 
eligible to receive an amount determined by multiplying the amount 
appropriated to carry out 23 U.S.C. 411 by the ratio that the funds 
apportioned to the State under 23 U.S.C. 402 for fiscal year 1997 bears 
to the funds apportioned to

[[Page 512]]

all States under 23 U.S.C. 402 for fiscal year 1997, except that--
    (1) If the State has not received an initiation or an implementation 
grant under this part in a previous fiscal year, the State shall receive 
no less than $250,000; and
    (2) If the State has received an initiation or an implementation 
grant under this part in a previous fiscal year, the State shall receive 
no less than $225,000.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.9  Availability of funds.

    (a) The release of grant funds under this part in a fiscal year 
shall be subject to the availability of funds for that fiscal year. If 
there are expected to be insufficient funds to award the grant amounts 
specified in Sec. 1335.8 to all eligible States in any fiscal year, 
NHTSA may release less than these grant amounts upon approval of the 
State's application and plan, up to the State's proportionate share of 
available funds. Project approval and the contractual obligation of the 
Federal government to provide grant funds shall be limited to the amount 
of funds released.
    (b) If any amounts authorized for grants under this part for a 
fiscal year are expected to remain unobligated in that fiscal year, the 
Administrator may transfer such amounts to the programs authorized under 
23 U.S.C. 405 and 23 U.S.C. 410, to ensure to the extent possible that 
each State receives the maximum incentive funding for which it is 
eligible.
    (c) If any amounts authorized for grants under 23 U.S.C. 405 and 23 
U.S.C. 410 are transferred to the grant program under this part in a 
fiscal year, the Administrator shall distribute the transferred amounts 
so that each eligible State receives a proportionate share of these 
amounts, subject to the conditions specified in Sec. 1335.8 and 
paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.10  Grant limitations.

    (a) No State may receive a grant under this part in more than six 
fiscal years.
    (b) Grants may be used by States only to adopt and implement 
effective highway safety data and traffic records programs:
    (1) To improve the timeliness, accuracy, completeness, uniformity, 
and accessibility of the data of the State that is needed to identify 
priorities for national, State and local highway and traffic safety 
programs;
    (2) To evaluate the effectiveness of efforts to make such 
improvements;
    (3) To link these State data systems, including traffic records, 
with other data systems within the State, such as systems that contain 
medical and economic data; and
    (4) To improve the compatibility of the data system of the State 
with national data systems and data systems of other States and to 
enhance the ability of the Secretary to observe and analyze national 
trends in crash occurrences, rates, outcomes, and circumstances.
    (c) In the first and second Federal fiscal years a State receives a 
grant under this part, the Federal share of the costs of adopting and 
implementing an effective highway safety data and traffic records 
program shall not exceed 75 percent.
    (d) In the third and fourth Federal fiscal year in which a State 
receives a grant under this part, the Federal share of the costs of 
adopting and implementing an effective highway safety data and traffic 
records program shall not exceed 50 percent.
    (e) In the fifth and sixth Federal fiscal years a State receives a 
grant under this part, the Federal share of the costs of adopting and 
implementing an effective highway safety data and traffic records 
program shall not exceed 25 percent.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.11  Application procedures.

    (a) A State applying for a grant under this part shall submit an 
original and two copies of its application to the NHTSA Regional 
Administrator for the Region in which the State is located.
    (b) To be considered for a grant in any fiscal year, an application 
must be received by the agency not later than January 15 of that fiscal 
year.
    (c) Within 30 days of being informed by NHTSA that it is eligible 
for a grant, a State shall submit to the agency a Program Cost Summary 
(HS Form 217) obligating the funds under

[[Page 513]]

this part to highway safety data and traffic records programs.
    (d) The State shall document how it intends to use the funds under 
this part in the Highway Safety Plan it submits pursuant to 23 CFR 1200.


<R05>
Sec. 1335.12  Contents of application.

    (a) Start-up grant. An application for a start-up grant under Sec. 
1335.7(a) shall certify that the State --
    (1) Does not meet the requirements of Sec. 1335.7 (b) or (c) of 
this part; and
    (2) Will use the grant funds to conduct activities necessary to 
qualify for a grant under Sec. 1335.7 (b) or (c) of this part in the 
next fiscal year.
    (b) Initiation grant. An application for an initiation grant under 
Sec. 1335.7(b) shall--
    (1) Certify that the State has established a coordinating committee, 
and include the name, title and organizational affiliation of each 
member of the coordinating committee;
    (2) Certify that the State has conducted or updated an assessment 
within the last five years, and submit a copy of the assessment and any 
updates of the assessment; and
    (3) Certify that the State has initiated the development of a 
strategic plan, with the supervision and approval of the coordinating 
committee.
    (c) Implementation grant. (1) An application for an implementation 
grant under Sec. 1335.7(c), if the State has not received an initiation 
or an implementation grant under this part in a previous fiscal year, 
shall--
    (i) Certify that the State has established a coordinating committee, 
and include the name, title and organizational affiliation of each 
member of the coordinating committee;
    (ii) Certify that the State has conducted or updated an assessment 
within the last five years, and submit a copy of the assessment and any 
updates of the assessment;
    (iii) Submit a strategic plan that specifies how the grant funds 
awarded to the State under this part for the fiscal year will be used to 
address the needs and goals identified in the plan; and
    (iv) Certify that the coordinating committee continues to operate 
and supports the strategic plan.
    (2) An application for an implementation grant under Sec. 
1335.7(c), if the State has received an initiation or an implementation 
grant under this part in a previous fiscal year, shall--
    (i) Certify that the coordinating committee continues to operate and 
supports the strategic plan and identify any changes to the membership 
of the coordinating committee;
    (ii) Submit a strategic plan or an update to the plan that specifies 
how the grant funds awarded to the State under this part for the fiscal 
year will be used to address the needs and goals identified in the plan; 
and
    (iii) Report on the progress of the State in implementing the 
strategic plan since the State's previous application.
    (d) Any grant under this part. An application for a grant under 
Sec. 1335.7 (a), (b), or (c) of this part shall certify that the State 
will:
    (1) Use the funds awarded under 23 U.S.C. 411 only to adopt and 
implement an effective highway safety data and traffic records program, 
in accordance with 23 CFR 1335.10(b);
    (2) Administer the funds in accordance with 49 CFR part 18 and OMB 
Circulars A-102 and A-87; and
    (3) Maintain its aggregate expenditures from all other sources, 
except those authorized under Chapter 1 of Title 23 of the United States 
Code, for highway safety data and traffic records programs at or above 
the average level of such expenditures in Federal fiscal years 1996 and 
1997 (either State or federal fiscal year 1996 and 1997 can be used).

[63 FR 54048, Oct. 8, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 48911, Aug. 10, 2000]


<R03>
PART 1340_UNIFORM CRITERIA FOR STATE OBSERVATIONAL SURVEYS OF SEAT 
BELT USE--Table of Contents




Sec.
1340.1 Purpose.
1340.2 Applicability.
1340.3 Basic design requirements.
1340.4 Population, demographic, and time/day requirements.
1340.5 Documentation requirements.

Appendix A to Part 1340--Sample Design

    Authority: 23 U.S.C. 157; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

[[Page 514]]


    Source: 63 FR 46392, Sept. 1, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1340.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes uniform criteria for surveys of seat belt use 
conducted by States under 23 U.S.C. 157.


<R05>
Sec. 1340.2  Applicability.

    These uniform criteria apply to State surveys of seat belt use, 
beginning in calendar year 1998 (except as otherwise provided in this 
part), and continuing annually thereafter through calendar year 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 1340.3  Basic design requirements.

    Surveys conducted in accordance with this part shall incorporate the 
following minimum design requirements:
    (a) Probability-based requirement. The sample identified for the 
survey shall have a probability-based design such that estimates are 
representative of safety belt use for the population of interest in the 
state and sampling errors may be calculated for each estimate produced.
    (b) Observational requirement. Minimum requirements include the 
following:
    (1) The sample data shall be collected through direct observation of 
seat belt use on roadways within the State, conducted completely within 
the calendar year for which the seat belt use rate is being reported;
    (2) Seat belt use shall be determined by observation of the use or 
non-use of a shoulder belt;
    (3) Observers shall be required to follow a predetermined, clear 
policy in the event that observations cannot be made at an assigned site 
at the specified time (due to heavy rain, construction, safety problems, 
etc.);
    (4) Instructions to observers shall specify which road and which 
direction of traffic on that road are to be observed (observers must not 
be free to choose between roads at an intersection); and
    (5) Observers shall follow clear instructions on how to start and 
end an observation period and how to stop and start observations if 
traffic flow is too heavy to observe all vehicles or if vehicles begin 
moving too quickly for observation (to remove any possible bias, such as 
starting with the next belted driver).
    (c) Precision requirement. The relative error (standard error 
divided by the estimate) for safety belt use must not exceed 5 percent.


<R05>
Sec. 1340.4  Population, demographic, and time/day requirements.

    Surveys conducted in accordance with this part shall comply with the 
following minimum population, demographic, and time/day requirements:
    (a) Population of interest. (1) Drivers and front seat outboard 
passengers in passenger motor vehicles (passenger cars, pickup trucks, 
vans, and sport utility vehicles) must be observed in the survey. (Only 
overall restraint use for the population of interest is required. 
However, in order to assist in the evaluation of trends, it is 
recommended that data be collected in such a way that restraint use 
estimates can be reported separately for passenger cars and other 
covered vehicles, and separately for drivers and front-seat outboard 
passengers within those vehicle groups.)
    (2) Surveys conducted during calendar year 1998 shall be deemed to 
comply with paragraph (a)(1) of this section if passenger motor vehicles 
registered in-State are included in the survey. For surveys conducted 
during calendar year 1999 and thereafter, passenger motor vehicles 
registered both in-state and out-of-state must be included in the 
survey.
    (b) Demographics. Counties, or other primary sampling units, 
totaling at least 85 percent of the State's population must be eligible 
for inclusion in the sample. States may eliminate their least populated 
counties, or other primary sampling units, to a total of fifteen percent 
or less of the total State population, from the sampling frame.
    (c) Time of day and day of week. All daylight hours for all days of 
the week must be eligible for inclusion in the sample. Observation sites 
must be randomly assigned to the selected day-of-week/time-of-day time 
slots. If observation sites are grouped to reduce data collection 
burdens, a random process

[[Page 515]]

must be used to make the first assignment of a site within a group to an 
observational time period. Thereafter, assignment of other sites within 
the group to time periods may be made in a manner that promotes 
administrative efficiency and timely completion of the survey.

[63 FR 46392, Sept. 1, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 13683, Mar. 14, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 1340.5  Documentation requirements.

    All sample design, data collection, and estimation procedures used 
in State surveys conducted in accordance with this part must be well 
documented. At a minimum, the documentation must:
    (a) For sample design--
    (1) Define all sampling units, with their measures of size;
    (2) Define what stratification was used at each stage of sampling 
and what methods were used for allocation of the sample units to the 
strata;
    (3) Explain how the sample size at each stage was determined;
    (4) List all samples units and their probabilities of selection; and
    (5) Describe how observation sites were assigned to observation time 
periods.
    (b) For data collection--
    (1) Define an observation period;
    (2) Define an observation site and what procedures were implemented 
when the observation site was not accessible on the date assigned;
    (3) Describe what vehicles were observed and what procedures were 
implemented when traffic was too heavy to observe all vehicles; and
    (4) Describe the data recording procedures.
    (c) For estimation--
    (1) Display the raw data and the weighted estimates;
    (2) For each estimate, provide an estimate of one standard error and 
an approximate 95 percent confidence interval; and
    (3) Describe how estimates were calculated and how variances were 
calculated.

                 Appendix A to Part 1340--Sample Design

    Following is a description of a sample design that meets the final 
survey guidelines and, based upon NHTSA's experience in developing and 
reviewing such designs, is presented as a reasonably accurate and 
practical design. Depending on the data available in a State, 
substitutions in this design can be made without loss of accuracy. This 
information is intended only as an example of a complying survey design 
and to provide guidance for States concerning recommended design 
options. These are not design requirements. It is recommended that State 
surveys of safety belt use be designed by qualified survey 
statisticians.

                            I. Sample Design

    A. Sample population: It is recommended that all controlled 
intersections or all roadway segments in the State (or in the parts of 
the State that have not been excluded by the 85 present demographic 
guideline) be eligible for sampling.
    B. First Stage: Usually, counties are the best candidates for 
primary sampling units (PSUs). In large States with differing geographic 
areas, it is recommended that stratification of PSUs by geographic 
region be employed prior to PSU selection. Counties should be randomly 
selected, preferably with probabilities proportional to vehicle miles of 
travel (VMT) in each county. If VMT is not available by county, PSUs can 
also be selected with probability proportional to county population. 
When sampling PSUs, States should ensure that an adequate mix of rural 
and urban areas are represented. In some cases, urban/rural 
stratification must be employed prior to PSU selection. In other cases, 
it may be more practical to perform urban/rural stratification at the 
second sampling stage.
    C. Second Stage: Within sampled PSUs, it is recommended that road 
segments be stratified by road type. For example, a two-strata design 
might be major roads vs. local roads, a three strata design might be 
high, medium and low traffic volume roads. The sample should be 
allocated to these strata by estimated annual VMT in each stratum. The 
sample of road segments within a stratum should be selected with 
probability proportional to average daily VMT. When enumerating all 
local roads is impractical, additional stages of selection can be 
introduced and alternative sample probabilities can be used. For 
example, census tracts within counties can be selected with probability 
proportional to VMT, or, if VMT is not available, proportional to the 
square root of the population. Next, within each sampled census tract, 
road segments can be selected.
    D. Sample Size: The following tables are provided as rough 
guidelines for determining sample size for estimating belt use with the 
required level of precision. The numbers are based on results from 
previous probability-based seat belt surveys.

[[Page 516]]



                   Determining First Stage Sample Size
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Number
                                                                   of
                  Number of counties in State                   counties
                                                                   in
                                                                 sample
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10............................................................         7
20............................................................        11
30............................................................        13
40............................................................        15
50............................................................        16
60............................................................        17
70............................................................        18
80............................................................        19
90............................................................        19
100-120.......................................................        20
130-170.......................................................        21
More than 180.................................................        22
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                  Determining Second Stage Sample Size
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Number
                                                                 of road
                                                                segments
    Average number of road segments in each sampled county       sampled
                                                                 in each
                                                                 sample
                                                                 county
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50............................................................        19
60............................................................        20
70............................................................        21
80............................................................        21
90............................................................        22
100...........................................................        23
200...........................................................        26
300...........................................................        27
400...........................................................        27
500-900.......................................................        28
More than 1000................................................        29
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    E. Example: To achieve the required level of precision, a State with 
100 counties would sample 20 counties at the first stage. At the second 
stage, assuming an average of 100 road segments in each sampled county, 
a sample of 23 road segments per county would be selected. The total 
sample size would be 20x460 observational sites.

                           II. Data Collection

    A. Exact observation sites, such as the specific intersection on a 
road segment, should be determined prior to conducting the observations.
    B. Direction of traffic to be observed should be determined prior to 
conducting the observations.
    C. If traffic volume is too heavy to accurately record information, 
predetermined protocol should exist for selecting which travel lanes to 
observe.
    D. Observations should be conducted for a predetermined time period, 
usually one hour. Time periods should be the same at each site.
    E. To minimize travel time and distance required to conduct the 
observations, clustering of sampled sites can be done. Sample sites 
should be grouped into geographic clusters, with each cluster containing 
major and local roads. Assignment of sites and times within clusters 
should be random.
    F. Two counts should be recorded for all eligible vehicles:
    1. Number of front seat outboard occupants.
    2. Number of these occupants wearing shoulder belts.

                             III. Estimation

    A. Observations at each site should be weighted by the site's final 
probability of selection.
    B. An estimate of one standard error should be calculated for the 
estimate of belt use. Using this estimate, 95 percent confidence 
intervals for the estimate of safety belt use should be calculated.


<R03>
PART 1345_INCENTIVE GRANT CRITERIA FOR OCCUPANT PROTECTION 
PROGRAMS--Table of Contents




Sec.
1345.1 Scope.
1345.2 Purpose.
1345.3 Definitions.
Sec. 1345.4 General requirements.
1345.5 Requirements for a grant.
1345.6 Award procedures.

    Authority: Pub. L. 105-178; 23 U.S.C. 405; delegation of authority 
at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 63 FR 52597, Oct. 1, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1345.1  Scope.

    This part establishes criteria, in accordance with section 2003 of 
the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, for awarding 
incentive grants to States that adopt and implement effective programs 
to reduce highway deaths and injuries resulting from individuals riding 
unrestrained or improperly restrained in motor vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 1345.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to implement the provisions of section 
2003 of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, 23 U.S.C. 
405, and to encourage States to adopt effective occupant protection 
programs.


<R05>
Sec. 1345.3  Definitions.

    (a) Child restraint system means child safety seat.

[[Page 517]]

    (b) Child safety seat means any device (except safety belts) 
designed for use in a motor vehicle to restrain, seat, or position a 
child who weighs 50 pounds or less.
    (c) Minimum fine means a total monetary penalty which may include 
fines, fees, court costs, or any other additional monetary assessments 
collected.
    (d) Passenger motor vehicle means a passenger car, pickup truck, 
van, minivan, or sport utility vehicle.
    (e) State means any of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
    (f) Targeted population means a specific group of people chosen by a 
State to receive instruction on proper use of child restraint systems.

[63 FR 52597, Oct. 1, 1998, as amended at 66 FR 38918, July 26, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 1345.4  General requirements.

    (a) Qualification requirements. To qualify for a grant under 23 
U.S.C. 405, a State must, for each year it seeks to qualify:
    (1) Submit an application to the appropriate NHTSA Regional 
Administrator demonstrating that it meets the requirements of Sec. 
1345.5 and include certifications that:
    (i) It has an occupant protection program that meets the 
requirements of 23 U.S.C. 405;
    (ii) It will use the funds awarded under 23 U.S.C. 405 only for the 
implementation and enforcement of occupant protection programs;
    (iii) It will administer the funds in accordance with 49 CFR part 18 
and OMB Circulars A-102 and A-87 and
    (iv) It will maintain its aggregate expenditures from all other 
sources, except those authorized under Chapter 1 of Title 23 of the 
United States Code, for its occupant protection programs at or above the 
average level of such expenditures in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 (either 
State or federal fiscal year 1996 and 1997 can be used);
    (2) After being informed by NHTSA that it is eligible for a grant, 
submit to the agency, within 30 days, a Program Cost Summary (HS Form 
217) obligating the section 405 funds to occupant protection programs.
    (3) The State's Highway Safety Plan, which is required to be 
submitted by September 1 of each year, pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 402 and 23 
CFR 1200, should document how it intends to use the Section 405 grant 
funds.
    (4) To qualify for grant funds in any fiscal year, the application 
must be received by the agency not later than August 1 of the fiscal 
year in which the State is applying for funds.
    (b) Limitation on grants. A State may receive a grant for up to six 
fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1998, subject to the 
following limitations:
    (1) The amount of a grant, under Sec. 1345.5 shall equal up to 25 
percent of the State's 23 U.S.C. 402 apportionment for fiscal year 1997, 
subject to availability of funds.
    (2) In the first and second fiscal years a State receives a grant, 
it shall be reimbursed for up to 75 percent of the cost of its occupant 
protection program adopted pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 405.
    (3) In the third and fourth fiscal years a State receives a grant, 
it shall be reimbursed for up to 50 percent of the cost of its occupant 
protection program adopted pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 405.
    (4) In the fifth and sixth fiscal years a State receives a grant, it 
shall be reimbursed for up to 25 percent of the cost of its occupant 
protection program adopted pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 405.

[63 FR 52597, Oct. 1, 1998, as amended at 66 FR 38918, July 26, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 1345.5  Requirements for a grant.

    To qualify for an incentive grant, a State must adopt and implement 
effective programs to reduce highway deaths and injuries resulting from 
individuals riding unrestrained or improperly restrained in motor 
vehicles. A State must adopt and implement at least four of the 
following criteria:
    (a) Safety belt use law. (1) In fiscal years 1999 and 2000, a State 
must make unlawful throughout the State the operation of a passenger 
motor vehicle whenever an individual (other than a child who is secured 
in a child restraint system) in the front seat of the vehicle does not 
have a safety belt properly secured about the individual's body.

[[Page 518]]

    (2) Beginning in fiscal year 2001, a State must make unlawful 
throughout the State the operation of a passenger motor vehicle whenever 
an individual (other than a child who is secured in a child restraint 
system) in any seating position in the vehicle does not have a safety 
belt properly secured about the individual's body.
    (3) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion, a State shall 
submit a copy of the State's safety belt use law, regulation or binding 
policy directive interpreting or implementing the law or regulation that 
provides for each element of paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2), as 
appropriate, of this section. The State is also required to identify any 
exemptions to its safety belt use law.
    (b) Primary safety belt use law. (1) A State must provide for 
primary enforcement of its safety belt use law.
    (2) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion, the State shall 
submit a copy of its law, regulation or binding policy directive 
interpreting or implementing the law or regulation that provides for 
each element of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (c) Minimum fine or penalty points. (1) A State must provide for the 
imposition of a minimum fine of not less than $25.00 or one or more 
penalty points on the driver's license of an individual:
    (i) For a violation of the State's safety belt use law; and
    (ii) for a violation of the State's child passenger protection law.
    (2)(i) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion, a Law State 
shall submit a copy of the law, regulation or binding policy directive 
interpreting or implementing the law or regulation that provides for 
each element of paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, a ``Law State'' means a State 
that has a law, regulation or binding policy directive interpreting or 
implementing the law or regulation that provides for each element of the 
minimum fines or penalty points criterion including the imposition of a 
minimum fine of not less than $25.00 or one or more penalty points for a 
violation of the State's safety belt use and child passenger protection 
laws.
    (3)(i) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion, a Data State 
shall submit data covering a period of at least three months during the 
past twelve months showing the total number of persons who were 
convicted of a safety belt use or child passenger protection law 
violation and that 80 percent or more of all such persons were required 
to pay at least $25 in fines, fees or court costs or had one or more 
penalty points assessed against their driver's license. The State can 
provide the necessary data based on a representative sample.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, a ``Data State'' means a State 
that does not require the mandatory imposition of a minimum fine of not 
less than $25.00 or one or more penalty points for a violation of the 
State's safety belt use and child passenger protection laws.
    (4) If a State has in effect a law that provides for the imposition 
of a fine of not less than $25.00 or one or more penalty points for a 
violation of the State's child passenger protection law, but provides 
that imposition of the fine or penalty points may be waived if the 
offender presents proof of the purchase of a child safety seat, the 
State shall be deemed to have in effect a law that provides for the 
imposition of a minimum fine or penalty points, as provided in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section.
    (d) Special traffic enforcement program. (1) A State must establish 
a statewide Special Traffic Enforcement Program for occupant protection 
that emphasizes publicity for the program. The program must provide for 
periodic enforcement efforts. Each enforcement effort must include the 
following five elements, in chronological order:
    (i) A seat belt observed use survey conducted before any enforcement 
wave;
    (ii) A media campaign to inform the public about the risks and costs 
of traffic crashes, the benefits of increased occupant protection use, 
and the need for traffic enforcement as a way to manage those risks and 
costs.
    (iii) Local media events announcing a pending enforcement wave;
    (iv) A wave of enforcement effort consisting of checkpoints, 
saturation patrols or other enforcement tactics.

[[Page 519]]

    (v) A post-wave observed use survey coupled with a post-wave media 
event announcing the results of the survey and the enforcement effort.
    (2) The State's program must provide for at least two enforcement 
efforts each year and must require the participation of State and local 
law enforcement officials in each effort.
    (3) The State's program must cover at least 70% of the State's 
population.
    (4) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion in the first year 
the State receives a grant based on this criterion, the State shall 
submit a plan to conduct a program that covers each element identified 
in paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(3) of this section. Specifically, the 
plan shall:
    (i) Provide the approximate dates, durations and locations of the 
efforts planned in the upcoming year;
    (ii) Specify the types of enforcement methods that will be used 
during each enforcement effort and provide a listing of the law 
enforcement agencies that will participate in the enforcement efforts 
along with an estimate of the approximate cumulative percentage of the 
State's population served by those agencies or the approximate 
percentage of the traffic volume on roadways covered by the enforcement 
program; and
    (iii) Document the activities the State plans to conduct to provide 
the public with information on the importance of occupant restraints and 
to publicize each enforcement effort and its results. This information 
should include a sample or synopsis of the content of the public 
information messages that will accompany the enforcement efforts and the 
strategy that the State intends to use to deliver each message to its 
target audience.
    (5) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion in subsequent 
fiscal years the State receives a grant based on this criterion, the 
State shall submit an updated plan for conducting a special traffic 
enforcement program in the following year and information documenting 
that the prior year's plan was effectively implemented. The information 
shall document that enforcement efforts were conducted; which law 
enforcement agencies were involved; and the dates, duration and location 
of each enforcement effort. The State must also submit samples of 
materials used, and document activities that took place to reach the 
target population.
    (e) Child passenger protection education program. (1) A State must 
provide an effective system for educating the public about the proper 
use of child safety seats. The program must, at a minimum:
    (i) Provide information to the public about proper seating positions 
for children in air bag equipped motor vehicles, the importance of 
restraint use, and instruction on how to reduce the improper use of 
child restraint systems;
    (ii) Provide for child passenger safety (CPS) training and 
retraining to establish or update child passenger safety technicians, 
law enforcement officials, fire and emergency personnel and other 
educators to function at the community level for the purpose of 
educating the public about proper restraint use and to teach child care 
givers how to install a child safety seat correctly. The training should 
encompass the goals and objectives of NHTSA's Standardized Child 
Passenger Safety Technician Curriculum;
    (iii) Provide periodic child safety seat clinics conducted by State 
and local agencies (health, medical, hospital, enforcement, etc.); and
    (iv) The States's public information program must reach at least 70% 
of the State's total population. The State's clinic program must reach 
at least 70% of a targeted population determined by the State and States 
must provide a rationale for choosing a specific group, supported by 
data, where possible.
    (2) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion in the first 
fiscal year the State receives a grant based on this criterion, the 
State shall submit a plan to conduct a child passenger protection 
education program that covers each element identified in paragraph (e) 
(1) of this section. The information shall include:
    (i) A sample or synopsis of the content of the planned public 
information program and the strategy that will be used to reach 70% of 
the State's population;

[[Page 520]]

    (ii) A description of the activities that will be used to train and 
retrain child passenger safety technicians, law enforcement officials, 
fire and emergency personnel and other educators and provide the 
durations and locations of such training activities;
    (iii) An estimate of the approximate number of people who will 
participate in the training and retraining activities; and
    (iv) A plan to conduct clinics that will serve at least 70% of the 
targeted population.
    (3) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion in subsequent 
fiscal years the State receives a grant based on this criterion, the 
State shall submit an updated plan for conducting a child passenger 
protection education program in the following year and information 
documenting that the prior year's plan was effectively implemented. The 
information shall document that a public information program, training 
and child safety seat clinics were conducted; which agencies were 
involved; and the dates, durations and locations of these programs.
    (f) Child passenger protection law. (1) The State must make unlawful 
the operation of a passenger motor vehicle whenever an individual who is 
less than 16 years of age is not properly secured in a child safety seat 
or other appropriate restraint system.
    (2) To demonstrate compliance with this criterion, a State shall 
submit a copy of the law(s), regulation or binding policy directive 
interpreting or implementing the law or regulation that provides for 
each element of paragraph (f)(1) of this section. In addition, the State 
must identify any exemptions to its child passenger protection law(s).
    (g) Certifications in subsequent years. (1) To demonstrate 
compliance in subsequent years the State receives a grant based on 
criteria in paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (f) of this section, if the 
State's law, regulation or binding policy directive has not changed, the 
State, in lieu of resubmitting its law, regulation or binding policy 
directive as provided in paragraphs (a)(3), (b)(2), (c)(2)(i) or (f)(2) 
of this section, may submit a statement certifying that there have been 
no substantive changes in the State's laws, regulations or binding 
policy directives.
    (2) The certifying statement shall be worded as follows:

(Name of certifying official), (position title), of the (State or 
Commonwealth) of --------, do hereby certify that the (State or 
Commonwealth) of -------- has not changed and is enforcing a law, that 
conforms to 23 U.S.C. 405 and 23 CFR 1345.5 (insert reference to section 
and paragraph), (citations to State law).

[63 FR 52597, Oct. 1, 1998, as amended at 66 FR 38918, July 26, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 1345.6  Award procedures.

    (a) In each Federal fiscal year, grants will be made to eligible 
States upon submission and approval of the application required by Sec. 
1345.4(a) and subject to the limitation in Sec. 1345.4(b). The release 
of grant funds under this part shall be subject to the availability of 
funding for that fiscal year. If there are expected to be insufficient 
funds to award full grant amounts to all eligible States in any fiscal 
year, NHTSA may release less than the full grant amounts upon initial 
approval of the State's application and documentation and the remainder 
of the full grant amounts, up to the State's proportionate share of 
available funds, before the end of that fiscal year. Project approval, 
and the contractual obligation of the Federal government to provide 
grant funds, shall be limited to the amount of funds released.
    (b) If any amounts authorized for grants under this part for a 
fiscal year are expected to remain unobligated in that fiscal year, the 
Administrator may transfer such amounts to the programs authorized under 
23 U.S.C. 410 and 23 U.S.C. 411, to ensure to the extent possible that 
each State receives the maximum incentive funding for which it is 
eligible.
    (c) If any amounts authorized for grants under 23 U.S.C. 410 and 23 
U.S.C. 411 are transferred to the grant program under this part in a 
fiscal year, the Administrator shall distribute the transferred amounts 
so that each eligible State receives a proportionate share of these 
amounts, subject to the conditions specified in Sec. 1345.4.

                       PARTS 1346	1399 [RESERVED]

[[Page 521]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids Volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 523]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of April 1, 2004)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


23 CFR

FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
                                                                  23 CFR


American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials

  444 N. Capitol St., NW, Suite 249, Washington, 
  DC 20001
Guide for Accomodating Utilities within Highway                  645.211
  Right-of-Way, 1981.
Guide to Metric Conversion, AASHTO, 1993..........               655.601
Policy on Design Standards--Interstate Systems,                 625.4(a)
  1991.
Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and                      625.4(a)
  Streets, 2001.
Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges,                    625.4(b)
  Fifteenth Ed., 1992, and Interim Specifications, 
  Bridges, 1993 through 1995.
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, First                 625.4(b)
  Edition, 1994 (U.S. Units).
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, First                 625.4(b)
  Edition, 1994 (SI Units).
Standard Specifications for Movable Highway                     625.4(b)
  Bridges, 1988.
Standard Specifications for Structural Supports                 625.4(b)
  for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic 
  Signals, 1994 and Interim Specifications, 
  Bridges, 1986 through 1988.
Standard Specifications for Transportation                      625.4(c)
  Materials and Methods of Sampling and Testing, 
  Parts I and Part II, 1986.
Traffic Engineering Metric Conversion Factors,                   655.601
  1993--Addendum to the Guide to Metric 
  Conversion, AASHTO, October 1993.


American Welding Society

  2501 NW 7th St., Miami, FL 33125
AWS D 12.1-75 Reinforcing Steel Welding Code......              625.3(b)
AWSD 1.4-79 Reinforcing Steel Welding Code........           625.4(b)(4)
ANSI/AASHTO/AWS D1.5-95 Bridge Welding Code, 1995.              625.4(b)
ANSI/AWS D1.4-92 Structural Welding Code--                      625.4(b)
  Reinforcing Steel.


Federal Highway Administration

  400 Seventh Street SW, Room 3408, Washington, DC 
  20590, http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)             655.601(a)
  for Streets and Highways, 2003 Edition.
Standard Alphabets for Highway Signs, FHWA, 1966,               625.3(c)
Reprinted May 1972.
[[Page 524]]

23 CFR (PARTS 1200 TO 1299)

NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF 
TRANSPORTATION
                                                                  23 CFR


Federal Highway Administration

  400 Seventh St., SW, Washington, DC 20590
Standard Alphabets, 1966..........................                1204.4


General Services Administration

  18th and F Streets, NW, Washington DC 20405
Federal Standard No. 595a, Color 13432............                1204.4
Federal Standard No. 595a, Color 37038............                1204.4

[[Page 525]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 2004)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2 [Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)

[[Page 526]]

    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Part 6501)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Part 6601)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Part 7701)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Part 8301)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                      Title 6--Homeland Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

[[Page 527]]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)

[[Page 528]]

      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Part 1800)

[[Page 529]]

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

[[Page 530]]

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 531]]

      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
                Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)

[[Page 532]]

         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)

[[Page 533]]

      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)

[[Page 534]]

       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)

[[Page 535]]

       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)

[[Page 536]]

        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Part 1501)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

[[Page 537]]

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)

[[Page 538]]

       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-70)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10010)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare

[[Page 539]]

        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 540]]

       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)

[[Page 541]]

        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1400--1499)
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1599)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 542]]

         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 543]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 2004)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development, United      22, II
     States
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 544]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII

[[Page 545]]

  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I, IV, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II

[[Page 546]]

  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5

[[Page 547]]

  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V; 42, I
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V; 42, I
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General

[[Page 548]]

  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I, XI; 40, 
                                                  IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A

[[Page 549]]

  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
   Commission
[[Page 550]]

Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV

[[Page 551]]

Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 553]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
section for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000,'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

23 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.11 (a) revised...................................................58666
630 Authority citation revised.....................................23847
630.102--630.112 (Subpart A) Revised...............................23847
630.301--630.307 (Subpart C) Removed...............................23849
655.401--655.411 (Subpart D) Removed................................1453
    Regulation at 66 FR 1453 eff. date delayed to 4-8-01............9198
655.601 (a) revised................................................38911
658.5 Corrected; CFR correction....................................13012
777 Regulation at 65 FR 82924 eff. date delayed to 3-30-01..........8089
940 (Subchapter K) Added............................................1453
    Regulation at 66 FR 1453 eff. date delayed to 4-8-01............9198
940.9 (b) amended..................................................19856
940.11 (g) amended.................................................19856
Chapter II
1240 Regulation at 63 FR 57909 confirmed...........................20926
Chapter III
1345.3 (f) added...................................................38918
1345.4 (a)(1)(iv) revised..........................................38918
1345.5 (c)(4) added; (d)(2), (5), (e)(1)(ii), (2)(i) and (ii) 
        amended; (e)(1)(iv) revised................................38918

                                  2002

23 CFR
                                                                   67 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
172 Revised........................................................40155
420 Revised........................................................47271
450 Technical correction...........................................68512
450.322 (a) revised................................................62373
625.4 (a)(1) revised................................................6395
627 Authority citation revised; nomenclature change................75924
627.5 (e) added....................................................75924
635 Authority citation revised; nomenclature change................75924
635.102 Amended....................................................75924
635.104 (c) added..................................................75925
635.107 Revised....................................................75925
635.109 (c) added..................................................75925
635.110 (f) added..................................................75925
635.112 Heading revised; (i) added.................................75925
635.113 (c) added..................................................75925
635.114 (k) added..................................................75925
635.116 (d) added..................................................75925
635.122 (c) added..................................................75925
635.309 (p) added..................................................75926
635.411 (f) added..................................................75926
635.413 Heading revised; (e) added.................................75926
636 Added..........................................................7592
</pre></body></html>
