<html><body><pre>
[Title 50 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2012 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]

       
<R02>
          Title 50

Wildlife and Fisheries


________________________

Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(f) to end of Sec.  17.95)

                         Revised as of October 1, 2012

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of October 1, 2012
                    Published by the Office of the Federal Register 
                    National Archives and Records Administration as a 
                    Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]







As of October 1, 2012

Title 50, Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(c) to the end of Sec.  17.95)

Revised as of October 1, 2011

Is Replaced by

Title 50, Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(c) to Sec.  17.95(e))

and

Title 50, Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(f) to the end of Sec.  17.95)



[[Page v]]




<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................     vii

  Title 50:
          Chapter I--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
          Department of the Interior (Continued)                     3
  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     615
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     635
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     645

[[Page vi]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 50 CFR 17.95 refers 
                       to title 50, part 17, 
                       section 95.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page vii]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2012), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page viii]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in eleven separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

``[RESERVED]'' TERMINOLOGY

    The term ``[Reserved]'' is used as a place holder within the Code of 
Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a 
``[Reserved]'' location at any time. Occasionally ``[Reserved]'' is used 
editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and 
not accidentally dropped due to a printing or computer error.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as 
an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that 
issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after 
contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please 
notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, 
or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities 
and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an 
alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in 
this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.

[[Page ix]]

    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 
20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2104, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to: US Government Printing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States, Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act 
Compilation are available in electronic format via www.ofr.gov. For more 
information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government 
Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-
mail, gpo@custhelp.com.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-
register.

    Charles A. Barth,
    Director,
    Office of the Federal Register.
    October 1, 2012.







[[Page xi]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 50--Fish and Wildlife is composed of thirteen volumes. The 
parts in these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-16; 
part 17 (17.1 to 17.95(a)), part 17 (17.95(b)), part (17.95(c) to (e)), 
part 17 (17.95(f) to end of 17.95), part 17 (17.96 to 17.98), part 17 
(17.99(a) to 17.99(h)), part 17 (17.99(i) to end of part 17), parts 18-
199, parts 200-227, parts 228-599, parts 600-659, and part 660 to end. 
The first nine volumes consist of parts 1-16, part 17 (17.1 to 
17.95(a)), part 17 (17.95(b)), part 17 (17.95(c) to (e)), part 17 
(17.95(f) to end of 17.95), part 17 (17.96 to 17.98), part 17 (17.99(a) 
to 17.99(h), part 17 (17.99(i) to end of part 17), and parts 18-199 and 
contain the current regulations issued under chapter I--United States 
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior. The tenth volume 
(parts 200-227) contains the current regulations issued under chapter 
II--the National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. The eleventh volume (parts 228-599) contains 
the remaining current regulations issued under chapter II--National 
Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Department of Commerce; and the current regulations 
issued under chapter III--International Fishing and Related Activities, 
chapter IV--Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
Department of the Interior and National Marine Fisheries Service, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
Commerce); Endangered Species Committee regulations; and chapter V--
Marine Mammal Commission. The twelfth and thirteenth volumes (parts 600-
659 and part 660 to end) contain the current regulations issued under 
chapter VI--Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce. The contents of 
these volumes represent all current regulations codified under this 
title of the CFR as of October 1, 2012.

    Alphabetical listings of endangered and threatened wildlife and 
plants appear in Sec. Sec.  17.11 and 17.12.

    The OMB control numbers for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration appear in 15 CFR 902.1.

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Michael L. White, assisted by Ann Worley.

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                    TITLE 50--WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES


<R02>

   (This book contains part 17, Sec. 17.95(f) to end of Sec. 17.95)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
  Department of the Interior (Continued)....................          17

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
 CHAPTER I--UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE 
                          INTERIOR (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

   SUBCHAPTER B--TAKING, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, SALE, PURCHASE, 
 BARTER, EXPORTATION, AND IMPORTATION OF WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)
Part                                                                Page
17              Endangered and threatened wildlife and 
                    plants (Continued)......................           5

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
SUBCHAPTER B_TAKING, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, SALE, PURCHASE, BARTER, 
     EXPORTATION, AND IMPORTATION OF WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)

<R05>


<R03>
PART 17_ENDANGERED AND THREATENED WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)--Table
of Contents



              Subpart I_Interagency Cooperation (Continued)

Sec.
17.95 Critical habitat--fish and wildlife. (Continued)

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 1361-1407; 16 U.S.C. 1531-1544; 16 U.S.C. 4201-
4245; Pub. L. 99-625, 100 Stat. 3500; unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 40 FR 44415, Sept. 26, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
              Subpart I_Interagency Cooperation (Continued)

    Editorial Note: Paragraphs (a)-(e) of Sec. 17.95 appear in 50 Part 
17, Sec. Sec. 17.1 to 17.95(a), 50 Part 17, Sec. 17.95(b), and 50 Part 
17, Sec. 17.95(c) to Sec. 17.95(e).


<R05>
Sec. 17.95  Critical habitat--fish and wildlife. (Continued)

    (f) Clams and Snails.

              Appalachian Elktoe (Alasmidonta raveneliana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are described below and depicted in the 
maps that follow, with the lateral extent of each designated unit 
bounded by the ordinary high-water line.
    (i) Index map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.007
    

[[Page 6]]


    (2) Unit 1.
    (i) Macon County and Swain County, NC--the main stem of the Little 
Tennessee River (Tennessee River system), from the Lake Emory Dam at 
Franklin, Macon County, NC, downstream to the backwaters of Fontana 
Reservoir in Swain County, NC.
    (3) Unit 2.
    (i) Jackson County and Swain County, NC--the main stem of the 
Tuckasegee River (Little Tennessee River system), from the N.C. State 
Route 1002 Bridge in Cullowhee, Jackson County, NC, downstream to the 
N.C. Highway 19 Bridge, north of Bryson City, Swain County, NC.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1 and Unit 2 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.008
    
    (4) Unit 3.
    (i) Graham County, NC--the main stem of the Cheoah River (Little 
Tennessee River system), from the Santeetlah Dam, downstream to its 
confluence with the Little Tennessee River.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 7]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.009

    (5) Unit 4.
    (i) Transylvania County, NC--the main stem of the Little River 
(French Broad River system), from the Cascade Lake Power Plant, 
downstream to its confluence with the French Broad River.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 8]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.010

    (6) Unit 5.
    (i) Haywood County, NC--the main stem of the West Fork Pigeon River 
(French Broad River system), from the confluence of the Little East Fork 
Pigeon River, downstream to the confluence of the East Fork Pigeon 
River, and the main stem of the Pigeon River, from the confluence of the 
West Fork Pigeon River and the East Fork Pigeon River, downstream to the 
N.C. Highway 215 Bridge crossing, south of Canton, NC.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5 follows:

[[Page 9]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.011

    (7) Unit 6.
    (i) Yancey County and Mitchell County, NC, and Unicoi County, TN--
the main stem of the North Toe River, Yancey and Mitchell Counties, NC, 
from the confluence of Big Crabtree Creek, downstream to the confluence 
of the South Toe River; the main stem of the South Toe River, Yancey 
County, NC, from the N.C. State Route 1152 Bridge, downstream to its 
confluence with the North Toe River; the main stem of the Toe River, 
Yancey and Mitchell Counties, NC, from the confluence of the North Toe 
River and the South Toe River, downstream to the confluence of the Cane 
River; the main stem of the Cane River, Yancey County, NC, from the N.C. 
State Route 1381 Bridge, downstream to its confluence with the Toe 
River; and the main stem of the Nolichucky River from the confluence of 
the Toe River and the Cane River in Yancey County and Mitchell County, 
NC, downstream to the U.S. Highway 23/19W Bridge southwest of Erwin, 
Unicoi County, TN.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6 follows:

[[Page 10]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.012

    (8) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing, cool, clean water;
    (ii) Geomorphically stable stream channels and banks;
    (iii) Pool, riffle, and run sequences within the channel;
    (iv) Stable sand, gravel, cobble, boulder, and bedrock substrates 
with no more than low amounts of fine sediment;
    (v) Moderate to high stream gradient;
    (vi) Periodic natural flooding; and
    (vii) Fish hosts, with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them.

               Carolina Heelsplitter (Lasmigona decorata)

    (1) Critical habitat units are described below and depicted in the 
maps that follow, with the lateral extent of each designated unit 
bounded by the ordinary high-water line.
    (2) Unit 1.
    (i) Union County, NC--main stem of Goose Creek (Pee Dee River 
system) from the N.C. Highway 218 Bridge, downstream to its confluence 
with the Rocky River, and the main stem of Duck Creek, from the 
Mecklenburg/Union County line, downstream to its confluence with Goose 
Creek.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 11]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.000

    (3) Unit 2.
    (i) Union County, NC--main stem of Waxhaw Creek (Catawba River 
system) from the N.C. Highway 200 Bridge, downstream to the North 
Carolina/South Carolina State line.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 12]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.001

    (4) Unit 3.
    (i) Lancaster County, SC--main stem of Gills Creek (Catawba River 
system) from the County Route S-29-875, downstream to the S.C. Route 51 
Bridge, east of the city of Lancaster.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 13]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.002

    (5) Unit 4.
    (i) Lancaster, Chesterfield, and Kershaw Counties, SC--main stem of 
Flat Creek (Pee Dee River system), Lancaster County, from the S.C. Route 
204 Bridge, downstream to its confluence with Lynches River, and the 
main stem of the Lynches River, Lancaster and Chesterfield Counties, 
from the confluence of Belk Branch, Lancaster County, northeast 
(upstream) of the U.S. Highway 601 Bridge, downstream to the S.C. 
Highway 903 Bridge in Kershaw County.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 14]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.003

    (6) Unit 5.
    (i) Edgefield and McCormick Counties, SC--main stem of Mountain 
Creek (Savannah River system), Edgefield County, SC, from the S.C. Route 
36 Bridge, downstream to its confluence with Turkey Creek; Beaverdam 
Creek, Edgefield County, from the S.C. Route 51 Bridge, downstream to 
its confluence with Turkey Creek; and Turkey Creek, from the S.C. Route 
36 Bridge, Edgefield County, downstream to the S.C. Route 68 Bridge, 
Edgefield and McCormick Counties.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5 follows:

[[Page 15]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.004

    (7) Unit 6.
    (i) Greenwood and McCormick Counties, SC--main stem of Cuffytown 
Creek (Savannah River system), from the confluence of Horsepen Creek, 
northeast (upstream) of the S.C. Route 62 Bridge in Greenwood County, 
downstream to the U.S. Highway 378 Bridge in McCormick County.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6 follows:

[[Page 16]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.005

    (8) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing, cool, clean water;
    (ii) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks;
    (iii) Pool, riffle, and run sequences within the channel;
    (iv) Stable substrates with no more than low amounts of fine 
sediment;
    (v) Moderate stream gradient;
    (vi) Periodic natural flooding; and
    (vii) Fish hosts, with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them.

     Eleven Mobile River Basin Mussel Species: Southern acornshell 
  (Epioblasma othcaloogensis), ovate clubshell (Pleurobema perovatum), 
 southern clubshell (Pleurobema decisum), upland combshell (Epioblasma 
 metastriata), triangular kidneyshell (Ptychobranchus greenii), Alabama 
moccasinshell (Medionidus acutissimus), Coosa moccasinshell (Medionidus 
   parvulus), orange-nacre mucket (Lampsilis perovalis), dark pigtoe 
 (Pleurobema furvum), southern pigtoe (Pleurobema georgianum), and fine-
                  lined pocketbook (Lampsilis altilis)

    (1) The primary constituent elements essential for the conservation 
of the southern acornshell (Epioblasma othcaloogensis), ovate clubshell 
(Pleurobema perovatum), southern clubshell (Pleurobema decisum), upland 
combshell (Epioblasma metastriata); triangular kidneyshell 
(Ptychobranchus greenii),

[[Page 17]]

Alabama moccasinshell (Medionidus acutissimus), Coosa moccasinshell 
(Medionidus parvulus), orange-nacre mucket (Lampsilis perovalis), dark 
pigtoe (Pleurobema furvum), southern pigtoe (Pleurobema georgianum), and 
fine-lined pocketbook (Lampsilis altilis) are those habitat components 
that support feeding, sheltering, reproduction, and physical features 
for maintaining the natural processes that support these habitat 
components. The primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks;
    (ii) A flow regime (i.e., the magnitude, frequency, duration, and 
seasonality of discharge over time) necessary for normal behavior, 
growth, and survival of all life stages of mussels and their fish hosts 
in the river environment;
    (iii) Water quality, including temperature, pH, hardness, turbidity, 
oxygen content, and other chemical characteristics, necessary for normal 
behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages;
    (iv) Sand, gravel, and/or cobble substrates with low to moderate 
amounts of fine sediment, low amounts of attached filamentous algae, and 
other physical and chemical characteristics necessary for normal 
behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages;
    (v) Fish hosts, with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them; and
    (vi) Few or no competitive nonnative species present.
    (2) Critical habitat unit descriptions and maps.
    (i) Index map. The index map showing critical habitat units in the 
States of Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and Tennessee for the 11 Mobile 
River Basin mussel species follows:

[[Page 18]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.001

    (ii) Protected species and critical habitat units. A table listing 
the protected species, their respective critical habitat units, and the 
States that contain those habitat units follows. Detailed critical 
habitat unit descriptions and maps appear below the table.

[[Page 19]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Critical habitat
            Species                   units                States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Southern acornshell             Units 13, 18, 19,  AL, GA, TN
 (Epioblasma othcaloogensis).    21, 24, 25, 26.
Ovate clubshell (Pleurobema     Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, GA, MS, TN
 perovatum).                     5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 10, 11, 12, 13,
                                 17, 18, 19, 21,
                                 24, 25, 26.
Southern clubshell (Pleurobema  Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, GA, MS, TN
 decisum).                       5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 13, 14, 15, 17,
                                 18, 19, 21, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Upland combshell (Epioblasma    Units 12, 13, 18,  AL, GA, TN
 metastriata).                   19, 21, 24, 25,
                                 26.
Triangular kidneyshell          Units 10, 11, 12,  AL, GA, TN
 (Ptychobranchus greenii).       13, 18, 19, 20,
                                 21, 22, 23, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Alabama moccasinshell           Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, GA, MS, TN
 (Medionidus acutissimus).       5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 10, 11, 12, 13,
                                 15, 25, 26.
Coosa moccasinshell             Units 18, 19, 20,  AL, GA, TN
 (Medionidus parvulus).          21, 22, 23, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Orange-nacre mucket (Lampsilis  Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, MS
 perovalis).                     5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 10, 11, 12, 13,
                                 14, 15.
Dark pigtoe (Pleurobema         Units 10, 11, 12.  AL
 furvum).
Southern pigtoe (Pleurobema     Units 18, 19, 20,  AL, GA, TN
 georgianum).                    21, 22, 23, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Fine-lined pocketbook           Units 13, 16, 17,  AL, GA, TN
 (Lampsilis altilis).            18, 19, 20, 21,
                                 22, 23, 24, 25,
                                 26.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Unit 1. East Fork Tombigbee River, Monroe, Itawamba County, 
Mississippi. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 1 includes the East Fork Tombigbee River main stem from 
Mississippi Highway 278 (T13S R7E S3), Monroe County, upstream to the 
confluence of Mill Creek (T11S R8E S24), Itawamba County, Mississippi.
    (B) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 20]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.002

    (iv) Unit 2. Bull Mountain Creek, Itawamba County, Mississippi. This 
is a critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 2 includes the main stem of Bull Mountain Creek from 
Mississippi Highway 25 (T11S R9E S30), upstream to U.S. Highway 78 (T10S 
R10E S6), Itawamba County, Mississippi.
    (B) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 21]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.003

    (v) Unit 3. Buttahatchee River and Sipsey Creek, Lowndes/Monroe 
County, Mississippi; Lamar County, Alabama. This is a critical habitat 
unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, 
and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 3 includes the Buttahatchee River main stem from its 
confluence with the impounded waters of Columbus Lake (Tombigbee River, 
T16S R19W S23), Lowndes/Monroe County, Mississippi, upstream to the 
confluence of Beaver Creek (T13S R15W S17), Lamar County, Alabama; and 
Sipsey Creek, from its confluence with the Buttahatchee

[[Page 22]]

River (T14S R17W S2), upstream to the Mississippi/Alabama State Line 
(T12S R10E S21), Monroe County, Mississippi.
    (B) Map of Unit 3 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.004
    
    (vi) Unit 4. Luxapalila Creek and Yellow Creek, Lowndes County, 
Mississippi; Lamar County, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for 
the ovate clubshell, southern

[[Page 23]]

clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 4 includes the Luxapalila Creek main stem from Waterworks 
Road (T18S R18W S11), Columbus, Mississippi, upstream to approximately 
1.0 km (0.6 mi) above Steens Road (T17S R17W S27), Lowndes County, 
Mississippi; and the Yellow Creek main stem from its confluence with 
Luxapalila Creek (T17S R17W S21), Lowndes County, Mississippi, upstream 
to the confluence of Cut Bank Creek (T16S R16W S30), Lamar County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 4 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.005
    

[[Page 24]]


    (vii) Unit 5. Coalfire Creek, Pickens County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 5 includes the Coalfire Creek main stem from its confluence 
with the impounded waters of Aliceville Lake (Tombigbee River, T20S R17W 
S26), upstream to U.S. Highway 82 (T19S R15W S15), Pickens County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 5 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.006
    

[[Page 25]]


    (viii) Unit 6. Lubbub Creek, Pickens County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 6 includes the main stem of Lubbub Creek from its 
confluence with the impounded waters of Gainesville Lake (Tombigbee 
River, T24N R2W S11), upstream to the confluence of Little Lubbub Creek 
(T21S R1W S34), Pickens County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 6 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.007
    

[[Page 26]]


    (ix) Unit 7. Sipsey River, Greene/Pickens, Tuscaloosa Counties, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 7 includes the Sipsey River main stem from its confluence 
with impounded waters of Gainesville Lake (Tombigbee River, T24N R1W 
S30), Greene/Pickens County, upstream to Alabama Highway 171 crossing 
(T18S R12W S34), Tuscaloosa County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 7 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.008
    

[[Page 27]]


    (x) Unit 8. Trussels Creek, Greene County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 8 includes the Trussels Creek main stem from its confluence 
with the impounded waters of Demopolis Lake (Tombigbee River, T21N R2W 
S15), upstream to Alabama Highway 14 (T22N R1E S4), Greene County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 8 follows:

[[Page 28]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.009

    (xi) Unit 9. Sucarnoochee River, Sumter County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 9 includes the Sucarnoochee River main stem from its 
confluence with the Tombigbee River (T17N R1W S26), upstream to the 
Mississippi/Alabama State Line (T19N R4W S15), Sumter County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 9 follows:

[[Page 29]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.010

    (xii) Unit 10. Sipsey Fork and tributaries, Winston, Lawrence 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, orange-nacre 
mucket, and dark pigtoe.
    (A) Unit 10 includes the Sipsey Fork main stem from the section 11/
12 line (T10S R8W), Winston County, Alabama, upstream to the confluence 
of Hubbard Creek (T8S R9W S27), Lawrence County, Alabama; Thompson 
Creek, from its confluence with Hubbard

[[Page 30]]

Creek (T8S R9W S27), upstream to section 2 line (T8S R9W) Lawrence 
County; Brushy Creek, from the confluence of Glover Creek (T10S R7W 
S11), Winston County, upstream to section 9 (T8S R7W), Lawrence County; 
Capsey Creek, from confluence with Brushy Creek (T9S R7W S23), Winston 
County, upstream to the confluence of Turkey Creek (T8S R6W S33), 
Lawrence County; Rush Creek, from confluence with Brushy Creek (T9S R7W 
S15), upstream to Winston/Lawrence County Line (T9S R7W S1), Winston 
County; Brown Creek, from confluence with Rush Creek (T9S R7W S2), 
Winston County, upstream to section 24 line (T8S R7W), Lawrence County; 
Beech Creek, from confluence with Brushy Creek (T9S R7W S8), to 
confluence of East and West Forks (T9S R7W S6), Winston County; Caney 
Creek and North Fork Caney Creek, from confluence with Sipsey Fork (T9S 
R8W S28), upstream to section 14 line (T9S R9W), Winston County; Borden 
Creek, from confluence with Sipsey Fork (T8S R8W S5), Winston County, 
upstream to the confluence of Montgomery Creek (T8S R8W S10), Lawrence 
County; and Flannagin Creek, from confluence with Borden Creek (T8S R8W 
S28), upstream to confluence of Dry Creek (T8S R8W S4), Lawrence County.

[[Page 31]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.011


[[Page 32]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.012

    (xiii) Unit 11. North River and Clear Creek, Tuscaloosa, Fayette 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, orange-nacre 
mucket, and dark pigtoe.
    (A) Unit 11 includes the main stem of the North River from 
Tuscaloosa County Road 38 (T18S R10W S16), Tuscaloosa County, upstream 
to confluence of Ellis Creek (T16S R10W S6), Fayette County, Alabama; 
and Clear Creek from its confluence with North River (T16S R11W S13) to 
Bays Lake Dam (T16S R11W S2), Fayette County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 11 follows:

[[Page 33]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.013

    (xiv) Unit 12. Locust Fork and Little Warrior Rivers, Jefferson, 
Blount Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama 
moccasinshell, orange-nacre mucket, and dark pigtoe.
    (A) Unit 12 includes the Locust Fork main stem from U.S. Highway 78 
(T15S R4W S30), Jefferson County, upstream to the confluence of Little 
Warrior River (T13S R1W

[[Page 34]]

S3), Blount County, Alabama; and Little Warrior River from its 
confluence with the Locust Fork (T13S R1W S3), upstream to the 
confluence of Calvert Prong and Blackburn Fork (T13S R1W S12), Blount 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 12 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.014
    

[[Page 35]]


    (xv) Unit 13. Cahaba River and Little Cahaba River, Jefferson, 
Shelby, Bibb Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the 
southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, upland 
combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, orange-nacre 
mucket, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 13 includes the Cahaba River from U.S. Highway 82 (T23N R9E 
S26), Centerville, Bibb County, upstream to Jefferson County Road 143 
(T18S R1E S33), Jefferson County, Alabama; and the Little Cahaba River 
from its confluence with the Cahaba River (T24N R10E S21), upstream to 
the confluence of Mahan and Shoal Creeks (T24N R11E S14), Bibb County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 13 follows:

[[Page 36]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.015

    (xvi) Unit 14. Alabama River, Autauga, Lowndes, Dallas Counties, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the southern clubshell and 
orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 14 includes the Alabama River from the confluence of the 
Cahaba River (T16N R10E S32), Dallas County, upstream to the confluence 
of Big Swamp Creek (T15N R12E S1), Lowndes County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 14 follows:

[[Page 37]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.016

    (xvii) Unit 15. Bogue Chitto Creek, Dallas County, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern clubshell, Alabama 
moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 15 includes the Bogue Chitto Creek main stem from its 
confluence with the Alabama River (T14N R8E S24), Dallas County, 
upstream to U.S. Highway 80 (T17N R7E S24), Dallas County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 15 follows:

[[Page 38]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.017

    (xviii) Unit 16. Tallapoosa River, Cleburne County, Alabama, and 
Paulding, Haralson Counties, Georgia; Cane Creek, Cleburne County, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 16 includes the main stem Tallapoosa River from U.S. 
Highway 431 (T17S R10E S31), Cleburne County, Alabama, upstream to the 
confluence of McClendon and Mud Creeks (33[deg]50[min]43[sec] N 
85[deg]00[min]45[sec] W), Paulding County, Georgia; and Cane Creek from 
its confluence with Tallapoosa River (T16S R10E S24), upstream to 
section 33/4

[[Page 39]]

Line (T15S, R11E), Cleburne County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 16 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.018
    
    (xix) Unit 17. Uphapee, Choctafaula, and Chewacla Creeks, Macon, Lee 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, southern clubshell, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 17 includes the mainstem of Uphapee Creek from Alabama 
Highway 199

[[Page 40]]

(T17N R23E S3), upstream to the confluence of Opintlocco and Chewacla 
Creeks (T17N R24E S26), Macon County, Alabama; Choctafaula Creek, from 
confluence with Uphapee Creek (T17N R24E S8), upstream to Macon County 
Road 54 (T18N R 25E S31), Macon County, Alabama; Chewacla Creek, from 
confluence with Opintlocco Creek (T17N R24E S26), Macon County, Alabama, 
upstream to Lee County Road 159 (T18N R26E S18), Lee County, Alabama; 
Opintlocco Creek, from confluence with Chewacla Creek (T17N R24E S26), 
upstream to Macon County Road 79 (T16N R25E S25) Macon County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 17 follows:

[[Page 41]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.019

    (xx) Unit 18. Coosa River (Old River Channel) and Terrapin Creek, 
Cherokee, Calhoun, Cleburne Counties, Alabama. This is a critical 
habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern 
clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 18 includes the Coosa River main stem from the power line 
crossing southeast of Maple Grove, Alabama (T10S R8E S35), upstream to 
Weiss Dam (T10S R8E S13), Cherokee County, Alabama; Terrapin Creek, 53

[[Page 42]]

km (33 mi) extending from its confluence with the Old Coosa River 
channel (T10S R9E S28), Cherokee County, upstream to Cleburne County 
Road 49 (T13S R11E S15), Cleburne County, Alabama; South Fork Terrapin 
Creek, 7 km (4 mi), from its confluence with Terrapin Creek (T13S R11E 
S18), upstream to Cleburne County Road 55 (T13S R11E S30), Cleburne 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 18 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.020
    

[[Page 43]]


    (xxi) Unit 19. Hatchet Creek, Coosa, Clay Counties, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 19 includes the main stem of Hatchet Creek from the 
confluence of Swamp Creek at Coosa County Road 29 (T22N R17E S26), Coosa 
County, Alabama, upstream to Clay County Road 4 (T22S R6E S17) Clay 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 19 follows:

[[Page 44]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.021

    (xxii) Unit 20. Shoal Creek, Calhoun, Cleburne Counties, Alabama. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 20 includes the main stem of Shoal Creek from the headwater 
of Whitesides Mill Lake (T15S R9E S12), Calhoun County, Alabama, 
upstream to the tailwater of Coleman Lake Dam (T14S R10E S26), Cleburne 
County, Alabama.

[[Page 45]]

    (B) Map of Unit 20 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.022
    
    (xxiii) Unit 21. Kelly Creek and Shoal Creek, Shelby, St. Clair 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the southern 
acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, upland combshell, 
triangular

[[Page 46]]

kidneyshell, Coosa moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined 
pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 21 includes the Kelly Creek main stem extending from the 
confluence with the Coosa River (T19S R3E S5), upstream to the 
confluence of Shoal Creek (T17S R2E S28), St. Clair County, Alabama; and 
the main stem of Shoal Creek from the confluence with Kelly Creek (T17S 
R2E S28), St. Clair County, Alabama, upstream to the St. Clair/Shelby 
County Line (T17S R2E S30), St. Clair County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 21 follows:

[[Page 47]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.023

    (xxiv) Unit 22. Cheaha Creek, Talladega, Clay Counties, Alabama. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 22 includes the main stem of Cheaha Creek from its 
confluence with Choccolocco Creek (T17S R6E S19), Talladega County, 
Alabama, upstream to the tailwater of Chinnabee Lake Dam (T18S R7E S14), 
Clay County, Alabama.

[[Page 48]]

    (B) Map of Unit 22 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.024
    
    (xxv) Unit 23. Yellowleaf Creek and Mud Creek, Shelby County, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the triangular kidneyshell, 
Coosa moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 23 includes the Yellowleaf Creek main stem from Alabama 
Highway 25 (T20S

[[Page 49]]

R2E S29), upstream to Shelby County Road 49 (T20S R1W S13); and the 
Muddy Prong main stem extending from its confluence with Yellowleaf 
Creek (T20S R1E S1), upstream to U.S. Highway 280 (T19S R1E S28), Shelby 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 23 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.025
    

[[Page 50]]


    (xxvi) Unit 24. Big Canoe Creek, St. Clair County, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 24 includes the main stem of Big Canoe Creek from its 
confluence with Little Canoe Creek at the St. Clair/Etowah County line 
(T13S R5E S17), St. Clair County, upstream to the confluence of Fall 
Branch (T14S R1E S28) St. Clair County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 24 follows:

[[Page 51]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.026

    (xxvii) Unit 25. Oostanaula, Coosawattee, and Conasauga Rivers, and 
Holly Creek, Floyd, Gordon, Whitfield, Murray Counties, Georgia; 
Bradley, Polk Counties, Tennessee. This is a critical habitat unit for 
the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, upland 
combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 25 includes the Oostanaula River main stem from its 
confluence with the

[[Page 52]]

Etowah River, Floyd County, Georgia (34[deg]15[min]13[sec] N, 
85[deg]10[min]35[sec] W), upstream to the confluence of the Conasauga 
and Coosawattee River, Gordon County, Georgia (34[deg]32[min]32[sec] N, 
84[deg]54[min]12[sec] W); the Coosawattee River main stem from its 
confluence with the Conasauga River (34[deg]32[min]32[sec] N, 
84[deg]54[min]12[sec] W), upstream to Georgia State Highway 136, Gordon 
County, Georgia (34[deg]36[min]49[sec] N, 84[deg]46[min]43[sec] W); the 
Conasauga River main stem from confluence with the Coosawattee River 
(34[deg]32[min]32[sec] N, 84[deg]54[min]13[sec] W), Gordon County, 
Georgia, upstream through Bradley and Polk Counties, Tennessee, to 
Murray County Road 2 (34[deg]58[min]27[sec] N, 84[deg]38[min]43[sec] W), 
Murray County, Georgia; and the mainstem of Holly Creek from its 
confluence with the Conasauga River (34[deg]42[min]12[sec] N, 
84[deg]53[min]29[sec] W), upstream to its confluence with Rock Creek, 
Murray County, Georgia (34[deg]46[min]59[sec] N, 84[deg]45[min]25[sec] 
W).
    (B) Map of Unit 25 follows:

[[Page 53]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.027

    (xxviii) Unit 26. Lower Coosa River, Elmore County, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama 
moccasinshell, Coosa moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined 
pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 26 includes the Coosa River main stem from Alabama State 
Highway 111 bridge (T18N R18/19E S24/19), upstream to

[[Page 54]]

Jordan Dam (T19N R18E S22), Elmore County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 26 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.028
    

[[Page 55]]



 Five Tennessee and Cumberland River Basin Mussels Species: Purple bean 
 (Villosa perpurpurea), Cumberlandian combshell (Epioblasma brevidens), 
Cumberland elktoe (Alasmidonta atropurpurea), oyster mussel (Epioblasma 
 capsaeformis), and rough rabbitsfoot (Quadrula cylindrica strigillata).

    (1) The primary constituent elements essential for the conservation 
of the purple bean (Villosa perpurpurea), Cumberlandian combshell 
(Epioblasma brevidens), Cumberland elktoe (Alasmidonta atropurpurea), 
oyster mussel (Epioblasma capsaeformis), and rough rabbitsfoot (Quadrula 
cylindrica strigillata) are those habitat components that support 
feeding, sheltering, reproduction, and physical features for maintaining 
the natural processes that support these habitat components. The primary 
constituent elements include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing stream reaches with a flow regime (i.e, the 
magnitude, frequency, duration, and seasonality of discharge over time) 
necessary for normal behavior, growth, and survival of all life stages 
of the five mussels and their host fish;
    (ii) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks;
    (iii) Stable substrates consisting of mud, sand, gravel, and/or 
cobble/boulder, with low amounts of fine sediments or attached 
filamentous algae;
    (iv) Water quality (including temperature, turbidity, oxygen 
content, and other characteristics) necessary for the normal behavior, 
growth, and survival of all life stages of the five mussels and their 
host fish; and
    (v) Fish hosts with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them.
    (2) Critical habitat unit descriptions and maps.
    (i) Index map. The index map showing critical habitat units in the 
States of Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia for 
the five Tennessee and Cumberland River Basin mussels follows:

[[Page 56]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.000


[[Page 57]]


    (ii) Table of protected species and critical habitat units. A table 
listing the protected species, their respective critical habitat units, 
and the States that contain those habitat units follows. Detailed 
critical habitat unit descriptions and maps appear below the table.

    Table of Five Tennessee and Cumberland River Basin Mussels, Their
  Critical Habitat Units, and States Containing Those Critical Habitat
                                  Units
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Critical habitat
             Species                     units              States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
purple bean (Villosa              Units 3, 4, 5, 7..  TN, VA
 perpurpurea).
Cumberlandian combshell           Units 1, 2, 4, 5,   AL, KY, MS, TN, VA
 (Epioblasma brevidens).           6, 9, 10.
Cumberland elktoe (Alasmidonta    Units 8, 9, 11,     KY, TN
 atropurpurea).                    12, 13.
oyster mussel (Epioblasma         Units 1, 2, 4, 5,   AL, KY, MS, TN, VA
 capsaeformis).                    6, 9,10.
rough rabbitsfoot (Quadrula       Units 4, 5........  TN, VA
 cylindrica strigillata).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Unit 1. Duck River, Marshall and Maury Counties, Tennessee. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the oyster mussel and Cumberlandian 
combshell.
    (A) Unit 1 includes the main stem of the Duck River from rkm 214 
(rmi 133) (0.3 rkm (0.2 rmi) upstream of the First Street Bridge) (-
87.03 longitude, 35.63 latitude) in the City of Columbia, Maury County, 
Tennessee, upstream to Lillard Mill Dam at rkm 288 (rmi 179) (-86.78 
longitude, 35.58 latitude), Marshall County, Tennessee.
    (B) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 58]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.001

    (iv) Unit 2. Bear Creek, Colbert County, Alabama, and Tishomingo 
County, Mississippi. This is a critical habitat unit for the oyster 
mussel and Cumberlandian combshell.
    (A) Unit 2 consists of the main stem of Bear Creek from the 
backwaters of Pickwick Lake at rkm 37 (rmi 23) (-88.09 longitude, 34.81 
latitude), Colbert County, Alabama, upstream through Tishomingo County, 
Mississippi, ending at the Mississippi/Alabama State line.
    (B) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 59]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.002

    (v) Unit 3. Obed River, Cumberland and Morgan Counties, Tennessee. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the purple bean.
    (A) Unit 3 includes the Obed River main stem from its confluence 
with the Emory River (-84.69 longitude, 36.09 latitude), Morgan County, 
Tennessee, upstream to Adams Bridge, Cumberland County, Tennessee (-
84.95 longitude, 36.07 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 60]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.003

    (vi) Unit 4. Powell River, Claiborne and Hancock Counties, 
Tennessee, and Lee County, Virginia. This is a critical habitat unit for 
the purple bean, Cumberlandian combshell, oyster mussel, and rough 
rabbitsfoot.
    (A) Unit 4 includes the main stem of the Powell River from the U.S. 
25E bridge in Claiborne County, Tennessee (-83.63 longitude, 36.53 
latitude), upstream to river mile 159 (upstream of Rock Island in the 
vicinity of Pughs) Lee County, Virginia.
    (B) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 61]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.004

    (vii) Unit 5. Clinch River, Hancock County, Tennessee, and Scott, 
Russell, and Tazewell Counties, Virginia; Copper Creek, Scott County, 
Virginia; and Indian Creek, Tazewell County, Virginia. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the purple bean, Cumberlandian combshell, 
oyster mussel, and rough rabbitsfoot.
    (A) Unit 5 includes the Clinch River main stem from rkm 255 (rmi 
159) (-83.36 longitude, 36.43 latitude) immediately below Grissom 
Island, Hancock County, Tennessee, upstream to its confluence with 
Indian Creek

[[Page 62]]

in Cedar Bluff, Tazewell County, Virginia (-81.80 longitude, 37.10 
latitude); Copper Creek in Scott County, Virginia, from its confluence 
with the Clinch River (-82.74 longitude, 36.67 latitude) upstream to 
Virginia State Route 72 (-82.56 longitude, 36.68 latitude); and Indian 
Creek from its confluence with the Clinch River upstream to the fourth 
Norfolk Southern Railroad crossing at Van Dyke, Tazewell County, 
Virginia (-81.77 longitude, 37.14 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 5 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.005
    

[[Page 63]]


    (viii) Unit 6. Nolichucky River, Hamblen and Cocke Counties, 
Tennessee. This is a critical habitat unit for the Cumberlandian 
combshell and oyster mussel.
    (A) Unit 6 consists of the main stem of the Nolichucky River from 
rkm 14 (rmi 9) (-83.18 longitude, 36.18 latitude) (approximately 0.6 rkm 
(0.4 rmi) upstream of Enka Dam) upstream to Susong Bridge (-83.20 
longitude, 36.14 latitude) in Hamblen and Cocke Counties, Tennessee.
    (B) Map of Unit 6 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.006
    

[[Page 64]]


    (ix) Unit 7. Beech Creek, Hawkins County, Tennessee. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the purple bean.
    (A) Unit 7 includes the Beech Creek main stem from rkm 4 (rmi 2) (-
82.92 longitude, 36.40 latitude) of Beech Creek (in the vicinity of 
Slide, Tennessee) upstream to the dismantled railroad bridge at rkm 27 
(rmi 16) (-82.77 longitude, 36.40 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 7 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.007
    

[[Page 65]]


    (x) Unit 8. Rock Creek, McCreary County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberland elktoe.
    (A) Unit 8 includes the main stem of Rock Creek from its confluence 
with White Oak Creek (-84.59 longitude, 36.71 latitude), upstream to the 
low-water crossing at rkm 25.6 (rmi 15.9) approximately 2.6 km (1.6 mi) 
southwest of Bell Farm (-84.69 longitude, 36.65 latitude), McCreary 
County, Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 8 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.008
    

[[Page 66]]


    (xi) Unit 9. Big South Fork of the Cumberland River and its 
tributaries, Fentress, Morgan, and Scott Counties, Tennessee, and 
McCreary County, Kentucky. This is a critical habitat unit for the 
Cumberlandian combshell, Cumberland elktoe, and oyster mussel.
    (A) Unit 9 consists of the Big South Fork of the Cumberland River 
main stem from its confluence with Laurel Crossing Branch (-84.54 
longitude, 36.64 latitude), McCreary County, Kentucky, upstream to its 
confluence with the New River and Clear Fork, Scott County, Tennessee; 
North White Oak Creek from its confluence with the Big South Fork 
upstream to Panther Branch (-84.75 longitude, 36.42 latitude), Fentress 
County, Tennessee; New River from its confluence with Clear Fork 
upstream to U.S. Highway 27 (-84.55 longitude, 36.38 latitude), Scott 
County, Tennessee; Clear Fork from its confluence with the New River 
upstream to its confluence with North Prong Clear Fork, Morgan and 
Fentress Counties, Tennessee; White Oak Creek from its confluence with 
Clear Fork upstream to its confluence with Bone Camp Creek, Morgan 
County, Tennessee; Bone Camp Creek from its confluence with White Oak 
Creek upstream to Massengale Branch (-84.71 longitude, 36.28 latitude), 
Morgan County, Tennessee; Crooked Creek from its confluence with Clear 
Fork upstream to Buttermilk Branch (-84.92 longitude, 36.36 latitude), 
Fentress County, Tennessee; and North Prong Clear Fork from its 
confluence with Clear Fork upstream to Shoal Creek (-84.97 longitude, 
36.26 latitude), Fentress County, Tennessee.
    (B) Maps of Unit 9 follow:

[[Page 67]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.009


[[Page 68]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.010


[[Page 69]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.011

    (xii) Unit 10. Buck Creek, Pulaski County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberlandian combshell and oyster mussel.
    (A) Unit 10 includes the Buck Creek main stem from the State Road 
192 Bridge (-84.43 longitude, 37.06 latitude) upstream to the State Road 
328 Bridge (-84.56 longitude, 37.32 latitude) in Pulaski County, 
Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 10 follows:

[[Page 70]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.012

    (xiii) Unit 11. Sinking Creek, Laurel County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberland elktoe.
    (A) Unit 11 includes the main stem of Sinking Creek from its 
confluence with the Rockcastle River (-84.28 longitude, 37.10 latitude) 
upstream to its confluence with Laurel Branch (-84.17 longitude, 37.09 
latitude) in Laurel County, Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 11 follows:

[[Page 71]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.013

    (xiv) Unit 12. Marsh Creek, McCreary County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberland elktoe.
    (A) Unit 12 includes the Marsh Creek main stem from its confluence 
with the Cumberland River (-84.35 longitude, 36.78 latitude) upstream to 
State Road 92 Bridge (-84.35 longitude, 36.66 latitude) in McCreary 
County, Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 12 follows:

[[Page 72]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.014

    (xv) Unit 13. Laurel Fork, Claiborne County, Tennessee, and Whitley 
County, Kentucky. This is a critical habitat unit for the Cumberland 
elktoe.
    (A) Unit 13 includes the main stem of the Laurel Fork of the 
Cumberland River from the boundary between Claiborne and Campbell 
Counties (-84.00 longitude, 36.58 latitude) upstream to rkm 11 (rmi 
6.85) in Whitley County, Kentucky. The upstream terminus is 3 rkm (2 
rmi) upstream of the Kentucky/Tennessee State line (-84.00 longitude, 
36.60 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 13 follows:

[[Page 73]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.015


[[Page 74]]



   Seven mussel species (in four northeast Gulf of Mexico drainages): 
    Purple bankclimber (Elliptoideus sloatianus), Gulf moccasinshell 
    (Medionidus penicillatus), Ochlockonee moccasinshell (Medionidus 
simpsonianus), oval pigtoe (Pleurobema pyriforme), shinyrayed pocketbook 
(Lampsilis subangulata), Chipola slabshell (Elliptio chipolaensis), and 
                   fat threeridge (Amblema neislerii).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted on the maps below for the 
following counties:
    (i) Alabama: Houston and Russell;
    (ii) Florida: Alachua, Bay, Bradford, Calhoun, Columbia, Franklin, 
Gadsden, Gulf, Jackson, Leon, Liberty, Union, Wakulla, and Washington; 
and
    (iii) Georgia: Baker, Calhoun, Coweta, Crawford, Crisp, Decatur, 
Dooly, Dougherty, Early, Fayette, Grady, Lee, Macon, Marion, Meriwether, 
Miller, Mitchell, Peach, Pike, Schley, Spalding, Sumter, Talbot, Taylor, 
Terrell, Thomas, Upson, Webster, and Worth.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
purple bankclimber (Elliptoideus sloatianus), Gulf moccasinshell 
(Medionidus penicillatus), Ochlockonee moccasinshell (Medionidus 
simpsonianus), oval pigtoe (Pleurobema pyriforme), shinyrayed pocketbook 
(Lampsilis subangulata), Chipola slabshell (Elliptio chipolaensis), and 
fat threeridge (Amblema neislerii) are:
    (i) A geomorphically stable stream channel (a channel that maintains 
its lateral dimensions, longitudinal profile, and spatial pattern over 
time without a consistent aggrading or degrading bed elevation);
    (ii) A predominantly sand, gravel, and/or cobble stream substrate 
with low to moderate amounts of silt and clay;
    (iii) Permanently flowing water;
    (iv) Water quality (including temperature, turbidity, dissolved 
oxygen, and chemical constituents) that meets or exceeds the current 
aquatic life criteria established under the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 
1251-1387); and
    (v) Fish hosts (such as largemouth bass, sailfin shiner, brown 
darter) that support the larval life stages of the seven mussels.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Data layers defining map units were 
created with USGS National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) GIS data. The 
1:100,000 river reach (route) files were used to calculate river 
kilometers and miles. The following data sources were referenced to 
identify upstream and downstream extents of critical habitat units: USGS 
7.5' quadrangles; Georgia Department of Transportation county highway 
maps; U.S. Census Bureau 1:100,000 TIGER line road data; 1993 Georgia 
digital orthographic quarter quads (DOQQs); 2004 Florida DOQQs; and 
DeLorme Atlas and Gazetteers for Alabama, Florida, and Georgia. The 
projection used in mapping all units was Universal Transverse Mercator 
(UTM), NAD 83, Zone 16 North.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units in the States of 
Alabama, Florida, and Georgia for the seven mussels follows:

[[Page 75]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.000

    (6) Table of listed species and critical habitat units. A table 
showing the listed species, their respective critical habitat units, and 
the States that contain those habitat units follows. Detailed critical 
habitat unit descriptions and maps appear below in paragraphs (7) 
through (17).

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Critical habitat
            Species                    units               States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Purple bankclimber               Units 5, 6, 7, 8,  AL, FL, GA
 (Elliptoideus sloatianus).       9, 10.

[[Page 76]]

 
Gulf moccasinshell (Medionidus   Units 1, 2, 4, 5,  AL, FL, GA
 penicillatus).                   6, 7.
Ochlockonee moccasinshell        Unit 9...........  FL, GA
 (Medionidus simpsonianus).
Oval pigtoe (Pleurobema          Units 1, 2, 4, 5,  AL, FL, GA
 pyriforme).                      6, 7, 9, 11.
Shinyrayed pocketbook            Units 2, 3, 4, 5,  AL, FL, GA
 (Lampsilis subangulata).         6, 7, 9.
Chipola slabshell (Elliptio      Unit 2...........  AL, FL
 chipolaensis).
Fat threeridge (mussel)          Units 2, 7, 8....  AL, FL, GA
 (Amblema neislerii).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (7) Unit 1. Econfina and Moccasin creeks, Bay and Washington 
Counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat unit for the Gulf 
moccasinshell and oval pigtoe.
    (i) General Description: Unit 1 includes the main stem of Econfina 
Creek and one of its tributaries, Moccasin Creek, encompassing a total 
stream length of 31.4 kilometers (km) (19.5 miles (mi)). The main stem 
of Econfina Creek extends from its confluence with Deer Point Lake at 
the powerline crossing located 3.8 km (2.3 mi) downstream of Bay County 
Highway 388 (-85.56 longitude, 30.36 latitude), Bay County, Florida, 
upstream 28.6 km (17.8 mi) to Tenmile Creek (-85.50 longitude, 30.51 
latitude), Washington County, Florida; and Moccasin Creek from its 
confluence with Econfina Creek upstream 2.8 km (1.7 mi) to Ellis Branch 
(-85.53 longitude, 30.41 latitude), Bay County, Florida.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 map follows:

[[Page 77]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.001

    (8) Unit 2. Chipola River and Dry, Rocky, Waddells Mill, Baker, 
Marshall, Big, and Cowarts Creeks in Houston County, Alabama, and in 
Calhoun, Gulf, and Jackson counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat 
unit for the fat threeridge, shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, 
oval pigtoe, and Chipola slabshell.
    (i) General Description: Unit 2 includes the main stem of the 
Chipola River and seven of its tributaries, encompassing a total stream 
length of 228.7 km (142.1 mi). The main stem

[[Page 78]]

of the Chipola River extends from its confluence with the Apalachicola 
River (-85.09 longitude, 30.01 latitude) in Gulf County, Florida, 
upstream 144.9 river km (90.0 river mi), including the reach known as 
Dead Lake, to the confluence of Marshall and Cowarts creeks (-85.27 
longitude, 30.91 latitude) in Jackson County, Florida; Dry Creek from 
the Chipola River upstream 7.6 river km (4.7 river mi) to Ditch Branch 
(-85.24 longitude, 30.69 latitude), Jackson County, Florida; Rocky Creek 
from the Chipola River upstream 7.1 river km (4.4 river mi) to Little 
Rocky Creek (-85.13 longitude, 30.68 latitude), Jackson County, Florida; 
Waddells Mill Creek from the Chipola River upstream 3.7 river km (2.3 
river mi) to Russ Mill Creek (-85.29 longitude, 30.87 latitude), Jackson 
County, Florida; Baker Creek from Waddells Mill Creek upstream 5.3 river 
km (3.3 river mi) to Tanner Springs (-85.32 longitude, 30.83 latitude), 
Jackson County, Florida; Marshall Creek from the Chipola River upstream 
13.7 river km (8.5 river mi) to the Alabama-Florida State line (-85.33 
longitude, 31.00 latitude), Jackson County, Florida; Cowarts Creek from 
the Chipola River in Jackson County, Florida, upstream 33.5 river km 
(20.8 river mi) to the Edgar Smith Road bridge (-85.29 longitude, 31.13 
latitude), Houston County, Alabama; and Big Creek from the Alabama-
Florida State line upstream 13.0 river km (8.1 river mi) to Limestone 
Creek (-85.42 longitude, 31.08 latitude), Houston County, Alabama. The 
short segment of the Chipola River that flows underground within the 
boundaries of Florida Caverns State Park is not included within this 
unit.
    (ii) Note: Unit 2 map follows:

[[Page 79]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.002

    (9) Unit 3. Uchee Creek, Russell County, Alabama. This is a critical 
habitat unit for the shinyrayed pocketbook.
    (i) General Description: Unit 3 includes the main stem of Uchee 
Creek from its confluence with the Chattahoochee River upstream 34.2 km 
(21.2 mi) to Island Creek (-85.18 longitude, 32.38 latitude), Russell 
County, Alabama, encompassing a total stream length of 34.2 km (21.2 
mi).
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 map follows:

[[Page 80]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.003

    (10) Unit 4. Sawhatchee, Sheffield Mill, and Kirkland creeks, Early 
County, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit for the shinyrayed 
pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, and oval pigtoe.
    (i) General Description: Unit 4 includes the main stems of 
Sawhatchee and Kirkland creeks, and one tributary, encompassing a total 
stream length of 37.8 km (23.5 mi). Unit 4 includes Sawhatchee Creek 
from its confluence with the Chattahoochee River upstream 28.6 km (17.8 
mi) to the powerline crossing located 1.4 km (0.87 mi) upstream of Early 
County Road 15 (-84.99 longitude, 31.32

[[Page 81]]

latitude); Sheffield Mill Creek, the tributary, from its confluence with 
Sawhatchee Creek upstream 3.1 km (1.9 mi) to the powerline crossing 
located 2.3 km (1.4 mi) upstream of Sowhatchee Road (-85.01 longitude, 
31.23 latitude); Kirkland Creek from its confluence with the 
Chattahoochee River upstream 6.1 km (3.8 mi) to Dry Creek (-85.00 
longitude, 31.13 latitude).
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.004
    

[[Page 82]]


    (11) Unit 5. Upper Flint River and Swift, Limestone, Turkey, 
Pennahatchee, Little Pennahatchee, Hogcrawl, Red Oak, Line, and 
Whitewater creeks in Coweta, Crawford, Crisp, Dooly, Fayette, Macon, 
Meriwether, Peach, Pike, Spalding, Sumter, Talbot, Taylor, Upson, and 
Worth counties, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit for the 
shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, oval pigtoe, and purple 
bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 5 encompasses a total stream length of 
380.4 km (236.4 mi) and includes the Flint River from the State Highway 
27 bridge (Vienna Road) (-83.98 longitude, 32.06 latitude) in Dooly and 
Sumter counties, Georgia (the river is the county boundary), upstream 
247.4 km (153.7 mi) through Macon, Peach, Taylor, Crawford, Talbot, 
Upson, Pike, Meriwether, and Coweta counties, to Horton Creek (-84.42 
longitude, 33.29 latitude) in Fayette and Spalding counties, Georgia 
(the river is the county boundary); Swift Creek from Lake Blackshear 
upstream 11.3 km (7 mi) to Rattlesnake Branch (-83.84 longitude, 31.82 
latitude), Crisp and Worth counties, Georgia (the creek is the county 
boundary); Limestone Creek from Lake Blackshear, Crisp County, Georgia, 
upstream 8.8 km (5.5 mi) to County Road 89 (-83.88 longitude, 32.04 
latitude), Dooly County, Georgia; Turkey Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 21.7 km (13.5 mi) to Rogers Branch (-83.89 longitude, 32.20 
latitude), in Dooly County, Georgia; Pennahatchee Creek from Turkey 
Creek upstream 4.8 km (3 mi) to Little Pennahatchee Creek (-83.89 
longitude, 32.10 latitude), Dooly County, Georgia; Little Pennahatchee 
Creek from Pennahatchee Creek upstream 5.8 km (3.6 mi) to Rock Hill 
Creek (-83.85 longitude, 32.13 latitude), Dooly County, Georgia; 
Hogcrawl Creek from the Flint River upstream 21.6 km (13.4 mi) to Little 
Creek (-83.90 longitude, 32.28 latitude), Dooly and Macon counties, 
Georgia (the creek is the county boundary); Red Oak Creek from the Flint 
River upstream 21.7 km (13.5 mi) to Brittens Creek (-84.68 longitude, 
33.11 latitude), Meriwether County, Georgia; Line Creek from the Flint 
River upstream 15.8 km (9.8 mi) to Whitewater Creek (-84.51 longitude, 
33.28 latitude), Coweta and Fayette counties, Georgia (the creek is the 
county boundary); and Whitewater Creek from Line Creek upstream 21.5 km 
(13.4 mi) to Ginger Cake Creek (-84.49 longitude, 33.42 latitude), 
Fayette County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Two maps of unit 5--northern part of unit 5 and--southern 
part of unit 5 follow:

[[Page 83]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.005


[[Page 84]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.006

    (12) Unit 6. Middle Flint River and Kinchafoonee, Lanahassee, 
Muckalee, Little Muckalee, Mill, Mercer Mill Pond, Abrams, Jones, and 
Chokee creeks in Dougherty, Lee, Marion, Schley, Sumter, Terrell, 
Webster, and Worth counties, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit 
for the shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, oval pigtoe, and 
purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 6 encompasses a total stream length of 
302.3 km (187.8 mi) and includes the Flint River from Piney

[[Page 85]]

Woods Creek (-84.06 longitude, 31.61 latitude) in Dougherty County, 
Georgia (the upstream extent of Lake Worth), upstream 39.9 km (24.8 mi) 
to the Warwick Dam (-83.94 longitude, 31.85 latitude), Lee and Worth 
counties, Georgia; Kinchafoonee Creek from its confluence with Lake 
Worth at the Lee--Dougherty county line (-84.17 longitude, 31.62 
latitude), upstream 107.6 km (66.8 mi) through Terrell and Sumter 
Counties, Georgia, to Dry Creek (-84.58 longitude, 32.17 latitude), 
Webster County, Georgia; Lanahassee Creek from Kinchafoonee Creek 
upstream 9.3 km (5.8 mi) to West Fork Lanahassee Creek (-84.50 
longitude, 32.11 latitude), Webster County, Georgia; Muckalee Creek, 
from its confluence with Lake Worth at the Lee--Dougherty county line (-
84.14 longitude, 31.62 latitude), upstream 104.5 km (64.9 mi) to County 
Road 114 (-84.44 longitude, 32.23 latitude), Marion County, Georgia; 
Little Muckalee Creek, from Muckalee Creek in Sumter County, Georgia, 
upstream 7.2 km (4.5 mi) to Galey Creek (-84.29 longitude, 32.17 
latitude), Schley County, Georgia; Mill Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 3.2 km (2 mi) to Mercer Millpond Creek (-83.99 longitude, 31.67 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; Mercer Millpond Creek from Mill Creek 
upstream 0.45 km (0.28 mi) to Mercer Mill Pond (-83.99 longitude, 31.68 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; Abrams Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 15.9 km (9.9 mi) to County Road 123 (-83.93 longitude, 31.68 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; Jones Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 3.8 km (2.4 mi) to County Road 123 (-83.96 longitude, 31.76 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; and Chokee Creek, from the Flint River 
upstream 10.5 km (6.5 mi) to Dry Branch Creek (-84.02 longitude, 31.89 
latitude), Lee County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Two maps of unit 6--western part of unit 6 and--eastern 
part of unit 6 follow:

[[Page 86]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.007


[[Page 87]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.008

    (13) Unit 7. Lower Flint River and Spring, Aycocks, Dry, 
Ichawaynochaway, Mill, Pachitla, Little Pachitla, Chickasawhatchee, and 
Cooleewahee creeks in Baker, Calhoun, Decatur, Dougherty, Early, Miller, 
Mitchell, and Terrell counties, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit 
for the fat threeridge, shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, oval 
pigtoe, and purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 7 encompasses a total stream length of 
396.7 km (246.5 mi) and includes the Flint River from its confluence 
with Big Slough (-84.56 longitude,

[[Page 88]]

30.93 latitude), Decatur County, Georgia, upstream 116.4 km (72.3 mi) 
through Baker and Mitchell Counties, Georgia, to the Flint River Dam 
(which impounds Lake Worth) (-84.14 longitude, 31.60 latitude), 
Dougherty County, Georgia; Spring Creek, from its confluence with Lake 
Seminole at Smith Landing (-84.75 longitude, 30.89 latitude), Decatur 
County, Georgia, upstream 74.2 km (46.1 mi) to County Road 35 (-84.78 
longitude, 31.34 latitude), Early County, Georgia; Aycocks Creek from 
Spring Creek upstream 15.9 km (9.9 mi) to Cypress Creek (-84.79 
longitude, 31.15 latitude), Miller County, Georgia; Dry Creek from 
Spring Creek upstream 9.9 km (6.1 mi) to Wamble Creek (-84.84 longitude, 
31.31 latitude), Early County, Georgia; Ichawaynochaway Creek from the 
Flint River, Baker County, Georgia, upstream 68.6 km (42.6 mi) to 
Merrett Creek (-84.58 longitude, 31.54 latitude), Calhoun County, 
Georgia; Mill Creek from Ichawaynochaway Creek upstream 7.4 km (4.6 mi) 
to County Road 163 (-84.63 longitude, 31.40 latitude), Baker County, 
Georgia; Pachitla Creek, from Ichawaynochaway Creek upstream 18.9 km 
(11.8 mi) to Little Pachitla Creek (-84.68 longitude, 31.56 latitude), 
Calhoun County, Georgia; Little Pachitla Creek from Pachitla Creek 
upstream 5.8 km (3.6 mi) to Bear Branch (-84.72 longitude, 31.58 
latitude), Calhoun County, Georgia; Chickasawhatchee Creek from 
Ichawaynochaway Creek, Baker County, Georgia, upstream 64.5 km (40.1 mi) 
to U.S. Highway 82 (-84.38 longitude, 31.74 latitude), Terrell County, 
Georgia; and Cooleewahee Creek from the Flint River upstream 15.1 km 
(9.4 mi) to Piney Woods Branch (-84.31 longitude, 31.42 latitude), Baker 
County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Two maps of unit 7--western part of unit 7 and--eastern 
part of unit 7 follow:

[[Page 89]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.009


[[Page 90]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.010

    (14) Unit 8. Apalachicola River, Chipola Cutoff, Swift Slough, River 
Styx, Kennedy Slough, and Kennedy Creek in Calhoun, Franklin, Gadsden, 
Gulf, Jackson, and Liberty Counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat 
unit for the fat threeridge and purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 8 includes the main stem of the 
Apalachicola River, two of its distributaries, Chipola Cutoff and Swift 
Slough, and three of its tributaries, River Styx, Kennedy Slough, and 
Kennedy Creek, encompassing a total length of 161.2 river km

[[Page 91]]

(100.2 river mi). The main stem of the Apalachicola River extends from 
the downstream end of Bloody Bluff Island (river mile 15.3 on U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers Navigation Charts) (-85.01 longitude, 29.88 
latitude), Franklin County, Florida, through Calhoun and Liberty 
Counties, Florida, upstream to the Jim Woodruff Lock and Dam (which 
impounds Lake Seminole) (-84.86 longitude, 30.71 latitude), Gadsden and 
Jackson Counties, Florida; Chipola Cutoff from the Apalachicola River in 
Gulf County, Florida, downstream 4.5 river km (2.8 river mi) to its 
confluence with the Chipola River; Swift Slough from the Apalachicola 
River in Liberty County, Florida, downstream 3.6 river km (2.2 river mi) 
to its confluence with the River Styx (-85.12 longitude, 30.10 
latitude); River Styx from the mouth of Swift Slough (-85.12 longitude, 
30.10 latitude) in Liberty County, Florida, downstream 3.8 river km (2.4 
river mi) to its confluence with the Apalachicola River; Kennedy Slough 
from -85.07 longitude, 30.01 latitude in Liberty County, Florida, 
downstream 0.9 river km (0.5 river mi) to its confluence with Kennedy 
Creek; and Kennedy Creek from Brushy Creek Feeder (-85.06 longitude, 
30.01 latitude) in Liberty County, Florida, downstream 1.1 river km (0.7 
river mi) to its confluence with the Apalachicola River.
    (ii) Note: Unit 8 map follows:

[[Page 92]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.011

    (15) Unit 9. Upper Ochlockonee River and Barnetts and West Barnetts 
creeks, and the Little Ochlockonee River in Gadsden and Leon counties, 
Florida, and in Grady and Thomas counties, Georgia. This is a critical 
habitat unit for the shinyrayed pocketbook, Ochlockonee moccasinshell, 
oval pigtoe, and purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 9 includes the main stem of the 
Ochlockonee River upstream of Lake Talquin and three tributaries 
encompassing a total stream length of 177.3 km (110.2 mi). The main stem 
of the

[[Page 93]]

Ochlockonee River extends from its confluence with Gulley Branch (the 
approximate upstream extent of Lake Talquin) (-84.44 longitude, 30.46 
latitude), Gadsden and Leon counties, Florida, upstream 134.0 km (83.3 
mi) to Bee Line Road/County Road 306 (-83.94 longitude, 31.03 latitude), 
Thomas County, Georgia; Barnetts Creek from the Ochlockonee River 
upstream 20 km (12.4 mi) to Grady County Road 170/Thomas County Road 74 
(-84.12 longitude, 30.98 latitude), Grady and Thomas counties, Georgia; 
West Barnetts Creek from Barnetts Creek upstream 10 km (6.2 mi) to 
Georgia Highway 111 (-84.17 longitude, 30.98 latitude), Grady County, 
Georgia; and the Little Ochlockonee River from the Ochlockonee River 
upstream 13.3 km (8.3 mi) to Roup Road/County Road 33 (-84.02 longitude, 
31.02 latitude), Thomas County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Unit 9 map follows:

[[Page 94]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.012

    (16) Unit 10. Lower Ochlockonee River in Leon, Liberty, and Wakulla 
counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat unit for the purple 
bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 10 encompasses a total stream length 
of 75.4 km (46.9 mi) and includes the main stem of the Ochlockonee River 
from its confluence with Syfrett Creek (-84.56 longitude, 30.02 
latitude), Wakulla County, Florida, upstream 75.4 km (46.9 mi) to the 
Jackson Bluff Dam (which impounds Lake Talquin) (-84.65 longitude, 30.39 
latitude), Leon and Liberty counties, Florida.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 map follows:

[[Page 95]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.013

    (17) Unit 11. Santa Fe River and New River in Alachua, Bradford, 
Columbia, and Union counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat unit 
for the oval pigtoe.
    (i) General Description: Unit 11 includes the main stem of the Santa 
Fe River and its tributary the New River encompassing a total stream 
length of 83.1 km (51.6 mi). The main channel of the Santa Fe River 
extends from where the river goes underground in O'Leno State Park (-
82.57 longitude, 29.91 latitude), Alachua and Columbia counties, 
Florida, upstream 60.2 km (37.4 mi) to the powerline crossing located 
1.9 km (1.2 mi) downstream from the U.S. Highway 301 bridge (-82.18 
longitude, 29.84 latitude) in

[[Page 96]]

Alachua and Bradford counties, Florida; and the New River from its 
confluence with the Santa Fe River at the junction of Alachua, Bradford, 
and Union counties, Florida, upstream 22.9 km (14.2 mi) to McKinney 
Branch (-82.27 longitude, 30.01 latitude) in Bradford and Union 
counties, Florida.
    (ii) Note: Unit 11 map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.014
    

[[Page 97]]



                 Georgia Pigtoe (Pleurobema hanleyianum)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Cherokee, Coosa, and 
Clay Counties, Alabama; Murray and Whitfield Counties, Georgia; and 
Bradley and Polk Counties, Tennessee, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the Georgia pigtoe are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks 
(channels that maintain lateral dimensions, longitudinal profiles, and 
sinuosity patterns over time without an aggrading or degrading bed 
elevation).
    (ii) A hydrologic flow regime (the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
and seasonality of discharge over time) necessary to maintain benthic 
habitats where the species is found. Unless other information becomes 
available, existing conditions at locations where the species occurs 
will be considered as minimal flow requirements for survival.
    (iii) Water quality (including temperature, pH, hardness, turbidity, 
oxygen content, and chemical constituents) that meets or exceeds the 
current aquatic life criteria established under the Clean Water Act (33 
U.S.C. 1251-1387).
    (iv) Sand, gravel, cobble, boulder, or bedrock substrates with low 
to moderate amounts of fine sediment and attached filamentous algae.
    (v) The presence of fish host(s) for the Georgia pigtoe (species 
currently unknown). Diverse assemblages of native fish will serve as a 
potential indication of presence of host fish.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
PCEs, such as buildings, bridges, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and 
the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Maps were developed from USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles. Critical habitat unit upstream and downstream 
limits were then identified by longitude and latitude using decimal 
degrees and converted to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) zone 16, 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the Georgia pigtoe 
follows:

[[Page 98]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.000

    (6) Unit 1 for Georgia pigtoe (GP 1): Conasauga River, Bradley and 
Polk Counties, Tennessee; Murray and Whitfield Counties, Georgia.
    (i) Unit GP 1 includes the channel of the Conasauga River from the 
confluence of Minnewaga Creek (710752.23E, 3875891.03N), Polk County, 
Tennessee, downstream to U.S.

[[Page 99]]

Highway 76 (694611.06E, 3851057.36N), Murray/Whitfield County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 (GP 1) for Georgia pigtoe (Conasauga River) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.001


[[Page 100]]


    (7) Unit 2 for Georgia pigtoe (GP 2), Terrapin Creek and Coosa 
River, Cherokee County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit GP 2 includes the channel of Terrapin Creek from Alabama 
Highway 9 (628065.76E, 3770007.078N), downstream to the confluence with 
the Coosa River (621001.27E, 3777441.03N), Cherokee County, Alabama; and 
the Coosa River channel from Weiss Dam (614866.54E, 3781969.16N), 
downstream to a point 1.6 km (1 mi) below the confluence of Terrapin 
Creek (619751.69E, 3776654.79N), Cherokee County, Alabama.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (GP 2) for Georgia pigtoe (Terrapin Creek, 
Coosa River) follows:

[[Page 101]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.002

    (8) Unit 3 for Georgia pigtoe (GP 3): Hatchet Creek, Coosa and Clay 
Counties, Alabama.
    (i) Unit GP 3 includes the channel of Hatchet Creek from Clay County 
Road 4 (588215.16E, 3666038.46N), Clay County, downstream to the 
confluence of Swamp Creek at Coosa County Road 29 (561904.90E, 
3636065.37N), Coosa County, Alabama.

[[Page 102]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (GP 3) for Georgia pigtoe (Hatchet Creek) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.003


[[Page 103]]



                Altamaha spinymussel (Elliptio spinosa).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Appling, Ben Hill, 
Coffee, Jeff Davis, Long, Montgomery, Tattnall, Telfair, Toombs, Wayne, 
and Wheeler Counties, Georgia, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the Altamaha spinymussel are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Geomorphically stable river channels and banks (channels that 
maintain lateral dimensions, longitudinal profiles, and sinuosity 
patterns over time without an aggrading or degrading bed elevation) with 
stable sandbar, slough, and mid-channel-island habitats of coarse-to-
fine sand substrates with low to moderate amounts of fine sediment and 
attached filamentous algae.
    (ii) A hydrologic flow regime (the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
and seasonality of discharge over time) necessary to maintain benthic 
habitats where the species are found and to maintain connectivity of 
rivers with the floodplain, allowing the exchange of nutrients and 
sediment for sand bar maintenance, food availability, and spawning 
habitat for native fishes.
    (iii) Water quality necessary for normal behavior, growth, and 
viability of all life stages, including specifically temperature (less 
than 32.6 [deg]C (90.68 [deg]) with less than 2 [deg]C (3.6 [deg]F) 
daily fluctuation), pH (6.1 to 7.7), oxygen content (daily average DO 
concentration of 5.0 mg/l and a minimum of 4.0 mg/l), an ammonia level 
not exceeding 1.5 mg N/L, 0.22 mg N/L (normalized to pH 8 and 25 [deg]C 
(77 [deg]F)), and other chemical characteristics.
    (iv) The presence of fish hosts (currently unknown) necessary for 
recruitment of the Altamaha spinymussel. The continued occurrence of 
diverse native fish assemblages currently occurring in the basin will 
serve as an indication of host fish presence until appropriate host 
fishes can be identified for the Altamaha spinymussel.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
PCEs, such as buildings, bridges, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and 
the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Maps were developed from USGS 7.5 
minute quadrangles, and critical habitat unit upstream and downstream 
limits were then identified by longitude and latitude using decimal 
degrees.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the Altamaha 
spinymussel follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11OC11.000

    (6) Unit 1: Ocmulgee River, Ben Hill, Telfair, Coffee, and Jeff 
Davis Counties, Georgia.
    (i) Unit 1 includes the channel of the Ocmulgee River from the 
confluence of House Creek with the Ocmulgee at Red Bluff

[[Page 104]]

Landing (longitude -83.18, latitude 31.85), Ben Hill and Telfair 
Counties, Georgia, downstream to Altamaha River (longitude -82.54, 
latitude 31.96), at the confluence of the Oconee and Ocmulgee Rivers, 
Jeff Davis and Telfair Counties, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 (Ocmulgee River) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11OC11.001
    
    (7) Unit 2: Upper Altamaha River, Wheeler, Toombs, Montgomery, Jeff 
Davis, Appling, and Tattnall Counties, Georgia.
    (i) Unit 2 includes the channel of the Altamaha River from the 
confluence of the Ocmulgee and Oconee Rivers (longitude -82.54, latitude 
31.96), Wheeler and Jeff Davis Counties, Georgia, downstream to the US 1 
crossing (longitude -82.36, latitude 31.94), and from the western edge 
of Moody Forest (longitude -82.33, latitude 31.93) downstream to the 
confluence of the Altamaha and Ohoopee Rivers (longitude -82.11, 
latitude 31.90), Appling and Tattnall Counties, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Upper Altamaha River) follows:

[[Page 105]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11OC11.002

    (8) Unit 3: Middle Altamaha River, Tattnall, Appling, Wayne, and 
Long Counties, Georgia.
    (i) Unit 3 includes the channel of Altamaha River, extending from 
the confluence with the Ohoopee (longitude -82.11, latitude 31.90), 
Tattnall and Appling Counties, Georgia, downstream to U.S. Route 301 
(longitude -81.84, latitude 31.67), Wayne and Long Counties, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Middle Altamaha River) follows:

[[Page 106]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11OC11.003

    (9) Unit 4: Lower Ohoopee River, Tattnall County, Georgia.
    (i) Unit 4 includes the channel of the Ohoopee River, starting 2.2 
km (1.3 mi) upstream of Tattnall County Road 191 (longitude -82.14, 
latitude 31.98), Tattnall County, Georgia, downstream to the confluence 
of the Ohoopee River with the Altamaha River (longitude -82.11, latitude 
31.90), Tattnall County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 (Lower Ohoopee River) follows:

[[Page 107]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11OC11.004

               Tumbling Creek Cavesnail (Antrobia culveri)

    (1) The critical habitat unit is depicted for Taney County, 
Missouri, on the map at paragraph (f)(5)(ii) of this section.
    (2) Within this area, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical and biological features essential to the conservation of the 
Tumbling Creek cavesnail consist of five components:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream bottoms and banks (stable 
horizontal dimension and vertical profile) in order to:
    (A) Maintain bottom features (riffles, runs, and pools) and 
transition zones between bottom features;
    (B) Continue appropriate habitat to maintain essential riffles, 
runs, and pools; and
    (C) Promote connectivity between Tumbling Creek and its tributaries 
and associated springs to maintain gene flow throughout the population.
    (ii) Instream flow regime with an average daily discharge between 
0.07 and 150 cubic feet per second (cfs), inclusive of both surface 
runoff and groundwater sources (springs and seepages).
    (iii) Water quality with temperature 55-62 [deg]F (12.78-16.67 
[deg]C), dissolved oxygen 4.5 milligrams or greater per liter, and 
turbidity of an average monthly reading of no more than 200 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU; units used to measure sediment 
discharge) for a duration not to exceed 4 hours.
    (iv) Bottom substrates consisting of fine gravel with coarse gravel 
or cobble, or bedrock with sand and gravel, with low amounts of fine 
sand and sediments within the interstitial spaces of the substrates.
    (v) Energy input from guano that originates mainly from gray bats 
(Myotis grisescens) that roost in the cave; guano is essential in the 
development of biofilm (the organic coating and bacterial layer that 
covers rocks in the cave stream) that cavesnails use for food.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Data layers defining the map unit 
were created using 7.5[min] topographic quadrangle maps and ArcGIS 
(version 9.3.1) mapping software.
    (5) Tumbling Creek Cavesnail Critical Habitat Unit.
    (i) U.S. Geological Survey 7.5[min] Topographic Protem Quad. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 15N, North American Datum of 1983 
(NAD83) coordinates (W, N): from the emergence of Tumbling Creek within 
Tumbling Creek Cave at Lat. 36[deg]33[min]37.41[sec] N, Long. 
92[deg]48[min]27.23[sec] W to its confluence with Bear Cave Hollow and 
Owens Spring upstream of Big Creek at at Lat. 36[deg]33[min]15.2[sec] N, 
Long. 92[deg]47[min]51.74[sec] W.
    (ii) Note: Map of Tumbling Creek Cavesnail Critical Habitat Unit 
follows:

[[Page 108]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR28JN11.000


[[Page 109]]



                  Rough Hornsnail (Pleurocera foremani)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Elmore and Shelby 
Counties, Alabama, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the rough hornsnail are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks 
(channels that maintain lateral dimensions, longitudinal profiles, and 
sinuosity patterns over time without an aggrading or degrading bed 
elevation).
    (ii) A hydrologic flow regime (the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
and seasonality of discharge over time) necessary to maintain benthic 
habitats where the species is found. Unless other information becomes 
available, existing conditions at locations where the species occurs 
will be considered as minimal flow requirements for survival.
    (iii) Water quality (including temperature, pH, hardness, turbidity, 
oxygen content, and chemical constituents) that meets or exceeds the 
current aquatic life criteria established under the Clean Water Act (33 
U.S.C. 1251-1387).
    (iv) Sand, gravel, cobble, boulder, bedrock, or mud substrates with 
low to moderate amounts of fine sediment and attached filamentous algae.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, bridges, aqueducts, 
airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Maps were developed from USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles. Critical habitat unit upstream and downstream 
limits were then identified by longitude and latitude using decimal 
degrees and converted to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) zone 16, 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the rough 
hornsnail follows:

[[Page 110]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.008

    (6) Unit 1 for rough hornsnail (RH 1): Lower Coosa River, Elmore 
County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit RH 1 includes the Coosa River channel from Jordan Dam 
(569930.28E, 3609212.67N), downstream to the confluence of the 
Tallapoosa River (568995.14E, 3597805.93N), Elmore County, Alabama.

[[Page 111]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 (RH 1) for rough hornsnail (Coosa River) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.009


[[Page 112]]


    (7) Unit 2 for rough hornsnail (RH 2): Yellowleaf Creek, Shelby 
County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit RH 2 includes the channel of Yellowleaf Creek from the 
confluence of Morgan Creek (550285.41E, 3682865.13N), downstream to 1.6 
km (1 mi) below Alabama Highway 25 (552296.38E, 3679287.87N), Shelby 
County, Alabama.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (RH 2) for rough hornsnail (Yellowleaf 
Creek) follows:

[[Page 113]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.010


[[Page 114]]



          Morro Shoulderband Snail (Helminthoglypta walkeriana)

    1. Critical habitat units are depicted for San Luis Obispo County, 
California, on the map below.

[[Page 115]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07FE01.018

    Map Units 1 to 3: All located in San Luis Obispo County, California. 
Coastline boundaries are based upon the U.S. Geological Survey Morro Bay 
South 7.5 minute topographic quadrangle. Other boundaries are based upon 
the Public Land Survey System. Within the historical boundaries of the 
Canada De Los Osos Y Pecho Y Islay Mexican Land Grant,

[[Page 116]]

boundaries are based upon section lines that are extensions to the 
Public Land Survey System developed by the California Department of 
Forestry and obtained by us from the State of California's Stephen P. 
Teale Data Center. Township and Range numbering is derived from the 
Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
    Map Unit 1: T. 29 S., R. 10 E., all of section 35 above mean sea 
level (MSL); T. 30 S., R. 10 E. All portions of sections 1, 2, 11, 12, 
14, 22, and 27 above MSL, SW\1/4\NW\1/4\ section 13 above MSL, W\1/
2\NW\1/4\ section 24, all of section 23 above MSL except S\1/2\SE\1/4\, 
NW\1/4\NW\1/4\ section 26, N\1/2\N\1/2\ section 34.
    Map Unit 2: T. 30 S., R. 10 E., E\1/2\NE\1/4\ section 24; T. 30 S., 
R, 11 E., E\3/4\N\1/2\ section 19.
    Map Unit 3: T. 30 S., R. 11 E., All of NE\1/4\ section 7 above MSL; 
in section 8, NW\1/4\NW\1/4\, S\1/2\NW\1/4\, SW\1/4\, and NW\1/4\SE\1/
4\.
    2. Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include, but 
are not limited to, those habitat components that are essential for the 
primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, reproduction, and 
dispersal. The primary constituent elements for the Morro shoulderband 
snail are the following: sand or sandy soils; a slope not greater than 
10 percent; and the presence of, or the capacity to develop, coastal 
dune scrub vegetation.
    3. Critical habitat does not include existing developed sites 
consisting of buildings, roads, aqueducts, railroads, airports, paved 
areas, and similar features and structures.

                    Newcomb's Snail (Erinna newcombi)

    (1) Critical Habitat Units are depicted for the County of Kauai, 
Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements required by 
the Newcomb's snail are those habitat components that are essential for 
the biological needs of foraging, sheltering, reproduction, and 
dispersal. The primary constituent elements are: cool, clean, moderate-
to fast-flowing water in streams, springs, and seeps; their adjacent 
riparian areas and hydrogeologic features that capture and direct water 
flow to these spring and stream systems; a perennial flow of water 
throughout even the most severe drought conditions; and stream channel 
morphology that provides protection from channel scour by having 
overhanging waterfalls, protected tributaries, or similar refugia.
    (3) Existing human-made features and structures within the 
boundaries of the mapped units, such as dams, ditches, tunnels, flumes, 
and other human-made features that do not contain the primary 
constituent elements, are not included as critical habitat.
    (4) Critical Habitat Unit I--Na Pali Coast Streams--(i) Unit I(a): 
Kalalau Stream (149 ha; 368 ac). The Kalalau Stream Newcomb's snail 
critical habitat location consists of all flowing surface waters within 
63 boundary points with the following coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with the 
units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 435010, 
2450871; 434991, 2450828; 435008, 2450782; 435112, 2450715; 435107, 
2450681; 435044, 2450591; 435058, 2450537; 435120, 2450441; 435078, 
2450308; 435048, 2450279; 435017, 2450341; 434968, 2450375; 434678, 
2450406; 434682, 2450441; 434678, 2450551; 434618, 2450603; 434578, 
2450602; 434518, 2450564; 434418, 2450540; 434444, 2450711; 434428, 
2450733; 434388, 2450657; 434338, 2450612; 434278, 2450596; 434228, 
2450621; 434188, 2450596; 434166, 2450621; 434159, 2450691; 434148, 
2450691; 434058, 2450599; 433995, 2450571; 433968, 2450540; 433878, 
2450559; 433825, 2450544; 433767, 2450451; 433738, 2450478; 433700, 
2450581; 433670, 2450611; 433670, 2450671; 433633, 2450738; 433715, 
2450996; 433732, 2451168; 433740, 2451380; 433642, 2451551; 433633, 
2451598; 433688, 2451664; 433842, 2451694; 434206, 2451592; 434680, 
2451547; 435053, 2451609; 435129, 2451611; 435147, 2451590; 435114, 
2451460; 435048, 2451400; 434973, 2451360; 435041, 2451320; 435043, 
2451250; 435134, 2451170; 435126, 2451120; 435089, 2451069; 435075, 
2451013; 435018, 2450933; 435010, 2450871;
    (ii) Unit I(b): Hanakoa Stream (63 ha; 156 ac). The Hanakoa Stream 
Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 24 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 435729, 2453628; 435717, 2453789; 436111, 2454127; 436637, 
2454087; 436700, 2454008; 436719, 2453907; 436658, 2453889; 436654, 
2453857; 436735, 2453697; 436744, 2453577; 436558, 2453527; 436518, 
2453555; 436478, 2453559; 436250, 2453496; 436152, 2453358; 436123, 
2453263; 436068, 2453238; 435998, 2453171; 435918, 2453168; 435869, 
2453229; 435799, 2453248; 435780, 2453320; 435770, 2453490; 435729, 
2453628.
    (iii) Unit I(c): Hanakapiai Stream (35 ha; 86 ac). The Hanakapiai 
Stream Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 25 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 438438, 2453772; 438785, 2453827; 438899, 2453794; 438961, 
2453796; 439113, 2453829; 439216, 2453871; 439257, 2453846; 439234, 
2453666; 439263, 2453606; 439310, 2453377; 439299, 2453306; 439258, 
2453253; 439158, 2453265; 439098, 2453290; 438949, 2453407; 438769, 
2453508; 438692, 2453457; 438674, 2453387; 438618, 2453307; 438591, 
2453347; 438578, 2453417; 438525, 2453507; 438443, 2453622; 438429, 
2453677; 438438, 2453772.
    (iv) Map 1--Unit I--Na Pali Coast Streams follows:

[[Page 117]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU02.000

    (5) Critical Habitat Unit II--Central Rivers--(i) Unit II(a): 
Lumahai River (492 ha; 1,216 ac). The Lumahai River Newcomb's snail 
critical habitat location consists of all flowing surface waters within 
89 boundary points with the following coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with the 
units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 447598, 
2445954; 447344, 2446136; 447298, 2446352; 447248, 2446290; 447178, 
2446384; 447088, 2446327; 446972, 2446364; 446950, 2446572; 446787, 
2446678; 446648, 2446627; 446648, 2446739; 446445, 2446836; 446409, 
2447000; 446278, 2447034; 446208, 2447169; 446097, 2447178; 446141, 
2447349; 446024, 2447449; 446014, 2447649; 445808, 2447618; 445809, 
2447680; 445839, 2447840; 445616, 2447859; 445773, 2448009; 445589, 
2448069; 445728, 2448189; 445531, 2448299; 445685, 2448359; 445605, 
2448469; 445728, 2448478; 445854, 2448578; 445858, 2448680; 445728, 
2448778; 445759, 2448939; 445618, 2448896; 445548, 2448954; 445318, 
2448932; 445338, 2449080; 445164, 2449034; 445171, 2449211; 444998, 
2449168; 444932, 2449348; 445008, 2449493; 445936, 2450417; 446309, 
2450498; 446262, 2450317; 446309, 2450238; 446476, 2450245; 446385, 
2450007; 446688, 2450060; 446714, 2449913; 446811, 2449890; 446799, 
2449758; 446998, 2449747; 447028, 2449643; 447101, 2449690; 447098, 
2449525; 447228, 2449509; 447343, 2449387; 447229, 2449247; 447298, 
2449117; 447128, 2449116; 446901, 2448918; 447174, 2448778; 447144, 
2448668; 447066, 2448628; 447190, 2448478; 446898, 2448400; 446778, 
2448451; 446649, 2448198; 446831, 2448108; 446782, 2447899; 447064, 
2447862; 446986, 2447707; 447038, 2447583; 447225, 2447529; 447162, 
2447395; 446973, 2447289; 447008, 2446969; 447288, 2446719; 447234, 
2446659; 447268, 2446571; 447448, 2446499; 447548, 2446559; 447484, 
2446393; 447518, 2446304; 447739, 2446259; 447507, 2446131; 447598, 
2445954;
    (ii) Unit II(b): Hanalei River (876 ha; 2,165 ac). The Hanalei River 
Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 91 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 450038, 2447210; 451786, 2447529; 453099, 2446469; 453648, 
2446167; 453691, 2445925; 453614, 2445904; 453508, 2446074; 453044, 
2445908; 452961, 2445785; 452974, 2445578;

[[Page 118]]

453125, 2445605; 453267, 2445468; 453258, 2445377; 453550, 2445238; 
453508, 2445111; 453318, 2445096; 453238, 2444991; 453098, 2445064; 
453010, 2444769; 452768, 2444606; 452680, 2444349; 452760, 2444169; 
452581, 2444039; 452723, 2443844; 452429, 2443810; 452486, 2443680; 
452419, 2443309; 452280, 2443240; 452198, 2443073; 452088, 2443185; 
451948, 2442960; 451678, 2442885; 451549, 2442979; 451471, 2442787; 
450955, 2442448; 451082, 2442651; 450916, 2442988; 450337, 2443081; 
450718, 2443188; 450968, 2443197; 451068, 2443077; 451255, 2443133; 
451414, 2443330; 451612, 2443370; 451552, 2443666; 451549, 2444330; 
451107, 2443911; 450988, 2444210; 450894, 2443874; 450638, 2443920; 
450431, 2443773; 450492, 2444026; 450614, 2444100; 450468, 2444134; 
450592, 2444250; 450389, 2444360; 450621, 2444363; 450698, 2444275; 
450967, 2444669; 450939, 2444770; 450803, 2444769; 450978, 2444899; 
450611, 2445032; 450698, 2445101; 450573, 2445219; 450969, 2445168; 
450768, 2445479; 451068, 2445422; 451226, 2445489; 451158, 2445584; 
451251, 2445606; 451216, 2445692; 451335, 2445819; 451188, 2445824; 
451124, 2445925; 450928, 2445983; 450904, 2446088; 451017, 2446148; 
450940, 2446208; 451031, 2446325; 451208, 2446428; 450928, 2446552; 
450788, 2446490; 450688, 2446603; 450538, 2446560; 450668, 2446774; 
450418, 2446700; 450199, 2446739; 450133, 2446913; 449784, 2447034; 
450038, 2447210.
    (iii) Map 2--Unit II--Central Rivers--follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU02.001
    
    (6) Critical Habitat Unit III--Eastside Mountain Streams--(i) Unit 
III(a): Waipahee Stream (66 ha; 163 ac). The Waipahee Stream Newcomb's 
snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing surface waters 
within 78 boundary points with the following coordinates in UTM Zone 4 
with the units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 
458921, 2447414; 458943, 2447424; 458998, 2447420; 459102, 2447444; 
459044, 2447534; 459104, 2447563; 459108, 2447613; 459085, 2447643; 
459100, 2447671; 459118, 2447693; 459108, 2447714; 459078,

[[Page 119]]

2447703; 459048, 2447661; 459028, 2447663; 459017, 2447694; 459045, 
2447696; 459054, 2447727; 459118, 2447770; 459164, 2447749; 459191, 
2447646; 459231, 2447596; 459309, 2447603; 459321, 2447623; 459306, 
2447685; 459351, 2447663; 459398, 2447531; 459478, 2447584; 459518, 
2447553; 459568, 2447656; 459586, 2447613; 459648, 2447556; 459738, 
2447649; 459918, 2447569; 459998, 2447569; 460018, 2447584; 460048, 
2447572; 460055, 2447576; 460261, 2447303; 460229, 2447182; 460178, 
2446882; 460172, 2446875; 460058, 2446836; 459978, 2446834; 459906, 
2446782; 459887, 2446803; 459902, 2446878; 459848, 2446946; 459818, 
2446933; 459778, 2446940; 459694, 2446904; 459702, 2447004; 459648, 
2447020; 459638, 2447098; 459608, 2447104; 459508, 2447031; 459502, 
2447068; 459448, 2447061; 459500, 2447134; 459467, 2447203; 459445, 
2447214; 459408, 2447183; 459388, 2447194; 459318, 2447163; 459268, 
2447169; 459248, 2447139; 459218, 2447136; 459182, 2447074; 459148, 
2447057; 459078, 2447076; 459083, 2447094; 459148, 2447124; 459185, 
2447224; 459166, 2447274; 459178, 2447334; 459118, 2447345; 458948, 
2447313; 459001, 2447384; 458928, 2447407.
    (ii) Unit III(b): Makaleha Stream (95 ha; 235 ac). The Makaleha 
Stream Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 68 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 459368, 2444730; 459372, 2444732; 459414, 2444830; 459438, 
2444851; 459498, 2444854; 459528, 2444873; 459588, 2444828; 459601, 
2444832; 459689, 2444388; 459662, 2444260; 459604, 2444112; 459455, 
2444044; 459279, 2444030; 459064, 2444037; 459008, 2444069; 459002, 
2444101; 458968, 2444099; 458944, 2444123; 458878, 2444096; 458808, 
2444142; 458803, 2444197; 458748, 2444245; 458658, 2444279; 458633, 
2444322; 458576, 2444325; 458582, 2444377; 458552, 2444407; 458568, 
2444467; 458478, 2444527; 458474, 2444587; 458537, 2444607; 458492, 
2444667; 458608, 2444684; 458633, 2444746; 458545, 2444763; 458495, 
2444803; 458485, 2444833; 458418, 2444844; 458347, 2444897; 458418, 
2444925; 458411, 2444963; 458504, 2444960; 458503, 2444991; 458458, 
2445046; 458458, 2445076; 458528, 2445084; 458582, 2445036; 458678, 
2444990; 458718, 2445049; 458798, 2444992; 458818, 2444992; 458868, 
2445050; 458908, 2445056; 458933, 2445106; 458927, 2445176; 458854, 
2445276; 458808, 2445463; 458960, 2445258; 459033, 2445116; 459033, 
2445066; 458978, 2444969; 458983, 2444831; 459038, 2444842; 459088, 
2444900; 459158, 2444877; 459218, 2444913; 459331, 2444816; 459368, 
2444730.
    (iii) Unit III(c): North Fork Wailua River (36 ha; 90 ac). The North 
Fork Wailua River Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of 
all flowing surface waters within 23 boundary points with the following 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American 
Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 450656, 2440137; 450861, 2440154; 450920, 
2440206; 450968, 2440196; 451045, 2440217; 451079, 2440286; 451145, 
2440241; 451197, 2440262; 451211, 2440324; 451291, 2440314; 451291, 
2440244; 451426, 2440217; 451589, 2440237; 451616, 2440286; 451811, 
2440230; 451801, 2440139; 451748, 2440049; 451717, 2439976; 451701, 
2439841; 451455, 2439688; 451343, 2439745; 450968, 2440043; 450840, 
2440040.
    (iv) Map 3--Unit III--Eastside Mountain Streams follows:

[[Page 120]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU02.002

                    Pecos Assiminea (Assiminea Pecos)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Chaves County, New 
Mexico, and Pecos and Reeves Counties, Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent element of critical habitat for the 
Pecos assiminea is moist or saturated soil at stream or spring run 
margins:
    (i) That consists of wet mud or occurs beneath mats of vegetation;
    (ii) That is within 1 inch (2 to 3 centimeters) of flowing water;
    (iii) That has native wetland plant species, such as salt grass or 
sedges, that provide leaf litter, shade, cover, and appropriate 
microhabitat;
    (iv) That contains wetland vegetation adjacent to spring complexes 
that supports the algae, detritus, and bacteria needed for foraging; and
    (v) That has adjacent spring complexes with:
    (A) Permanent, flowing, fresh to moderately saline water with no or 
no more than low levels of pollutants; and
    (B) Stable water levels with natural diurnal and seasonal 
variations.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 1:24,000 maps, and critical habitat units were 
then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Unit 1: Sago/Bitter Creek Complex, Chaves County, New Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N):
    (A) 553337, 3705095; 553357, 3705102; 553360, 3705067; 553371, 
3705041; 553420, 3705010; 553433, 3704982; 553482, 3704987; 553499, 
3704955; 553437,

[[Page 121]]

3704946; 553424, 3704909; 553401, 3704883; 553340, 3704906; 553319, 
3704879; 553266, 3704869; 553274, 3704816; 553240, 3704797; 553240, 
3704623; 553306, 3704532; 553300, 3704419; 553280, 3704354; 553287, 
3704287; 553338, 3704221; 553438, 3704145; 553459, 3704108; 553499, 
3704091; 553533, 3704059; 553559, 3704024; 553588, 3704004; 553650, 
3704024; 553655, 3704014; 553654, 3703981; 553699, 3703983; 553745, 
3703960; 553775, 3703978; 553799, 3703979; 553828, 3704003; 553859, 
3704016; 553871, 3704037; 553907, 3704053; 553938, 3704074; 553964, 
3704078; 553983, 3704080; 553993, 3703978; 553939, 3703960; 553917, 
3703914; 553903, 3703927; 553758, 3703909; 553710, 3703936; 553656, 
3703932; 553567, 3703940; 553484, 3704010; 553426, 3704085; 553396, 
3704109; 553357, 3704150; 553270, 3704273; 553271, 3704299; 553270, 
3704344; 553255, 3704398; 553274, 3704444; 553254, 3704540; 553218, 
3704577; 553197, 3704824; 553205, 3704843; 553246, 3704885; 553233, 
3704911; 553238, 3704941; 553265, 3704950; 553294, 3704941; 553312, 
3705045; 553337, 3705095.
    (B) 553906, 3704450; 553915, 3704455; 553920, 3704452; 553917, 
3704438; 553926, 3704432; 553935, 3704420; 553957, 3704404; 553965, 
3704405; 553974, 3704406; 553985, 3704388; 553993, 3704387; 554019, 
3704376; 554037, 3704362; 554045, 3704389; 554060, 3704406; 554083, 
3704416; 554085, 3704429; 554110, 3704452; 554132, 3704457; 554121, 
3704474; 554106, 3704494; 554102, 3704531; 554119, 3704531; 554135, 
3704523; 554144, 3704510; 554157, 3704481; 554154, 3704460; 554174, 
3704431; 554192, 3704393; 554210, 3704366; 554216, 3704346; 554190, 
3704357; 554174, 3704365; 554166, 3704375; 554159, 3704395; 554146, 
3704394; 554126, 3704391; 554117, 3704384; 554123, 3704364; 554119, 
3704346; 554105, 3704337; 554091, 3704312; 554097, 3704289; 554094, 
3704269; 554084, 3704261; 554059, 3704273; 554052, 3704260; 554034, 
3704259; 554022, 3704248; 554005, 3704272; 554024, 3704293; 554040, 
3704300; 554041, 3704321; 554016, 3704332; 554006, 3704317; 553974, 
3704323; 553963, 3704324; 553963, 3704316; 553966, 3704314; 553961, 
3704302; 553949, 3704302; 553936, 3704302; 553934, 3704311; 553946, 
3704321; 553952, 3704323; 553946, 3704332; 553946, 3704353; 553958, 
3704373; 553964, 3704381; 553958, 3704392; 553946, 3704391; 553938, 
3704396; 553934, 3704394; 553930, 3704397; 553930, 3704409; 553924, 
3704409; 553906, 3704413; 553902, 3704424; 553894, 3704419; 553885, 
3704419; 553898, 3704448; 553906, 3704450.
    (ii) Note: Map of Pecos Assiminea Critical Habitat Units 1 and 2b 
follows:

[[Page 122]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07JN11.000

    (6) Unit 2b: Assiminea Impoundment Complex, Chaves County, New 
Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): (A) 554768, 3699378; 554765, 
3699345; 554761, 3699217; 554681, 3699179; 554608, 3699086; 554569, 
3699029; 554501, 3699079; 554455, 3699103; 554488, 3699119; 554497, 
3699142; 554543, 3699151; 554539, 3699185; 554571, 3699264; 554587, 
3699280; 554622, 3699291; 554639, 3699320; 554667, 3699343; 554699, 
3699341; 554719, 3699367; 554748, 3699380; 554768, 3699378.
    (B) 554053, 3697672; 554064, 3697692; 554077, 3697704; 554085, 
3697691; 554078, 3697672; 554215,

[[Page 123]]

3697667; 554216, 3697653; 554045, 3697649; 554053, 3697672.
    (C) 554223, 3697539; 554247, 3697505; 554195, 3697448; 554171, 
3697394; 554179, 3697365; 554152, 3697343; 554132, 3697360; 554123, 
3697373; 554155, 3697405; 554167, 3697472; 554223, 3697539.
    (D) 554070, 3697244; 554099, 3697254; 554134, 3697240; 554127, 
3697220; 554096, 3697208; 554071, 3697229; 554070, 3697244.
    553784, 3697256; 553807, 3697291; 553829, 3697279; 553849, 3697268; 
553881, 3697270; 553911, 3697274; 553931, 3697267; 553979, 3697295; 
553989, 3697296; 553980, 3697274; 553965, 3697264; 553963, 3697246; 
553939, 3697239; 553914, 3697242; 553901, 3697230; 553881, 3697235; 
553872, 3697251; 553848, 3697246; 553833, 3697254; 553829, 3697262; 
553821, 3697262; 553799, 3697250; 553784, 3697256.
    (E) 553928, 3697415; 553935, 3697425; 553952, 3697426; 553941, 
3697416; 553940, 3697405; 553942, 3697385; 553927, 3697367; 553852, 
3697391; 553833, 3697408; 553822, 3697403; 553766, 3697414; 553739, 
3697424; 553735, 3697478; 553747, 3697483; 553764, 3697425; 553795, 
3697420; 553820, 3697429; 553849, 3697415; 553880, 3697408; 553905, 
3697395; 553921, 3697407; 553928, 3697415.
    (F) 553538, 3697315; 553550, 3697308; 553572, 3697322; 553580, 
3697314; 553556, 3697287; 553538, 3697302; 553538, 3697315.
    (G) 555054, 3699844; 555015, 3699840; 555015, 3699840; 555006, 
3699890; 555065, 3699975; 555086, 3700030; 555115, 3700032; 555114, 
3700030; 555076, 3699953; 555038, 3699915; 555039, 3699861; 555054, 
3699844.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2b for Pecos assiminea is provided at 
paragraph (5)(ii) of this entry.
    (7) Unit 4: Diamond Y Springs Complex, Pecos County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 700260, 3434916; 700413, 3434953; 
700640, 3435053; 700734, 3435148; 700861, 3435401; 700950, 3435543; 
701171, 3435706; 701340, 3435785; 701466, 3435869; 701519, 3436053; 
701645, 3436390; 701919, 3436264; 701835, 3435969; 701714, 3435753; 
701698, 3435711; 701356, 3435479; 701145, 3435353; 701045, 3435258; 
701024, 3435174; 701029, 3435095; 700998, 3434990; 700861, 3434921; 
700813, 3434832; 700629, 3434721; 700555, 3434727; 700445, 3434700; 
700371, 3434700; 700303, 3434658; 700255, 3434600; 700281, 3434521; 
700281, 3434390; 700281, 3434300; 700276, 3434147; 700250, 3433984; 
700203, 3433889; 700113, 3433726; 700124, 3433684; 700055, 3433652; 
699981, 3433626; 699923, 3433563; 699902, 3433489; 699755, 3433326; 
699665, 3433189; 699581, 3433047; 699550, 3432931; 699486, 3432852; 
699407, 3432826; 699318, 3432820; 699249, 3432747; 699202, 3432594; 
699128, 3432494; 698991, 3432415; 698849, 3432378; 698681, 3432352; 
698607, 3432262; 698533, 3432136; 698491, 3431973; 698428, 3431931; 
698396, 3431794; 698386, 3431620; 698296, 3431515; 698175, 3431473; 
698070, 3431509; 698038, 3431594; 698054, 3431794; 698149, 3431983; 
698260, 3432110; 698323, 3432189; 698449, 3432283; 698449, 3432362; 
698391, 3432436; 698370, 3432552; 698539, 3432647; 698665, 3432605; 
698727, 3432620; 698791, 3432636; 698955, 3432705; 698981, 3432826; 
699018, 3432931; 699134, 3433015; 699234, 3433021; 699286, 3433094; 
699302, 3433157; 699313, 3433168; 699460, 3433384; 699650, 3433610; 
699792, 3433784; 699834, 3433837; 699850, 3433947; 699893, 3434001; 
699929, 3434047; 699974, 3434107; 700013, 3434158; 700055, 3434326; 
700013, 3434463; 700013, 3434648; 700108, 3434827; 700260, 3434916.
    (ii) Note: Map of Pecos Assiminea Critical Habitat Units 4 and 5 
follows:

[[Page 124]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07JN11.001

    (8) Unit 5: East Sandia Spring, Reeves County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 621217, 3429265; 621262, 3429320; 
621304, 3429356; 621352, 3429393; 621397, 3429383; 621397, 3429384; 
621398, 3429384; 621342, 3429283; 621240, 3429237; 621217, 3429265.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5 for Pecos assiminea is provided at paragraph 
(7)(ii) of this entry.

[[Page 125]]

                Interrupted Rocksnail (Leptoxis foremani)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Cherokee and Elmore 
Counties, Alabama, and Gordon and Floyd Counties, Georgia, on the maps 
below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the interrupted rocksnail are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks 
(channels that maintain lateral dimensions, longitudinal profiles, and 
sinuosity patterns over time without an aggrading or degrading bed 
elevation).
    (ii) A hydrologic flow regime (the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
and seasonality of discharge over time) necessary to maintain benthic 
habitats where the species is found. Unless other information becomes 
available, existing conditions at locations where the species occurs 
will be considered as minimal flow requirements for survival.
    (iii) Water quality (including temperature, pH, hardness, turbidity, 
oxygen content, and chemical constituents) that meets or exceeds the 
current aquatic life criteria established under the Clean Water Act (33 
U.S.C. 1251-1387).
    (iv) Sand, gravel, cobble, boulder, or bedrock substrates with low 
to moderate amounts of fine sediment and attached filamentous algae.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
PCEs, such as buildings, bridges, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and 
the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Maps were developed from USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles. Critical habitat unit upstream and downstream 
limits were then identified by longitude and latitude using decimal 
degrees and converted to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) zone 16, 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the interrupted 
rocksnail follows:

[[Page 126]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.004

    (6) Unit 1 for interrupted rocksnail (IR 1): Coosa River, Cherokee 
County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit IR 1 includes the Coosa River channel from Weiss Dam 
(614866.53E, 3781969.15N), downstream to a point 1.6 km (1 mi) below the 
confluence of Terrapin Creek (619751.694E, 3776654.79N), Cherokee 
County, Alabama.

[[Page 127]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 (IR 1) for interrupted rocksnail (Coosa 
River) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.005


[[Page 128]]


    (7) Unit 2 for interrupted rocksnail (IR 2): Oostanaula River, 
Gordon and Floyd Counties, Georgia.
    (i) Unit IR 2 includes the primary channel of the Oostanaula River 
from the confluence of the Conasauga and Coosawattee Rivers (692275.90E, 
3824562.96N), Gordon County, downstream to Georgia Highway 1 Loop 
(668358.62E, 3792574.63N), Floyd County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (IR 2) for interrupted rocksnail 
(Oostanaula River) follows:

[[Page 129]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.006

    (8) Unit 3 for interrupted rocksnail (IR 3): Lower Coosa River, 
Elmore County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit IR 3 includes the Coosa River channel from Jordan Dam 
(569930.28E,

[[Page 130]]

3609212.67N), downstream to Alabama Highway 111 Bridge (574324.83E, 
3600042.81N), Elmore County, Alabama.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (IR 3) for interrupted rocksnail (Lower 
Coosa River) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO10.007


[[Page 131]]



             Chupadera Springsnail (Pyrgulopsis chupaderae)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Socorro County, New 
Mexico, on the map below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical and biological features essential to the conservation of the 
Chupadera springsnail consist of springheads, springbrooks, seeps, 
ponds, and seasonally wetted meadows containing:
    (i) Unpolluted spring water (free from contamination) emerging from 
the ground and flowing on the surface;
    (ii) Periphyton (an assemblage of algae, bacteria, and microbes) and 
decaying organic material for food;
    (iii) Substrates that include cobble, gravel, pebble, sand, silt, 
and aquatic vegetation, for egg laying, maturing, feeding, and escape 
from predators; and
    (iv) Nonnative species either absent or present at low population 
levels.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, roads, and other paved areas, and the land on which they are 
located) existing on the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units were plotted on 2007 USGS Digital 
Ortho Quarter UTM coordinates in ArcMap (Environmental Systems Research 
Institute, Inc.), a computer GIS program
    (5) Unit 1: Willow Spring, Socorro County, New Mexico.
    (i) The critical habitat area includes the springhead, springbrook, 
small seeps and ponds, seasonally wetted meadow, and all of the 
associated spring features. This area is approximately 0.5 ha (1.4 ac) 
around the following coordinates: Easting 316889, northing 3743013 
(Universal Transverse Mercator Zone 13 using North American Datum of 
1983).
    (ii) Map of Units 1 and 2 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JY12.003
    
    (6) Unit 2: Unnamed Spring, Socorro County, New Mexico.
    (i) The critical habitat area includes the springhead, springbrook, 
small seeps and ponds, seasonally wetted meadow, and all of the 
associated spring features. This area is approximately 0.2 ha (0.5 ac) 
around the following coordinates: Easting 317048, northing

[[Page 132]]

3743418 (Universal Transverse Mercator Zone 13 using North American 
Datum of 1983).
    (ii) Map of Unit 2 is provided at paragraph (5)(ii) of this entry.

    Koster's Springsnail (Juturnia Kosteri) and Roswell Springsnail 
                       (Pyrgulopsis Roswellensis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Chaves County, New 
Mexico, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent element of critical habitat for the 
Koster's springsnail and Roswell springsnail is springs and spring-fed 
wetland systems that:
    (i) Have permanent, flowing water with no or no more than low levels 
of pollutants;
    (ii) Have slow to moderate water velocities;
    (iii) Have substrates ranging from deep organic silts to limestone 
cobble and gypsum;
    (iv) Have stable water levels with natural diurnal (daily) and 
seasonal variations;
    (v) Consist of fresh to moderately saline water;
    (vi) Vary in temperature between 50-68 [deg]F (10-20 [deg]C) with 
natural seasonal and diurnal variations slightly above and below that 
range; and
    (vii) Provide abundant food, consisting of:
    (A) Algae, bacteria, and decaying organic material; and
    (B) Submergent vegetation that contributes the necessary nutrients, 
detritus, and bacteria on which these species forage.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 1:24,000 maps, and critical habitat units were 
then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Unit 1: Sago/Bitter Creek Complex, Chaves County, New Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): (A) 553337, 3705095; 553357, 
3705102; 553360, 3705067; 553371, 3705041; 553420, 3705010; 553433, 
3704982; 553482, 3704987; 553499, 3704955; 553437, 3704946; 553424, 
3704909; 553401, 3704883; 553340, 3704906; 553319, 3704879; 553266, 
3704869; 553274, 3704816; 553240, 3704797; 553240, 3704623; 553306, 
3704532; 553300, 3704419; 553280, 3704354; 553287, 3704287; 553338, 
3704221; 553438, 3704145; 553459, 3704108; 553499, 3704091; 553533, 
3704059; 553559, 3704024; 553588, 3704004; 553650, 3704024; 553655, 
3704014; 553654, 3703981; 553699, 3703983; 553745, 3703960; 553775, 
3703978; 553799, 3703979; 553828, 3704003; 553859, 3704016; 553871, 
3704037; 553907, 3704053; 553938, 3704074; 553964, 3704078; 553983, 
3704080; 553993, 3703978; 553939, 3703960; 553917, 3703914; 553903, 
3703927; 553758, 3703909; 553710, 3703936; 553656, 3703932; 553567, 
3703940; 553484, 3704010; 553426, 3704085; 553396, 3704109; 553357, 
3704150; 553270, 3704273; 553271, 3704299; 553270, 3704344; 553255, 
3704398; 553274, 3704444; 553254, 3704540; 553218, 3704577; 553197, 
3704824; 553205, 3704843; 553246, 3704885; 553233, 3704911; 553238, 
3704941; 553265, 3704950; 553294, 3704941; 553312, 3705045; 553337, 
3705095.
    (B) 553906, 3704450; 553915, 3704455; 553920, 3704452; 553917, 
3704438; 553926, 3704432; 553935, 3704420; 553957, 3704404; 553965, 
3704405; 553974, 3704406; 553985, 3704388; 553993, 3704387; 554019, 
3704376; 554037, 3704362; 554045, 3704389; 554060, 3704406; 554083, 
3704416; 554085, 3704429; 554110, 3704452; 554132, 3704457; 554121, 
3704474; 554106, 3704494; 554102, 3704531; 554119, 3704531; 554135, 
3704523; 554144, 3704510; 554157, 3704481; 554154, 3704460; 554174, 
3704431; 554192, 3704393; 554210, 3704366; 554216, 3704346; 554190, 
3704357; 554174, 3704365; 554166, 3704375; 554159, 3704395; 554146, 
3704394; 554126, 3704391; 554117, 3704384; 554123, 3704364; 554119, 
3704346; 554105, 3704337; 554091, 3704312; 554097, 3704289; 554094, 
3704269; 554084, 3704261; 554059, 3704273; 554052, 3704260; 554034, 
3704259; 554022, 3704248; 554005, 3704272; 554024, 3704293; 554040, 
3704300; 554041, 3704321; 554016, 3704332; 554006, 3704317; 553974, 
3704323; 553963, 3704324; 553963, 3704316; 553966, 3704314; 553961, 
3704302; 553949, 3704302; 553936, 3704302; 553934, 3704311; 553946, 
3704321; 553952, 3704323; 553946, 3704332; 553946, 3704353; 553958, 
3704373; 553964, 3704381; 553958, 3704392; 553946, 3704391; 553938, 
3704396; 553934, 3704394; 553930, 3704397; 553930, 3704409; 553924, 
3704409; 553906, 3704413; 553902, 3704424; 553894, 3704419; 553885, 
3704419; 553898, 3704448; 553906, 3704450.
    (ii) Note: Map of Koster's Springsnail and Roswell Springsnail 
Critical Habitat Units 1 and 2a follows:

[[Page 133]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07JN11.002

    (6) Unit 2a: Springsnail/Amphipod Impoundment Complex, Chaves 
County, New Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): (A) 554982, 3703317; 555004, 
3703315; 555011, 3703299; 555053, 3703215; 555079, 3703205; 555094, 
3703168; 555171, 3703138; 555222, 3703093; 555259, 3703078; 555289, 
3703055; 555338, 3703047; 555420, 3703024; 555458, 3702955; 555442, 
3702940; 555422, 3702925; 555406, 3702974; 555330, 3703017; 555277, 
3703025; 555229, 3703068; 555188, 3703090; 555151, 3703125; 555131, 
3703116; 555075, 3703115; 555042, 3703144; 555014,

[[Page 134]]

3703147; 554978, 3703231; 554964, 3703290; 554982, 3703317.
    (B) 555695, 3701598; 555603, 3701536; 555568, 3701479; 555565, 
3701460; 555559, 3701324; 555532, 3701296; 555502, 3701277; 555355, 
3700892; 555356, 3700852; 555342, 3700778; 555333, 3700694; 555294, 
3700533; 555271, 3700409; 555281, 3700322; 555273, 3700266; 555257, 
3700265; 555238, 3700281; 555247, 3700304; 555268, 3700316; 555269, 
3700343; 555221, 3700433; 555257, 3700433; 555263, 3700446; 555269, 
3700498; 555260, 3700534; 555284, 3700550; 555285, 3700567; 555274, 
3700604; 555288, 3700636; 555312, 3700666; 555322, 3700725; 555325, 
3700767; 555345, 3700858; 555350, 3700891; 555355, 3700901; 555365, 
3700958; 555379, 3700992; 555392, 3701014; 555436, 3701152; 555450, 
3701200; 555450, 3701241; 555472, 3701247; 555480, 3701271; 555504, 
3701300; 555520, 3701303; 555534, 3701340; 555529, 3701451; 555549, 
3701492; 555589, 3701560; 555621, 3701579; 555656, 3701579; 555669, 
3701602; 555686, 3701610; 555695, 3701598.
    (C) 554768, 3699378; 554765, 3699345; 554761, 3699217; 554681, 
3699179; 554608, 3699086; 554569, 3699029; 554501, 3699079; 554455, 
3699103; 554488, 3699119; 554497, 3699142; 554543, 3699151; 554539, 
3699185; 554571, 3699264; 554587, 3699280; 554622, 3699291; 554639, 
3699320; 554667, 3699343; 554699, 3699341; 554719, 3699367; 554748, 
3699380; 554768, 3699378.
    (D) 554487, 3699017; 554487, 3698993; 554435, 3698991; 554392, 
3698980; 554398, 3699012; 554405, 3699026; 554410, 3699056; 554427, 
3699057; 554423, 3699035; 554458, 3699018; 554487, 3699017.
    (E) 554195, 3698145; 554220, 3698101; 554258, 3698101; 554256, 
3698043; 554224, 3698055; 554210, 3698079; 554193, 3698085; 554191, 
3698097; 554195, 3698145.
    (F) 554223, 3697539; 554247, 3697505; 554195, 3697448; 554171, 
3697394; 554179, 3697365; 554152, 3697343; 554132, 3697360; 554123, 
3697373; 554155, 3697405; 554167, 3697472; 554223, 3697539.
    (G) 554070, 3697244; 554099, 3697254; 554134, 3697240; 554127, 
3697220; 554096, 3697208; 554071, 3697229; 554070, 3697244.
    (H) 553784, 3697256; 553807, 3697291; 553829, 3697279; 553849, 
3697268; 553881, 3697270; 553911, 3697274; 553931, 3697267; 553979, 
3697295; 553989, 3697296; 553980, 3697274; 553965, 3697264; 553963, 
3697246; 553939, 3697239; 553914, 3697242; 553901, 3697230; 553881, 
3697235; 553872, 3697251; 553848, 3697246; 553833, 3697254; 553829, 
3697262; 553821, 3697262; 553799, 3697250; 553784, 3697256.
    (I) 553928, 3697415; 553935, 3697425; 553952, 3697426; 553941, 
3697416; 553940, 3697405; 553942, 3697385; 553927, 3697367; 553852, 
3697391; 553833, 3697408; 553822, 3697403; 553766, 3697414; 553739, 
3697424; 553735, 3697478; 553747, 3697483; 553764, 3697425; 553795, 
3697420; 553820, 3697429; 553849, 3697415; 553880, 3697408; 553905, 
3697395; 553921, 3697407; 553928, 3697415.
    (J) 553538, 3697315; 553550, 3697308; 553572, 3697322; 553580, 
3697314; 553556, 3697287; 553538, 3697302; 553538, 3697315.
    (K) 555054, 3699844; 555015, 3699840; 555015, 3699840; 555006, 
3699890; 555065, 3699975; 555086, 3700030; 555115, 3700032; 555114, 
3700030; 555076, 3699953; 555038, 3699915; 555039, 3699861; 555054, 
3699844.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2a for Koster's springsnail and Roswell springsnail 
is provided at paragraph (5)(ii) of this entry.

           San Bernardino Springsnail (Pyrgulopsis bernardina)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Cochise County, Arizona, 
on the map in paragraph (5) of this entry.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical or biological features essential to the conservation of the San 
Bernardino springsnail consist of four components:
    (i) Adequately clean spring water (free from contamination) emerging 
from the ground and flowing on the surface;
    (ii) Periphyton (attached algae), bacteria, and decaying organic 
material for food;
    (iii) Substrates that include cobble, gravel, pebble, sand, silt, 
and aquatic vegetation, for egg laying, maturing, feeding, and escape 
from predators; and
    (iv) Either an absence of nonnative predators (crayfish) and 
competitors (snails) or their presence at low population levels.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures other than 
the road culvert and concrete spring-boxes, which are included to 
protect the water flowing within them.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
plotted on 2007 USGS Digital Ortho Quarter Quad maps using Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates in ArcMap. Because of the small 
size of the springs, spring runs and ditches, for mapping purposes we 
created a circle that encompasses them.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat for the San Bernardino 
springsnail follows:

[[Page 135]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17AP12.044

    (6) Snail Spring Unit contains approximately 0.457 ha (1.129 ac) in 
Cochise County, Arizona. This critical habitat unit is a spring 
approximately 5 m (16 ft) in diameter and has a spring run that goes 
south from the spring approximately 23.5 m (77 ft) to a manmade ditch, 
which runs 10.2 m (33.5 ft) to a dirt road. It passes under the road in 
a 3.5 m (11.5 ft) culvert, then flows approximately 17 m (56 ft) below 
the road. The culvert beneath the road is included in critical habitat, 
but not the road itself. We include a 1-m (3.3-ft)

[[Page 136]]

upland area on each side of the spring, spring run, and ditch. The 
critical habitat unit is the spring, spring run, ditch, and buffer 
within the 76-m (249-ft) diameter circle centered on UTM coordinate 
663858, 3468182 in Zone 12 with the units in meters using North American 
Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
    (7) Goat Tank Spring Unit contains approximately 0.002 ha (0.005 ac) 
in Cochise County, Arizona. The unit is a spring contained entirely 
within a square concrete box approximately 0.61 by 0.91 m (2 by 3 ft) 
and spring seepage emanating from the base of a cottonwood tree about 2 
m (7 ft) from the spring-box. This unit includes a 1-m (3.3-ft) upland 
area on each side of the spring box and spring. The critical habitat is 
the spring-box, spring seepage, and buffer within the 5-m (16.4-ft) 
diameter circle centered on UTM coordinate 663725, 3468162 in Zone 12 
with the units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
    (8) Horse Spring Unit contains approximately 0.032 ha (0.078 ac) in 
Cochise County, Arizona. The unit is a spring and springrun 
approximately 0.5 m (1.6 ft) wide and 15.5 m (50.9 ft) in length. We 
include a 1-m (3.3-ft) upland area on each side of the springhead and 
spring-run. The designated critical habitat unit is the spring-box, 
spring seepage, and buffer within the 20-m (66-ft) diameter circle 
centered on UTM coordinate 663772, 3468091 in Zone 12 with the units in 
meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
    (9) Tule Spring Unit contains approximately 0.324 ha (0.801 ac) in 
Cochise County, Arizona. The unit is a spring, which forms a pond 
approximately 23 m (75 ft) north-south and 13 m (43 ft) east-west, and 
it has a spring run that is approximately 22 m (71 ft) in length. The 
spring run emerges from the southeastern side of the spring pond, runs 
northeast for approximately 12.5 m (41 ft) to a manmade ditch, which 
runs southeast 9.2 m (30 ft). This unit includes a 1-m (3.3-ft) upland 
area on each side of the spring, spring run, and ditch. The designated 
critical habitat unit is the spring, spring-run, ditch, and buffer 
within the 64-m (210-ft) diameter circle centered on UTM coordinate 
664259, 3468499 in Zone 12 with the units in meters using North American 
Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).

             Three Forks Springsnail (Pyrgulopsis trivialis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Apache County, Arizona, 
on the map at paragraph (5) of this entry.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical or biological features essential to the conservation of the San 
Bernardino springsnail consist of four components:
    (i) Adequately clean spring water (free from contamination) emerging 
from the ground and flowing on the surface;
    (ii) Periphyton (attached algae), bacteria, and decaying organic 
material for food;
    (iii) Substrates that include cobble, gravel, pebble, sand, silt, 
and aquatic vegetation, for egglaying, maturing, feeding, and escape 
from predators; and
    (iv) Either an absence of nonnative predators (crayfish) and 
competitors (snails) or their presence at low population levels.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures other than 
concrete spring-boxes, which are included to protect the flowing water 
within them.
    (4) Critical habitat map units were plotted on 2007 USGS Digital 
Ortho Quarter Quad maps using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates in ArcMap.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat for the Three Forks 
springsnail follows:

[[Page 137]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17AP12.045

    (6) Three Forks Springs Unit (2.5 ha; 6.1 ac). The Three Forks 
Spring Unit consists of all areas within boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 12 with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83): 655708, 3747262; 655714, 3747269; 
655746, 3747258; 655777, 3747256; 655802, 3747270; 655808, 3747288; 
655815, 3747304; 655877, 3747299; 655898, 3747291; 655911, 3747271; 
655922, 3747253; 655932, 3747227; 655932, 3747209; 655939, 3747196; 
655948, 3747186; 655958, 3747165; 655969, 3747142; 655979, 3747116; 
655998, 3747094;

[[Page 138]]

656013, 3747078; 656022, 3747061; 656023, 3747050; 656013, 3747052; 
656001, 3747065; 655991, 3747086; 655973, 3747112; 655963, 3747133; 
655951, 3747166; 655931, 3747191; 655906, 3747198; 655886, 3747201; 
655869, 3747198; 655836, 3747179; 655826, 3747158; 655830, 3747123; 
655841, 3747098; 655838, 3747083; 655818, 3747085; 655785, 3747097; 
655771, 3747122; 655782, 3747144; 655784, 3747170; 655752, 3747216; 
655715, 3747232; 655707, 3747242; Thence returning to 655708, 3747262.
    (7) Boneyard Bog Springs Unit (2.1 ha; 5.3 ac). The Boneyard Bog 
Springs Unit consists of all areas within boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 12 with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83): 659968, 3750753; 659990, 3750731; 
660021, 3750713; 660060, 3750717; 660070, 3750742; 660176, 3750787; 
660190, 3750781; 660199, 3750758; 660208, 3750744; 660159, 3750685; 
660125, 3750680; 660088, 3750684; 660081, 3750690; 660072, 3750691; 
660072, 3750676; 660076, 3750675; 660076, 3750664; 660069, 3750664; 
660067, 3750663; 660060, 3750654; 660052, 3750648; 660034, 3750649; 
660029, 3750654; 660027, 3750663; 660008, 3750659; 659997, 3750649; 
659997, 3750639; 659988, 3750639; 659982, 3750641; 659958, 3750660; 
659954, 3750671; 659945, 3750675; 659942, 3750688; 659933, 3750685; 
659904, 3750662; 659889, 3750669; 659885, 3750687; 659902, 3750702; 
659919, 3750712; Thence returning to 659968, 3750753.
    (8) Boneyard Creek Springs Unit (2.3 ha; 5.8 ac). The Boneyard Creek 
Springs Unit consists of all areas within boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 12 with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83): 658758, 3750008; 658765, 3749996; 
658763, 3749984; 658732, 3749975; 658714, 3749981; 658698, 3749968; 
658661, 3749971; 658655, 3749981; 658655, 3749998; 658642, 3750000; 
658638, 3750024; 658623, 3750034; 658606, 3750036; 658580, 3750029; 
658568, 3750020; 658553, 3750013; 658537, 3750005; 658519, 3749993; 
658507, 3749985; 658492, 3749992; 658479, 3749976; 658469, 3749960; 
658467, 3749945; 658460, 3749935; 658452, 3749913; 658405, 3749863; 
658371, 3749841; 658343, 3749805; 658312, 3749789; 658273, 3749741; 
658272, 3749733; 658268, 3749725; 658261, 3749722; 658254, 3749720; 
658242, 3749699; 658211, 3749682; 658184, 3749655; 658140, 3749634; 
658119, 3749610; 658074, 3749624; 658024, 3749603; 657999, 3749549; 
657932, 3749492; 657916, 3749492; 657904, 3749509; 657912, 3749527; 
657933, 3749545; 657982, 3749559; 658020, 3749623; 658072, 3749642; 
658111, 3749632; 658129, 3749649; 658174, 3749667; 658201, 3749691; 
658223, 3749705; 658246, 3749743; 658311, 3749811; 658336, 3749826; 
658403, 3749893; 658410, 3749904; 658420, 3749908; 658434, 3749917; 
658447, 3749962; 658473, 3749991; 658493, 3750013; 658509, 3750003; 
658523, 3750019; 658528, 3750030; 658538, 3750043; 658564, 3750055; 
658584, 3750053; 658598, 3750061; 658616, 3750068; 658657, 3750052; 
658658, 3750032; 658656, 3750020; 658667, 3750002; 658666, 3749982; 
658692, 3749984; 658712, 3749994; 658730, 3749994; Thence returning to 
658758, 3750008.
    (g) Arachnids.

          Cokendolpher Cave Harvestman (Texella cokendolpheri)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Unit 20 as described in this entry and depicted 
on Map 1 (index map) and Map 2 in this entry.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Cokendolpher Cave harvestman are:
    (i) Karst-forming rock containing subterranean spaces (caves and 
connected mesocaverns) with stable temperatures, high humidities (near 
saturation), and suitable substrates (for example, spaces between and 
underneath rocks for foraging and sheltering) that are free of 
contaminants; and
    (ii) Surface and subsurface sources (such as plants and their roots, 
fruits, and leaves, and animal (e.g., cave cricket) eggs, feces, and 
carcasses) that provide nutrient input into the karst ecosystem.
    (3) Developed lands that do not contain the subsurface primary 
constituent elements (see paragraph (2)(i) of this entry) and that 
existed on the effective date of this rule are not considered to be 
critical habitat.
    (4) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (5) Index map of Bexar County invertebrates critical habitat units, 
Bexar County, Texas, follows:

[[Page 139]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.001

    (6) Unit 20: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 552126, 3264361; 552287, 3264522; 
552357, 3264610; 552436, 3264673; 552536, 3264710; 552654, 3264726; 
552756, 3264714; 552840, 3264685; 552920, 3264644; 552991, 3264506; 
553001, 3264408; 552930, 3264263; 552813, 3264165; 552683, 3264104; 
552571, 3264018; 552485, 3263914; 552285, 3263659; 552175, 3263484; 
552124, 3263435; 552081, 3263341; 551949, 3263214; 551826, 3263155; 
551728, 3263159; 551639, 3263221; 551567, 3263343; 551569, 3263474; 
551606, 3263569; 551704, 3263739; 551777, 3263863; 551969, 3264165; 
552126, 3264361.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 20 follows:

[[Page 140]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.002

               Braken Bat Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina venii)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Braken Bat Cave meshweaver in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Unit 15, as described in this entry and 
depicted on Map 2 in this entry. Unit 15 is also depicted on Map 1 
(index map) provided at paragraph (5) of the entry for the

[[Page 141]]

Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (2) The primary constituent elements of, and the statements 
regarding developed lands in, critical habitat for the Braken Bat Cave 
meshweaver are identical to those set forth at paragraphs (2) and (3) of 
the entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (3) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (4) Unit 15: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522689, 3256455; 522687, 3256517; 
522703, 3256601; 522765, 3256718; 522911, 3256823; 523046, 3256851; 
523177, 3256830; 523344, 3256801; 523479, 3256747; 523658, 3256674; 
523725, 3256656; 523834, 3256603; 523918, 3256523; 523969, 3256419; 
523978, 3256293; 523885, 3256159; 523885, 3256069; 523822, 3256015; 
523674, 3255915; 523547, 3255873; 523414, 3255874; 523281, 3255933; 
523201, 3256024; 523017, 3256131; 522987, 3256149; 522940, 3256160; 
522894, 3256168; 522869, 3256174; 522790, 3256246; 522722, 3256345; 
522689, 3256455.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 15 follows:

[[Page 142]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.003

        Government Canyon Bat Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina vespera)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver 
in Bexar County, Texas, occurs in Unit 1b, as described in this entry 
and depicted on Map 2 in this entry. Unit 1b is also depicted on Map 1 
(index map) provided at paragraph (5) of the

[[Page 143]]

entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (2) The primary constituent elements of, and the statements 
regarding developed lands in, critical habitat for the Government Canyon 
Bat Cave meshweaver are identical to those set forth at paragraphs (2) 
and (3) of the entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this 
paragraph (g).
    (3) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (4) Unit 1b: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522172, 3270656; 522202, 3270794; 
522259, 3270889; 522375, 3270977; 522521, 3271014; 522677, 3270988; 
522793, 3270905; 522880, 3270758; 522894, 3270605; 522843, 3270457; 
522724, 3270335; 522571, 3270287; 522401, 3270312; 522280, 3270382; 
522186, 3270538; 522172, 3270656.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Units 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d, 1e, and 1f follows:

[[Page 144]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.004

                 Madla Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina madla)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Madla Cave meshweaver in Bexar County, 
Texas, occurs in Units 1a, 1c, 1d, 1e, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 17, and 22, as 
described in this entry and depicted on Maps 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 in 
this entry. Units 1a, 1c, 1d, and 1e are depicted on Map 2, which is 
provided at paragraph (4)(ii) of the entry for

[[Page 145]]

the Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver in this paragraph (g). Units 
1a, 1c, 1d, 1e, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 17, and 22 are also depicted on Map 1 
(index map) provided at paragraph (5) of the entry for the Cokendolpher 
Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (2) Eight caves and their associated karst management areas 
established under the La Cantera Habitat Conservation Plan section 
10(a)(1)(B) permit are adjacent to or within the boundaries of Units 1e, 
3, 6, 8, and 17, but are not designated as critical habitat. These caves 
are Canyon Ranch Pit, Fat Man's Nightmare Cave, Scenic Overlook Cave and 
the surrounding approximately 75 ac (30 ha) adjacent to Unit 1e; Helotes 
Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop Caves and the surrounding approximately 25 
ac (10 ha) adjacent to Unit 3; John Wagner Cave No. 3 and the 
surrounding approximately 4 ac (1.6 ha) adjacent to Unit 6; Hills and 
Dales Pit and the surrounding approximately 70 ac (28 ha) adjacent to 
Unit 8; and Madla's Cave and the surrounding approximately 5 ac (2 ha) 
within Unit 17.
    (3) The primary constituent elements of, and the statements 
regarding developed lands in, critical habitat for the Madla Cave 
meshweaver are identical to those set forth at paragraphs (2) and (3) of 
the entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (4) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (5) Unit 1a: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522870, 3272900; 522872, 3273024; 
522919, 3273156; 523000, 3273241; 523124, 3273312; 523284, 3273323; 
523438, 3273258; 523618, 3273132; 523729, 3273041; 523797, 3272836; 
523784, 3272720; 523724, 3272603; 523633, 3272522; 523515, 3272464; 
523406, 3272460; 523276, 3272492; 523041, 3272654; 522939, 3272737; 
522870, 3272900.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1a is depicted on Map 2, provided at paragraph 
(4)(ii) of the entry for the Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver in 
this paragraph (g).
    (6) Unit 1c: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 524033, 3271973; 524063, 3272110; 
524119, 3272206; 524235, 3272294; 524382, 3272331; 524537, 3272305; 
524654, 3272222; 524740, 3272075; 524754, 3271922; 524703, 3271773; 
524585, 3271652; 524431, 3271604; 524262, 3271629; 524140, 3271699; 
524047, 3271855; 524033, 3271973.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1c is depicted on Map 2, provided at paragraph 
(4)(ii) of the entry for the Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver in 
this paragraph (g).
    (7) Unit 1d: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 524739, 3270323; 524739, 3270454; 
524798, 3270590; 524917, 3270699; 525091, 3270744; 525462, 3270937; 
525613, 3271016; 525757, 3271026; 525893, 3270977; 526000, 3270883; 
526059, 3270741; 526062, 3270603; 525980, 3270370; 525836, 3270243; 
525700, 3270206; 525289, 3270072; 525153, 3270020; 525016, 3270023; 
524883, 3270092; 524788, 3270191; 524739, 3270323.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1d is depicted on Map 2, provided at paragraph 
(4)(ii) of the entry for the Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver in 
this paragraph (g).
    (8) Unit 1e: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 526403, 3273634; 526465, 3273472; 
526487, 3273282; 526506, 3273157; 526879, 3273092; 527025, 3273129; 
527180, 3273102; 527297, 3273019; 527383, 3272873; 527398, 3272719; 
527346, 3272571; 527228, 3272449; 527075, 3272402; 526905, 3272426; 
526783, 3272497; 526472, 3272434; 526435, 3272318; 526460, 3272223; 
526443, 3272077; 526356, 3271945; 526158, 3271842; 525997, 3271842; 
525854, 3271930; 525762, 3272044; 525703, 3272205; 525729, 3272352; 
525802, 3272494; 525890, 3272776; 525876, 3272894; 525858, 3272918; 
525912, 3272925; 525904, 3272945; 525903, 3272947; 525903, 3272949; 
525902, 3272950; 525902, 3272952; 525901, 3272954; 525901, 3272956; 
525900, 3272957; 525900, 3272959; 525899, 3272961; 525899, 3272963; 
525898, 3272965; 525898, 3272966; 525898, 3272968; 525898, 3272970; 
525897, 3272972; 525897, 3272974; 525897, 3272975; 525897, 3272977; 
525897, 3272979; 525897, 3272981; 525897, 3272983; 525897, 3272985; 
525897, 3272986; 525897, 3272988; 525897, 3272990; 525897, 3272992; 
525897, 3272994; 525897, 3272996; 525897, 3272997; 525898, 3272999; 
525898, 3273001; 525898, 3273003; 525899, 3273005; 525899, 3273007; 
525899, 3273008; 525900, 3273010; 525900, 3273012; 525901, 3273014; 
525901, 3273015; 525902, 3273017; 525902, 3273019; 525903, 3273021; 
525904, 3273022; 525904, 3273024; 525905, 3273026; 525906, 3273027; 
525906, 3273029; 525907, 3273031; 525908, 3273032; 525909, 3273034; 
525910, 3273036; 525911, 3273037; 525912, 3273039; 525913, 3273040; 
525914, 3273042; 525915, 3273044; 525916, 3273045; 525917, 3273047; 
525918, 3273048; 525919, 3273049; 525920, 3273051; 525921, 3273052; 
525923, 3273054; 525924, 3273055; 525925, 3273056; 525926, 3273058; 
525928, 3273059; 525929, 3273060; 525930, 3273062; 525932, 3273063; 
525933, 3273064; 525934, 3273065; 525936, 3273066; 525937, 3273068; 
525939, 3273069; 525940, 3273070; 525942, 3273071; 525943, 3273072; 
525945, 3273073; 525946, 3273074; 525948, 3273075; 525949, 3273076; 
525951, 3273077; 525953, 3273078; 525954, 3273078; 525956, 3273079; 
525958, 3273080; 526305, 3273293; 526303, 3273302; 526276, 3273412; 
526276, 3273412; 526254, 3273499; 526202, 3273564; 526023, 3273523; 
525917, 3273448; 525824, 3273382; 525786, 3273440; 525587, 3273259; 
525586, 3273260; 525572, 3273363; 525594, 3273505; 525693, 3273659; 
525876, 3273765; 526048, 3273798; 526253, 3273754; 526403, 3273634.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1e is depicted on Map 2, provided at paragraph 
(4)(ii) of the entry for the

[[Page 146]]

Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver in this paragraph (g).
    (9) Unit 2: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 527508, 3276359; 527444, 3276287; 
527343, 3276226; 527229, 3276204; 527117, 3276216; 527116, 3276253; 
527085, 3276279; 527003, 3276270; 526933, 3276334; 526905, 3276386; 
526783, 3276386; 526851, 3276555; 526850, 3276556; 526864, 3276662; 
526908, 3276736; 526960, 3276801; 527010, 3276865; 527213, 3277098; 
527281, 3277166; 527392, 3277230; 527536, 3277252; 527711, 3277190; 
527805, 3277102; 527857, 3277003; 527869, 3276903; 527861, 3276787; 
527803, 3276674; 527699, 3276578; 527644, 3276515; 527643, 3276397; 
527630, 3276386; 527530, 3276384; 527508, 3276359.
    (ii) Note: Map 3 of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 147]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.005

    (10) Unit 3: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529906, 3272892; 529975, 3272934; 
529993, 3272946; 529996, 3272945; 529998, 3272943; 530001, 3272942; 
530004, 3272940; 530006, 3272938; 530007, 3272938; 530020, 3272926; 
530026, 3272920; 530030, 3272917; 530032, 3272915;

[[Page 148]]

530043, 3272905; 530045, 3272903; 530045, 3272902; 530046, 3272901; 
530047, 3272900; 530049, 3272897; 530050, 3272895; 530050, 3272895; 
530120, 3272932; 530134, 3272895; 530165, 3272898; 530159, 3272895; 
530124, 3272875; 530112, 3272843; 530083, 3272805; 530081, 3272805; 
530049, 3272774; 530020, 3272734; 529995, 3272714; 529909, 3272671; 
529790, 3272649; 529688, 3272658; 529646, 3272723; 529589, 3272792; 
529584, 3272798; 529600, 3272911; 529558, 3272947; 529514, 3272978; 
529473, 3272968; 529445, 3273019; 529423, 3273086; 529449, 3273173; 
529482, 3273196; 529507, 3273216; 529496, 3273253; 529504, 3273344; 
529564, 3273416; 529676, 3273477; 529771, 3273499; 529870, 3273496; 
529918, 3273447; 529970, 3273351; 530058, 3273320; 530110, 3273233; 
530105, 3273183; 530099, 3273138; 530128, 3273120; 530096, 3273123; 
530057, 3273126; 530055, 3273143; 530048, 3273180; 530057, 3273190; 
530057, 3273190; 530049, 3273191; 530038, 3273192; 530002, 3273195; 
529946, 3273200; 529916, 3273202; 529898, 3273204; 529897, 3273204; 
529680, 3273221; 529753, 3273117; 529764, 3273100; 529836, 3272993; 
529845, 3272981; 529906, 3272892.
    (ii) Note: Map 4 of Units 3 and 4 follows:

[[Page 149]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.006

    (11) Unit 5: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529536, 3275753; 529533, 3275931; 
529585, 3276056; 529741, 3276191; 529927, 3276249; 530112, 3276208; 
530275, 3276093; 530350, 3275987; 530318, 3275927; 530238, 3275838; 
530169, 3275776; 530109, 3275735; 529970, 3275629;

[[Page 150]]

529950, 3275603; 529936, 3275565; 529781, 3275523; 529719, 3275529; 
529621, 3275548; 529566, 3275611; 529536, 3275753.
    (ii) Note: Map 5 of Units 5, 6, and 17 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.007
    

[[Page 151]]


    (12) Unit 6: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 531676, 3275515; 531639, 3275342; 
531576, 3275302; 531483, 3275283; 531331, 3275337; 531242, 3275350; 
531189, 3275346; 531193, 3275501; 531094, 3275501; 531094, 3275378; 
531072, 3275398; 530953, 3275478; 530909, 3275521; 530851, 3275661; 
530871, 3275702; 530981, 3275903; 531119, 3275970; 531335, 3275950; 
531512, 3275851; 531615, 3275701; 531676, 3275515.
    (ii) Note: Unit 6 is depicted on Map 5, provided at paragraph 
(10)(ii) of this entry.
    (13) Unit 8: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 535007, 3274657; 535063, 3274624; 
535096, 3274626; 535133, 3274610; 535173, 3274570; 535222, 3274516; 
535282, 3274478; 535302, 3274450; 535290, 3274359; 535238, 3274250; 
535215, 3274045; 535226, 3273947; 535209, 3273836; 535160, 3273741; 
535056, 3273640; 535027, 3273631; 535026, 3273654; 535022, 3273714; 
535018, 3273721; 535013, 3273730; 534992, 3273775; 534988, 3273784; 
534962, 3273838; 534962, 3273838; 534936, 3273892; 534909, 3273947; 
534909, 3273947; 534883, 3274002; 534856, 3274057; 534856, 3274057; 
534813, 3274142; 534708, 3274141; 534625, 3274140; 534519, 3274140; 
534389, 3274145; 534389, 3274132; 534168, 3274322; 534058, 3274551; 
533966, 3274645; 533893, 3274683; 533848, 3274736; 533839, 3274809; 
533853, 3274895; 533905, 3274965; 534037, 3275030; 534156, 3275037; 
534290, 3274997; 534292, 3274995; 534881, 3274809; 534894, 3274782; 
534931, 3274737; 534962, 3274695; 535007, 3274657.
    (ii) Note: Map 6 of Unit 8 follows:

[[Page 152]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.008

    (14) Unit 9: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 536971, 3273194; 537058, 3273204; 
537958, 3273349; 538025, 3273049; 538011, 3273033; 537743, 3272819; 
537663, 3272828; 537645, 3272742; 537602, 3272707; 537551, 3272712; 
537500, 3272684; 537412, 3272713; 537309, 3272793; 537213, 3272912; 
537167, 3273017; 537121, 3273038; 537084, 3273013; 537008, 3273129; 
536943, 3273082;

[[Page 153]]

536897, 3273099; 536879, 3273117; 536871, 3273154; 536887, 3273183; 
536971, 3273194.
    (ii) Note: Map 7 of Unit 9 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.009
    

[[Page 154]]


    (15) Unit 17: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 528980, 3275191; 529043, 3275247; 
529120, 3275242; 529245, 3275219; 529327, 3275184; 529348, 3275167; 
529492, 3275167; 529613, 3275113; 529800, 3275081; 529870, 3274953; 
529819, 3274777; 529698, 3274627; 529486, 3274528; 529360, 3274615; 
529335, 3274712; 529174, 3274840; 528968, 3274859; 528957, 3275049; 
528980, 3275191.
    (ii) Not including land within and bounded by the following UTM Zone 
14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529490, 
3275008; 529490, 3275006; 529490, 3275005; 529490, 3275003; 529490, 
3275002; 529489, 3275001; 529489, 3274999; 529489, 3274998; 529489, 
3274997; 529489, 3274995; 529489, 3274994; 529488, 3274993; 529488, 
3274992; 529489, 3274991; 529489, 3274986; 529489, 3274983; 529489, 
3274982; 529482, 3274919; 529329, 3274930; 529337, 3274993; 529337, 
3274993; 529337, 3274994; 529336, 3274995; 529337, 3274997; 529337, 
3274998; 529336, 3274999; 529336, 3275001; 529336, 3275002; 529336, 
3275003; 529336, 3275005; 529336, 3275006; 529336, 3275008; 529336, 
3275009; 529336, 3275010; 529336, 3275012; 529336, 3275013; 529336, 
3275014; 529336, 3275016; 529337, 3275017; 529337, 3275018; 529337, 
3275020; 529337, 3275021; 529337, 3275022; 529338, 3275023; 529338, 
3275025; 529338, 3275026; 529339, 3275027; 529339, 3275029; 529339, 
3275030; 529340, 3275031; 529340, 3275033; 529341, 3275034; 529341, 
3275035; 529342, 3275036; 529342, 3275038; 529343, 3275039; 529343, 
3275040; 529344, 3275041; 529344, 3275042; 529345, 3275044; 529346, 
3275045; 529346, 3275046; 529347, 3275047; 529348, 3275048; 529348, 
3275049; 529349, 3275050; 529350, 3275052; 529351, 3275053; 529351, 
3275054; 529352, 3275055; 529353, 3275056; 529354, 3275057; 529355, 
3275058; 529356, 3275059; 529357, 3275060; 529358, 3275061; 529359, 
3275062; 529359, 3275063; 529360, 3275064; 529361, 3275065; 529362, 
3275066; 529363, 3275066; 529364, 3275067; 529366, 3275068; 529367, 
3275069; 529368, 3275070; 529369, 3275070; 529370, 3275071; 529371, 
3275072; 529372, 3275073; 529373, 3275073; 529374, 3275074; 529376, 
3275075; 529377, 3275075; 529378, 3275076; 529379, 3275077; 529380, 
3275077; 529382, 3275078; 529383, 3275078; 529384, 3275079; 529385, 
3275079; 529387, 3275080; 529388, 3275080; 529389, 3275081; 529390, 
3275081; 529392, 3275081; 529393, 3275082; 529394, 3275082; 529396, 
3275082; 529397, 3275083; 529398, 3275083; 529399, 3275083; 529401, 
3275083; 529402, 3275084; 529403, 3275084; 529405, 3275084; 529406, 
3275084; 529407, 3275084; 529409, 3275084; 529410, 3275084; 529412, 
3275084; 529413, 3275084; 529414, 3275084; 529416, 3275084; 529417, 
3275084; 529418, 3275084; 529420, 3275084; 529421, 3275084; 529422, 
3275084; 529424, 3275084; 529425, 3275083; 529426, 3275083; 529428, 
3275083; 529429, 3275083; 529430, 3275082; 529431, 3275082; 529433, 
3275082; 529434, 3275081; 529435, 3275081; 529437, 3275081; 529438, 
3275080; 529439, 3275080; 529440, 3275079; 529442, 3275079; 529443, 
3275078; 529444, 3275078; 529445, 3275077; 529447, 3275077; 529448, 
3275076; 529449, 3275075; 529450, 3275075; 529451, 3275074; 529452, 
3275073; 529454, 3275073; 529455, 3275072; 529456, 3275071; 529457, 
3275070; 529458, 3275070; 529459, 3275069; 529460, 3275068; 529461, 
3275067; 529462, 3275066; 529463, 3275066; 529464, 3275065; 529465, 
3275064; 529466, 3275063; 529467, 3275062; 529468, 3275061; 529469, 
3275060; 529470, 3275059; 529471, 3275058; 529472, 3275057; 529473, 
3275056; 529473, 3275055; 529474, 3275054; 529475, 3275053; 529476, 
3275052; 529477, 3275050; 529477, 3275049; 529478, 3275048; 529479, 
3275047; 529479, 3275046; 529480, 3275045; 529481, 3275044; 529481, 
3275042; 529482, 3275041; 529482, 3275040; 529483, 3275039; 529484, 
3275038; 529484, 3275036; 529485, 3275035; 529485, 3275034; 529486, 
3275033; 529486, 3275031; 529486, 3275030; 529487, 3275029; 529487, 
3275027; 529487, 3275026; 529488, 3275025; 529488, 3275023; 529488, 
3275022; 529489, 3275021; 529489, 3275020; 529489, 3275018; 529489, 
3275017; 529489, 3275016; 529489, 3275014; 529490, 3275013; 529490, 
3275012; 529490, 3275010; 529490, 3275009; 529490, 3275008.
    (iii) Note: Unit 17 is depicted on Map 5, provided at paragraph 
(11)(ii) of this entry.
    (16) Unit 22: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 533735, 3278278; 533765, 3278416; 
533821, 3278511; 533938, 3278599; 534084, 3278636; 534240, 3278610; 
534356, 3278527; 534443, 3278380; 534457, 3278227; 534406, 3278079; 
534287, 3277957; 534134, 3277909; 533964, 3277934; 533843, 3278004; 
533749, 3278160; 533735, 3278278.
    (ii) Note: Map 8 of Unit 22 follows:

[[Page 155]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.010

             Robber Baron Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina baronia)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Robber Baron Cave meshweaver in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Units 20 and 25. Unit 20 is described as set 
forth, and depicted on Map 2 provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the entry 
for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g). Unit 25 is 
described in this entry

[[Page 156]]

and depicted on Map 3 in this entry. Units 20 and 25 are also depicted 
on Map 1 (index map) provided in paragraph (5) of the entry for the 
Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (2) The primary constituent elements of, and the statements 
regarding developed lands in, critical habitat for the Robber Baron Cave 
meshweaver are identical to those set forth in paragraphs (2) and (3) of 
the entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (3) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (4) Unit 20: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 552126, 3264361; 552287, 3264522; 
552357, 3264610; 552436, 3264673; 552536, 3264710; 552654, 3264726; 
552756, 3264714; 552840, 3264685; 552920, 3264644; 552991, 3264506; 
553001, 3264408; 552930, 3264263; 552813, 3264165; 552683, 3264104; 
552571, 3264018; 552485, 3263914; 552285, 3263659; 552175, 3263484; 
552124, 3263435; 552081, 3263341; 551949, 3263214; 551826, 3263155; 
551728, 3263159; 551639, 3263221; 551567, 3263343; 551569, 3263474; 
551606, 3263569; 551704, 3263739; 551777, 3263863; 551969, 3264165; 
552126, 3264361.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 20 is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (5) Unit 25: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 549856, 3258720; 549779, 3258722; 
549776, 3258797; 549750, 3258818; 549485, 3258818; 549451, 3258796; 
549450, 3258759; 549391, 3258759; 549302, 3258907; 549288, 3259025; 
549281, 3259323; 549294, 3259345; 549486, 3259471; 549700, 3259499; 
549933, 3259412; 549943, 3259217; 549819, 3259100; 549840, 3259045; 
549869, 3259019; 549861, 3258961; 549846, 3258934; 549846, 3258909; 
549891, 3258888; 549961, 3258869; 549968, 3258839; 549972, 3258752; 
549856, 3258720.
    (ii) Note: Map 3 of Unit 25 follows:

[[Page 157]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.011

        Government Canyon Bat Cave Spider (Neoleptoneta microps)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Government Canyon Bat Cave spider in 
Bexar County, Texas, occurs in Unit 1b, as described at paragraph (4)(i) 
of the entry for the Government Canyon Bat Cave meshweaver in this 
paragraph (g). Unit 1b is also depicted on

[[Page 158]]

Map 1 (index map) provided at paragraph (5) of the entry for the 
Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g), and on Map 2 (Unit 
1b) provided at paragraph (4)(ii) of the entry for the Government Canyon 
Bat Cave meshweaver in this paragraph (g).
    (2) The primary constituent elements of, and statements regarding 
developed lands in, critical habitat for the Government Canyon Bat Cave 
spider are identical to those set forth at paragraphs (2) and (3) of the 
entry for the Cokendolpher Cave harvestman in this paragraph (g).
    (3) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (4) Unit 1b: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522172, 3270656; 522202, 3270794; 
522259, 3270889; 522375, 3270977; 522521, 3271014; 522677, 3270988; 
522793, 3270905; 522880, 3270758; 522894, 3270605; 522843, 3270457; 
522724, 3270335; 522571, 3270287; 522401, 3270312; 522280, 3270382; 
522186, 3270538; 522172, 3270656.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1b is provided at paragraph (4)(ii) in the 
entry for the Government Canyon Cave meshweaver in this paragraph (g).

                Kauai Cave Wolf Spider (Adelocosa anops).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for the island of Kauai, 
Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements for the Kauai cave wolf spider 
are:
    (i) The presence of subterranean spaces from 5 mm to 25 cm (0.2 in 
to 10 in) at their narrowest point (collectively termed ``mesocaverns'') 
and/or cave passages greater than 25 cm (<ls-thn-eq>10 in);
    (ii) Dark and/or stagnant air zones that maintain relative humidity 
at saturation levels (<ls-thn-eq>=100 percent); and
    (iii) The presence in these types of mesocaverns or caves of roots 
from living, nontoxic plants such as, but not limited to, ohia 
(Metrosideros polymorpha), maiapilo (Capparis sandwichiana), and aalii 
(Dodonea viscosa).
    (3) All critical habitat areas contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements for the Kauai cave wolf spider.
    (4)(i) Existing human-constructed features and structures within the 
boundaries of mapped units that involved trenching, filling, or 
excavation resulting in below-surface modification or alteration would 
not contain either of the primary constituent elements and are excluded 
from critical habitat designation. Such features and structures include 
but are not limited to: Homes and buildings for which the underlying 
bedrock has been altered for their construction or through incorporation 
of or connection to buried structural foundations, septic tanks, city 
sewage and drainage systems, or water or underground electrical supply 
corridors; paved roads; and areas previously or currently used as a 
quarry.
    (ii) Areas that have been modified on the surface but without 
trenching, filling, or excavation resulting in below-surface 
modification or alteration are included in the critical habitat 
designation, even if they are adjacent to areas that have undergone 
below-surface modification.
    (5) Critical habitat units are described below. Coordinates in UTM 
Zone 4 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83). 
The following map shows the general locations of the 14 critical habitat 
units designated on the island of Kauai.
    (i) Note: Map 1--Index map follows:

[[Page 159]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.000

    (6) Unit 1--(<1 ha (1 ac)):
    (i) Unit 1 consists of the following 10 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450554, 2420457; 450546, 
2420468; 450576, 2420510; 450586, 2420518; 450607, 2420516; 450624, 
2420502; 450625, 2420480; 450618, 2420452; 450600, 2420437; 450574, 
2420434; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (7) Unit 2--(7 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 2 consists of the following 16 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 451483, 2420974; 451539, 
2420991; 451583, 2421015; 451622, 2421014; 451667, 2420984; 451677, 
2420926; 451680, 2420869; 451705, 2420799; 451622, 2420769; 451650, 
2420664; 451488,

[[Page 160]]

2420620; 451468, 2420624; 451433, 2420642; 451470, 2420758; 451501, 
2420801; 451510, 2420870; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 2 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (8) Unit 3--(6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 3 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450881, 2419947; 450879, 
2419981; 450855, 2420053; 450859, 2420089; 450903, 2420089; 451012, 
2420125; 451058, 2420191; 451138, 2420180; 451184, 2420119; 451159, 
2420048; 451194, 2420014; 451183, 2419982; 451136, 2419987; 451114, 
2419892; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (9) Unit 4--(2 ha (6 ac)):
    (i) Unit 4 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452087, 2419809; 452063, 
2419804; 452053, 2419805; 452040, 2419807; 452027, 2419811; 452007, 
2419824; 451994, 2419844; 451989, 2419867; 451994, 2419890; 452007, 
2419910; 452027, 2419923; 452045, 2419927; 452053, 2419932; 452076, 
2419936; 452082, 2419936; 452084, 2419936; 452090, 2419939; 452095, 
2419942; 452096, 2419943; 452118, 2419954; 452145, 2419960; 452168, 
2419955; 452188, 2419942; 452201, 2419922; 452206, 2419899; 452201, 
2419876; 452188, 2419856; 452172, 2419844; 452153, 2419835; 452132, 
2419822; 452123, 2419817; 452099, 2419812; 452093, 2419812; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--which 
follows:

[[Page 161]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.001

    (10) Unit 5--(1 ha (2 ac)):
    (i) Unit 5 consists of the following 35 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452493, 2420608; 452493, 
2420613; 452493, 2420616; 452496, 2420639; 452492, 2420652; 452491, 
2420660; 452492, 2420669; 452497, 2420683; 452498, 2420686; 452502, 
2420694; 452516, 2420711; 452518, 2420713; 452528, 2420720; 452540, 
2420722; 452552, 2420720; 452561, 2420713; 452568, 2420704; 452570, 
2420692; 452568, 2420680; 452564, 2420673; 452553, 2420660; 452556, 
2420649; 452557, 2420641; 452557, 2420637; 452554, 2420613; 452555, 
2420611; 452555, 2420607; 452553, 2420595; 452546, 2420585; 452536, 
2420579; 452525, 2420576; 452513, 2420579; 452503, 2420585; 452496, 
2420595; 452494, 2420602; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 5 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (11) Unit 6--(2 ha (4 ac)):
    (i) Unit 6 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453052, 2420607; 453065,

[[Page 162]]

2420616; 453078, 2420622; 453101, 2420626; 453126, 2420621; 453139, 
2420616; 453154, 2420606; 453164, 2420591; 453167, 2420579; 453169, 
2420551; 453165, 2420533; 453156, 2420517; 453141, 2420500; 453127, 
2420490; 453109, 2420486; 453078, 2420490; 453053, 2420505; 453042, 
2420522; 453034, 2420543; 453032, 2420559; 453036, 2420585; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 6 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (12) Unit 7--(3 ha (9 ac)):
    (i) Unit 7 consists of the following 7 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452623, 2421100; 452812, 
2421077; 452831, 2421041; 452816, 2421016; 452786, 2420896; 452590, 
2420946; 452608, 2421015; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 7 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (13) Unit 8--(2 ha (7 ac)):
    (i) Unit 8 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452763, 2421383; 452759, 
2421402; 452760, 2421421; 452767, 2421462; 452766, 2421477; 452768, 
2421497; 452771, 2421510; 452780, 2421523; 452812, 2421556; 452824, 
2421564; 452831, 2421567; 452848, 2421571; 452857, 2421571; 452875, 
2421567; 452890, 2421557; 452899, 2421542; 452904, 2421531; 452907, 
2421514; 452908, 2421497; 452904, 2421480; 452899, 2421471; 452902, 
2421454; 452900, 2421439; 452894, 2421422; 452891, 2421412; 452891, 
2421402; 452888, 2421385; 452880, 2421368; 452871, 2421355; 452844, 
2421338; 452822, 2421335; 452799, 2421339; 452778, 2421357; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 8 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--which 
follows:

[[Page 163]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.002

    (14) Unit 9--(1 ha (4 ac)):
    (i) Unit 9 consists of the following 5 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452568, 2422604; 452577, 
2422610; 452696, 2422521; 452580, 2422429; 452537, 2422471; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 9 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--below.
    (15) Unit 10--(14 ha (35 ac)):
    (i) Unit 10 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452688, 2421988; 452834, 
2422427; 453145, 2422210; 453061, 2422147; 453053, 2422133; 453053, 
2422102; 453061, 2422078; 453074, 2422029; 453002, 2421944; 453015, 
2421922; 453022, 2421892; 452896, 2421910; 452733, 2421917; 452705, 
2421959; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--which 
follows:

[[Page 164]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.003

    (16) Unit 11--(4 ha (10 ac)):
    (i) Unit 11 consists of the following 17 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453958, 2419773; 453976, 
2419766; 453999, 2419741; 454054, 2419702; 454068, 2419667; 454060, 
2419596; 454042, 2419553; 454005, 2419528; 453962, 2419521; 453894, 
2419545; 453872, 2419573; 453862, 2419600; 453852, 2419642; 453862, 
2419676; 453887, 2419718; 453912, 2419742; 453936, 2419768; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 11 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--below.
    (17) Unit 12 (6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 12 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 454185, 2420229; 454242, 
2420243; 454326, 2420241; 454387, 2420207; 454420, 2420147; 454475, 
2420133; 454502, 2420080; 454474, 2420055; 454366, 2419954; 454341, 
2419944; 454321, 2419921; 454311, 2419895; 454286, 2419903; 454264, 
2419927; 454229, 2419962; 454208, 2419993; 454186, 2420038; 454169, 
2420058; 454145, 2420086; 454112, 2420103; 454120, 2420133; return to 
starting point.

[[Page 165]]

    (ii) Note: Unit 12 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--which 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.004

    (18) Unit 13--(21 ha (52 ac)):
    (i) Unit 13 consists of the following 43 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 457108, 2420666; 457027, 
2420606; 456763, 2420391; 456727, 2419912; 456456, 2419772; 455868, 
2419764; 455633, 2419645; 455601, 2419531; 455389, 2419219; 455225, 
2419029; 455014, 2418947; 455014, 2419015; 454926, 2419043; 455027, 
2419064; 455102, 2419103; 455202, 2419192; 455255, 2419258; 455300, 
2419334; 455508, 2419515; 455586, 2419614; 455664, 2419674; 455767, 
2419730; 455859, 2419764; 455969, 2419780; 456212, 2419805; 456272, 
2419811; 456376, 2419831; 456451, 2419859; 456531, 2419900; 456583, 
2419935; 456627, 2419981; 456656,

[[Page 166]]

2420036; 456682, 2420173; 456709, 2420316; 456718, 2420343; 456704, 
2420433; 456723, 2420583; 456747, 2420580; 456771, 2420584; 456786, 
2420569; 456848, 2420572; 456979, 2420634; 457022, 2420649; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 13 is depicted on Map 6--Unit 13--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.005
    
    (19) Unit 14--(39 ha (96 ac)):
    (i) Unit 14 consists of the following 47 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Coastline. 457575, 2420977; 
457548, 2420981; 457598, 2421002; 457624, 2421039; 457624, 2421039; 
457624, 2421039; 457664, 2421105; 457715, 2421146; 457755, 2421170; 
457901, 2421204; 458025, 2421342; 458025, 2421367; 458078, 2421412; 
458078, 2421413; 458078, 2421413; 458184, 2421510; 458226, 2421607; 
458226, 2421607; 458226, 2421607; 458259,

[[Page 167]]

2421727; 458308, 2421809; 458371, 2421876; 458405, 2421905; 458237, 
2422080; 458301, 2422271; 458346, 2422339; 458686, 2422403; 458785, 
2422371; 458932, 2422252; 458997, 2422153; Coastline. 458706, 2421920; 
458670, 2421988; 458662, 2422059; 458688, 2422116; 458778, 2422112; 
458809, 2422160; 458719, 2422266; 458630, 2422266; 458556, 2422191; 
458563, 2422061; 458479, 2421989; 458500, 2421803.
    (ii) Note: Unit 14 is depicted on Map 7--Unit 14--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.006
    
             Spruce-Fir Moss Spider (Microhexura montivaga)

    1. Critical habitat units and their ownership are described below 
and depicted in the following maps.
      

[[Page 168]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JY01.000

    Unit 1: Swain County, North Carolina, and Sevier County, Tennessee--
all portions of the GSMNP bounded to the north and to the south of the 
North Carolina/Tennessee State line (State line) by the 1,646-m (5,400-
ft) contour, from the intersection of the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour 
with the State line, south of Mingus Lead, Tennessee, southwest and then 
west to the intersection of the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour with the 
State line, east of The Narrows and west of Jenkins Knob, North 
Carolina, and Tennessee.
    Unit 2: Sevier County, Tennessee--all portions of the GSMNP at and 
above the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour, bounded on the southwest side by 
the North Carolina/Tennessee State line from the intersection of the 
State line with the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour near Dry Sluice Gap, 
southeast to the intersection of the State line with the 1,646-m (5,400-

[[Page 169]]

ft) contour at the head of Minnie Ball Branch, North Carolina, northwest 
of Newfound Gap, North Carolina, and Tennessee.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JY01.001

    Unit 3: Avery and Mitchell Counties, North Carolina, and Carter 
County, Tennessee--all portions of the Pisgah National Forest in North 
Carolina and the Cherokee National Forest in Tennessee, bounded to the 
north and to the south of the North Carolina/Tennessee State line by the 
1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour, from the intersection of the 1,646-m (5,400-
ft) contour with the State line north of Elk Hollow Branch, Avery 
County, North

[[Page 170]]

Carolina, and southwest of Yellow Mountain, Carter County, Tennessee, 
west to the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour at Eagle Cliff, Mitchell County, 
North Carolina.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JY01.002

    Unit 4: Avery, Caldwell, and Watauga Counties, North Carolina--all 
areas of Grandfather Mountain at and above the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) 
contour.

    2. Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Fraser fir or fir-dominated spruce-fir forests at and above 
1,646 m (5,400 ft) in elevation; and

[[Page 171]]

    (ii) Moderately thick and humid, but not wet, moss (species in the 
genus Dicranodontium, and possibly Polytrichum) and/or liverwort mats on 
rock surfaces that are adequately sheltered from the sun and rain (by 
overhang and aspect) and include a thin layer of humid soil and/or humus 
between the moss and rock surface.
    3. Existing human structures and other features not containing all 
of the primary constituent elements are not considered critical habitat.

    (h) Crustaceans.

              Kauai Cave Amphipod (Spelaeorchestia koloana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for the island of Kauai, 
Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements for the Kauai cave amphipod 
are:
    (i) The presence of subterranean spaces from 5 mm to 25 cm (0.2 in 
to 10 in) at their narrowest point (collectively termed ``mesocaverns'') 
and/or cave passages greater than 25 cm (<ls-thn-eq>10 in);
    (ii) Dark and/or stagnant air zones that maintain relative humidity 
at saturation levels (<ls-thn-eq>=100 percent); and
    (iii) The presence in these types of mesocaverns or caves of roots 
from living, nontoxic plants such as, but not limited to, ohia 
(Metrosideros polymorpha), maiapilo (Capparis sandwichiana), and aalii 
(Dodonea viscosa).
    (3) All critical habitat areas contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements for the Kauai cave amphipod.
    (4)(i) Existing human-constructed features and structures within the 
boundaries of mapped units that involved trenching, filling, or 
excavation resulting in below-surface modification or alteration would 
not contain either of the primary constituent elements and are excluded 
from critical habitat designation. Such features and structures include 
but are not limited to: Homes and buildings for which the underlying 
bedrock has been altered for their construction or through incorporation 
of or connection to buried structural foundations, septic tanks, city 
sewage and drainage systems, or water or underground electrical supply 
corridors; paved roads; and areas previously or currently used as a 
quarry.
    (ii) Areas that have been modified on the surface but without 
trenching, filling, or excavation resulting in below-surface 
modification or alteration are included in the critical habitat 
designation, even if they are adjacent to areas that have undergone 
below-surface modification.
    (5) Critical habitat units are described below. Coordinates in UTM 
Zone 4 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83). 
The following map shows the general locations of the 14 critical habitat 
units designated on the island of Kauai.
    (i) Note: Map 1--Index map follows:

[[Page 172]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.007

    (6) Unit 1--(<1 ha (1 ac)):
    (i) Unit 1 consists of the following 10 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450554, 2420457; 450546, 
2420468; 450576, 2420510; 450586, 2420518; 450607, 2420516; 450624, 
2420502; 450625, 2420480; 450618, 2420452; 450600, 2420437; 450574, 
2420434; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (7) Unit 2--(7 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 2 consists of the following 16 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 451483, 2420974; 451539, 
2420991; 451583, 2421015; 451622, 2421014; 451667, 2420984; 451677, 
2420926; 451680, 2420869; 451705, 2420799; 451622, 2420769; 451650, 
2420664; 451488,

[[Page 173]]

2420620; 451468, 2420624; 451433, 2420642; 451470, 2420758; 451501, 
2420801; 451510, 2420870; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 2 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (8) Unit 3--(6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 3 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450881, 2419947; 450879, 
2419981; 450855, 2420053; 450859, 2420089; 450903, 2420089; 451012, 
2420125; 451058, 2420191; 451138, 2420180; 451184, 2420119; 451159, 
2420048; 451194, 2420014; 451183, 2419982; 451136, 2419987; 451114, 
2419892; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (9) Unit 4--(2 ha (6 ac)):
    (i) Unit 4 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452087, 2419809; 452063, 
2419804; 452053, 2419805; 452040, 2419807; 452027, 2419811; 452007, 
2419824; 451994, 2419844; 451989, 2419867; 451994, 2419890; 452007, 
2419910; 452027, 2419923; 452045, 2419927; 452053, 2419932; 452076, 
2419936; 452082, 2419936; 452084, 2419936; 452090, 2419939; 452095, 
2419942; 452096, 2419943; 452118, 2419954; 452145, 2419960; 452168, 
2419955; 452188, 2419942; 452201, 2419922; 452206, 2419899; 452201, 
2419876; 452188, 2419856; 452172, 2419844; 452153, 2419835; 452132, 
2419822; 452123, 2419817; 452099, 2419812; 452093, 2419812; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--which 
follows:

[[Page 174]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.008

    (10) Unit 5--(1 ha (2 ac)):
    (i) Unit 5 consists of the following 35 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452493, 2420608; 452493, 
2420613; 452493, 2420616; 452496, 2420639; 452492, 2420652; 452491, 
2420660; 452492, 2420669; 452497, 2420683; 452498, 2420686; 452502, 
2420694; 452516, 2420711; 452518, 2420713; 452528, 2420720; 452540, 
2420722; 452552, 2420720; 452561, 2420713; 452568, 2420704; 452570, 
2420692; 452568, 2420680; 452564, 2420673; 452553, 2420660; 452556, 
2420649; 452557, 2420641; 452557, 2420637; 452554, 2420613; 452555, 
2420611; 452555, 2420607; 452553, 2420595; 452546, 2420585; 452536, 
2420579; 452525, 2420576; 452513, 2420579; 452503, 2420585; 452496, 
2420595; 452494, 2420602; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 5 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (11) Unit 6--(2 ha (4 ac)):

[[Page 175]]

    (i) Unit 6 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453052, 2420607; 453065, 
2420616; 453078, 2420622; 453101, 2420626; 453126, 2420621; 453139, 
2420616; 453154, 2420606; 453164, 2420591; 453167, 2420579; 453169, 
2420551; 453165, 2420533; 453156, 2420517; 453141, 2420500; 453127, 
2420490; 453109, 2420486; 453078, 2420490; 453053, 2420505; 453042, 
2420522; 453034, 2420543; 453032, 2420559; 453036, 2420585; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 6 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (12) Unit 7--(3 ha (9 ac)):
    (i) Unit 7 consists of the following 7 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452623, 2421100; 452812, 
2421077; 452831, 2421041; 452816, 2421016; 452786, 2420896; 452590, 
2420946; 452608, 2421015; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 7 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (13) Unit 8--(2 ha (7 ac)):
    (i) Unit 8 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452763, 2421383; 452759, 
2421402; 452760, 2421421; 452767, 2421462; 452766, 2421477; 452768, 
2421497; 452771, 2421510; 452780, 2421523; 452812, 2421556; 452824, 
2421564; 452831, 2421567; 452848, 2421571; 452857, 2421571; 452875, 
2421567; 452890, 2421557; 452899, 2421542; 452904, 2421531; 452907, 
2421514; 452908, 2421497; 452904, 2421480; 452899, 2421471; 452902, 
2421454; 452900, 2421439; 452894, 2421422; 452891, 2421412; 452891, 
2421402; 452888, 2421385; 452880, 2421368; 452871, 2421355; 452844, 
2421338; 452822, 2421335; 452799, 2421339; 452778, 2421357; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 8 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--which 
follows:

[[Page 176]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.009

    (14) Unit 9--(1 ha (4 ac)):
    (i) Unit 9 consists of the following 5 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452568, 2422604; 452577, 
2422610; 452696, 2422521; 452580, 2422429; 452537, 2422471; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 9 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--below.
    (15) Unit 10--(14 ha (35 ac)):
    (i) Unit 10 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452688, 2421988; 452834, 
2422427; 453145, 2422210; 453061, 2422147; 453053, 2422133; 453053, 
2422102; 453061, 2422078; 453074, 2422029; 453002, 2421944; 453015, 
2421922; 453022, 2421892; 452896, 2421910; 452733, 2421917; 452705, 
2421959; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--which 
follows:

[[Page 177]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.010

    (16) Unit 11--(4 ha (10 ac)):
    (i) Unit 11 consists of the following 17 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453958, 2419773; 453976, 
2419766; 453999, 2419741; 454054, 2419702; 454068, 2419667; 454060, 
2419596; 454042, 2419553; 454005, 2419528; 453962, 2419521; 453894, 
2419545; 453872, 2419573; 453862, 2419600; 453852, 2419642; 453862, 
2419676; 453887, 2419718; 453912, 2419742; 453936, 2419768; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 11 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--below.
    (17) Unit 12 (6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 12 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 454185, 2420229; 454242, 
2420243; 454326, 2420241; 454387, 2420207; 454420, 2420147; 454475, 
2420133; 454502, 2420080; 454474, 2420055; 454366, 2419954; 454341, 
2419944; 454321, 2419921; 454311, 2419895; 454286, 2419903; 454264, 
2419927; 454229, 2419962; 454208, 2419993; 454186, 2420038; 454169, 
2420058; 454145, 2420086; 454112, 2420103; 454120, 2420133; return to 
starting point.

[[Page 178]]

    (ii) Note: Unit 12 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--which 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.011

    (18) Unit 13--(21 ha (52 ac)):
    (i) Unit 13 consists of the following 43 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 457108, 2420666; 457027, 
2420606; 456763, 2420391; 456727, 2419912; 456456, 2419772; 455868, 
2419764; 455633, 2419645; 455601, 2419531; 455389, 2419219; 455225, 
2419029; 455014, 2418947; 455014, 2419015; 454926, 2419043; 455027, 
2419064; 455102, 2419103; 455202, 2419192; 455255, 2419258; 455300, 
2419334; 455508, 2419515; 455586, 2419614; 455664, 2419674; 455767, 
2419730; 455859, 2419764; 455969, 2419780; 456212, 2419805; 456272, 
2419811; 456376, 2419831; 456451, 2419859; 456531, 2419900; 456583, 
2419935; 456627, 2419981; 456656,

[[Page 179]]

2420036; 456682, 2420173; 456709, 2420316; 456718, 2420343; 456704, 
2420433; 456723, 2420583; 456747, 2420580; 456771, 2420584; 456786, 
2420569; 456848, 2420572; 456979, 2420634; 457022, 2420649; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 13 is depicted on Map 6--Unit 13--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.012
    
    (19) Unit 14--(39 ha (96 ac)):
    (i) Unit 14 consists of the following 47 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Coastline. 457575, 2420977; 
457548, 2420981; 457598, 2421002; 457624, 2421039; 457624, 2421039; 
457624, 2421039; 457664, 2421105; 457715, 2421146; 457755, 2421170; 
457901, 2421204; 458025, 2421342; 458025, 2421367; 458078, 2421412; 
458078, 2421413; 458078, 2421413; 458184, 2421510; 458226, 2421607; 
458226, 2421607; 458226, 2421607; 458259,

[[Page 180]]

2421727; 458308, 2421809; 458371, 2421876; 458405, 2421905; 458237, 
2422080; 458301, 2422271; 458346, 2422339; 458686, 2422403; 458785, 
2422371; 458932, 2422252; 458997, 2422153; Coastline. 458706, 2421920; 
458670, 2421988; 458662, 2422059; 458688, 2422116; 458778, 2422112; 
458809, 2422160; 458719, 2422266; 458630, 2422266; 458556, 2422191; 
458563, 2422061; 458479, 2421989; 458500, 2421803.
    (ii) Note: Unit 14 is depicted on Map 7--Unit 14--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.013
    
                  Noel's amphipod (Gammarus desperatus)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Chaves County, New 
Mexico, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent element of critical habitat for Noel's 
amphipod is springs and spring-fed wetland systems that:
    (i) Have permanent, flowing water with no or no more than low levels 
of pollutants;

[[Page 181]]

    (ii) Have slow to moderate water velocities;
    (iii) Have substrates including limestone cobble and aquatic 
vegetation;
    (iv) Have stable water levels with natural diurnal (daily) and 
seasonal variations;
    (v) Consist of fresh to moderately saline water;
    (vi) Have minimal sedimentation;
    (vii) Vary in temperature between 50-68 [deg]F (10-20 [deg]C) with 
natural seasonal and diurnal variations slightly above and below that 
range; and
    (viii) Provide abundant food, consisting of:
    (A) Submergent vegetation and decaying organic matter;
    (B) A surface film of algae, diatoms, bacteria, and fungi; and
    (C) Microbial foods, such as algae and bacteria, associated with 
aquatic plants, algae, bacteria, and decaying organic material.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 1:24,000 maps, and critical habitat units were 
then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Unit 1: Sago/Bitter Creek Complex, Chaves County, New Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): (A) 553337, 3705095; 553357, 
3705102; 553360, 3705067; 553371, 3705041; 553420, 3705010; 553433, 
3704982; 553482, 3704987; 553499, 3704955; 553437, 3704946; 553424, 
3704909; 553401, 3704883; 553340, 3704906; 553319, 3704879; 553266, 
3704869; 553274, 3704816; 553240, 3704797; 553240, 3704623; 553306, 
3704532; 553300, 3704419; 553280, 3704354; 553287, 3704287; 553338, 
3704221; 553438, 3704145; 553459, 3704108; 553499, 3704091; 553533, 
3704059; 553559, 3704024; 553588, 3704004; 553650, 3704024; 553655, 
3704014; 553654, 3703981; 553699, 3703983; 553745, 3703960; 553775, 
3703978; 553799, 3703979; 553828, 3704003; 553859, 3704016; 553871, 
3704037; 553907, 3704053; 553938, 3704074; 553964, 3704078; 553983, 
3704080; 553993, 3703978; 553939, 3703960; 553917, 3703914; 553903, 
3703927; 553758, 3703909; 553710, 3703936; 553656, 3703932; 553567, 
3703940; 553484, 3704010; 553426, 3704085; 553396, 3704109; 553357, 
3704150; 553270, 3704273; 553271, 3704299; 553270, 3704344; 553255, 
3704398; 553274, 3704444; 553254, 3704540; 553218, 3704577; 553197, 
3704824; 553205, 3704843; 553246, 3704885; 553233, 3704911; 553238, 
3704941; 553265, 3704950; 553294, 3704941; 553312, 3705045; 553337, 
3705095.
    (B) 553906, 3704450; 553915, 3704455; 553920, 3704452; 553917, 
3704438; 553926, 3704432; 553935, 3704420; 553957, 3704404; 553965, 
3704405; 553974, 3704406; 553985, 3704388; 553993, 3704387; 554019, 
3704376; 554037, 3704362; 554045, 3704389; 554060, 3704406; 554083, 
3704416; 554085, 3704429; 554110, 3704452; 554132, 3704457; 554121, 
3704474; 554106, 3704494; 554102, 3704531; 554119, 3704531; 554135, 
3704523; 554144, 3704510; 554157, 3704481; 554154, 3704460; 554174, 
3704431; 554192, 3704393; 554210, 3704366; 554216, 3704346; 554190, 
3704357; 554174, 3704365; 554166, 3704375; 554159, 3704395; 554146, 
3704394; 554126, 3704391; 554117, 3704384; 554123, 3704364; 554119, 
3704346; 554105, 3704337; 554091, 3704312; 554097, 3704289; 554094, 
3704269; 554084, 3704261; 554059, 3704273; 554052, 3704260; 554034, 
3704259; 554022, 3704248; 554005, 3704272; 554024, 3704293; 554040, 
3704300; 554041, 3704321; 554016, 3704332; 554006, 3704317; 553974, 
3704323; 553963, 3704324; 553963, 3704316; 553966, 3704314; 553961, 
3704302; 553949, 3704302; 553936, 3704302; 553934, 3704311; 553946, 
3704321; 553952, 3704323; 553946, 3704332; 553946, 3704353; 553958, 
3704373; 553964, 3704381; 553958, 3704392; 553946, 3704391; 553938, 
3704396; 553934, 3704394; 553930, 3704397; 553930, 3704409; 553924, 
3704409; 553906, 3704413; 553902, 3704424; 553894, 3704419; 553885, 
3704419; 553898, 3704448; 553906, 3704450.
    (ii) Note: Map of Noel's Amphipod Critical Habitat Units 1 and 2a 
follows:

[[Page 182]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07JN11.003

    (6) Unit 2a: Springsnail/Amphipod Impoundment Complex, Chaves 
County, New Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): (A) 554982, 3703317; 555004, 
3703315; 555011, 3703299; 555053, 3703215; 555079, 3703205; 555094, 
3703168; 555171, 3703138; 555222, 3703093; 555259, 3703078; 555289, 
3703055; 555338, 3703047; 555420, 3703024; 555458, 3702955; 555442, 
3702940; 555422, 3702925; 555406, 3702974; 555330, 3703017; 555277, 
3703025; 555229, 3703068; 555188, 3703090; 555151, 3703125; 555131, 
3703116; 555075, 3703115; 555042, 3703144; 555014,

[[Page 183]]

3703147; 554978, 3703231; 554964, 3703290; 554982, 3703317.
    (B) 555695, 3701598; 555603, 3701536; 555568, 3701479; 555565, 
3701460; 555559, 3701324; 555532, 3701296; 555502, 3701277; 555355, 
3700892; 555356, 3700852; 555342, 3700778; 555333, 3700694; 555294, 
3700533; 555271, 3700409; 555281, 3700322; 555273, 3700266; 555257, 
3700265; 555238, 3700281; 555247, 3700304; 555268, 3700316; 555269, 
3700343; 555221, 3700433; 555257, 3700433; 555263, 3700446; 555269, 
3700498; 555260, 3700534; 555284, 3700550; 555285, 3700567; 555274, 
3700604; 555288, 3700636; 555312, 3700666; 555322, 3700725; 555325, 
3700767; 555345, 3700858; 555350, 3700891; 555355, 3700901; 555365, 
3700958; 555379, 3700992; 555392, 3701014; 555436, 3701152; 555450, 
3701200; 555450, 3701241; 555472, 3701247; 555480, 3701271; 555504, 
3701300; 555520, 3701303; 555534, 3701340; 555529, 3701451; 555549, 
3701492; 555589, 3701560; 555621, 3701579; 555656, 3701579; 555669, 
3701602; 555686, 3701610; 555695, 3701598.
    (C) 554768, 3699378; 554765, 3699345; 554761, 3699217; 554681, 
3699179; 554608, 3699086; 554569, 3699029; 554501, 3699079; 554455, 
3699103; 554488, 3699119; 554497, 3699142; 554543, 3699151; 554539, 
3699185; 554571, 3699264; 554587, 3699280; 554622, 3699291; 554639, 
3699320; 554667, 3699343; 554699, 3699341; 554719, 3699367; 554748, 
3699380; 554768, 3699378.
    (D) 554487, 3699017; 554487, 3698993; 554435, 3698991; 554392, 
3698980; 554398, 3699012; 554405, 3699026; 554410, 3699056; 554427, 
3699057; 554423, 3699035; 554458, 3699018; 554487, 3699017.
    (E) 554195, 3698145; 554220, 3698101; 554258, 3698101; 554256, 
3698043; 554224, 3698055; 554210, 3698079; 554193, 3698085; 554191, 
3698097; 554195, 3698145.
    (F) 554223, 3697539; 554247, 3697505; 554195, 3697448; 554171, 
3697394; 554179, 3697365; 554152, 3697343; 554132, 3697360; 554123, 
3697373; 554155, 3697405; 554167, 3697472; 554223, 3697539.
    (G) 554070, 3697244; 554099, 3697254; 554134, 3697240; 554127, 
3697220; 554096, 3697208; 554071, 3697229; 554070, 3697244.
    (H) 553784, 3697256; 553807, 3697291; 553829, 3697279; 553849, 
3697268; 553881, 3697270; 553911, 3697274; 553931, 3697267; 553979, 
3697295; 553989, 3697296; 553980, 3697274; 553965, 3697264; 553963, 
3697246; 553939, 3697239; 553914, 3697242; 553901, 3697230; 553881, 
3697235; 553872, 3697251; 553848, 3697246; 553833, 3697254; 553829, 
3697262; 553821, 3697262; 553799, 3697250; 553784, 3697256.
    (I) 553928, 3697415; 553935, 3697425; 553952, 3697426; 553941, 
3697416; 553940, 3697405; 553942, 3697385; 553927, 3697367; 553852, 
3697391; 553833, 3697408; 553822, 3697403; 553766, 3697414; 553739, 
3697424; 553735, 3697478; 553747, 3697483; 553764, 3697425; 553795, 
3697420; 553820, 3697429; 553849, 3697415; 553880, 3697408; 553905, 
3697395; 553921, 3697407; 553928, 3697415.
    (J) 553538, 3697315; 553550, 3697308; 553572, 3697322; 553580, 
3697314; 553556, 3697287; 553538, 3697302; 553538, 3697315.
    (K) 555054, 3699844; 555015, 3699840; 555015, 3699840; 555006, 
3699890; 555065, 3699975; 555086, 3700030; 555115, 3700032; 555114, 
3700030; 555076, 3699953; 555038, 3699915; 555039, 3699861; 555054, 
3699844.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2a for Noel's amphipod is provided at paragraph 
(5)(ii) of this entry.
    (7) Unit 3: Rio Hondo, Chaves County, New Mexico.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 13N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 554121, 3694838; 554166, 3694847; 
554200, 3694673; 554230, 3694507; 554247, 3694358; 554277, 3694294; 
554243, 3694274; 554212, 3694343; 554196, 3694458; 554164, 3694649; 
554121, 3694838.
    (ii) Note: Map of Noel's Amphipod Critical Habitat Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 184]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07JN11.004

                Peck's cave amphipod (Stygobromus pecki).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Comal County, Texas, on 
the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for Peck's 
cave amphipod are:
    (i) High-quality water with no or minimal levels of pollutants, such 
as soaps and detergents (Brown 1987, p. 261) and other compounds 
containing surfactants, heavy metals, pesticides, fertilizer nutrients, 
petroleum hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals and

[[Page 185]]

veterinary medicines, and semi-volatile compounds, such as industrial 
cleaning agents, and including:
    (A) Low salinity with total dissolved solids that generally range 
from 307 to 368 mg/L; and
    (B) Low turbidity that generally is less than 5 nephelometric 
turbity units;
    (ii) Aquifer water temperatures that range from approximately 68 to 
75 [deg]F (20 to 24 [deg]C); and
    (iii) Food supply that includes detritus (decomposed materials), 
leaf litter, living plant material, algae, fungi, bacteria and other 
microorganisms, and decaying roots.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, roads, and other paved areas) and the land on 
which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on the 
effective date of this rule. Where lakes are designated, critical 
habitat is only designated for areas where springs occur and does not 
include areas of the lake bottom beyond a radius of 50 ft (15.2 m) from 
the spring outlet.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created by using ArcGIS. All coordinates are UTM zone 14 coordinate 
pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates 
were derived from 2004 digital orthophotographs. All acreage and mileage 
calculations were performed using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 186]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.000

    (6) Comal Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583387, 3287251; 583392, 3287264; 
583405, 3287280; 583404, 3287290; 583407, 3287301; 583414, 3287307; 
583425, 3287308; 583425, 3287320; 583433, 3287328; 583444, 3287330; 
583454, 3287325; 583463, 3287301; 583482, 3287272; 583486, 3287286; 
583501, 3287296; 583520, 3287314; 583547, 3287326;

[[Page 187]]

583557, 3287333; 583572, 3287335; 583586, 3287342; 583567, 3287387; 
583560, 3287408; 583559, 3287423; 583534, 3287403; 583499, 3287359; 
583491, 3287347; 583484, 3287340; 583471, 3287334; 583461, 3287334; 
583452, 3287340; 583450, 3287350; 583454, 3287364; 583465, 3287374; 
583494, 3287415; 583521, 3287443; 583526, 3287453; 583563, 3287477; 
583589, 3287503; 583613, 3287519; 583643, 3287547; 583662, 3287561; 
583719, 3287617; 583759, 3287669; 583780, 3287701; 583811, 3287743; 
583833, 3287764; 583848, 3287784; 583892, 3287826; 583911, 3287850; 
583970, 3287907; 584008, 3287938; 584047, 3287963; 584055, 3287964; 
584065, 3287960; 584073, 3287948; 584074, 3287941; 584081, 3287952; 
584131, 3288011; 584164, 3288044; 584183, 3288062; 584197, 3288071; 
584216, 3288093; 584236, 3288110; 584258, 3288138; 584284, 3288161; 
584325, 3288209; 584343, 3288223; 584364, 3288233; 584375, 3288243; 
584386, 3288244; 584401, 3288234; 584403, 3288218; 584433, 3288201; 
584437, 3288193; 584436, 3288184; 584416, 3288167; 584405, 3288167; 
584375, 3288184; 584365, 3288180; 584344, 3288156; 584329, 3288131; 
584320, 3288125; 584298, 3288103; 584273, 3288067; 584204, 3287997; 
584187, 3287985; 584176, 3287973; 584152, 3287943; 584147, 3287933; 
584105, 3287880; 584080, 3287862; 584049, 3287844; 584026, 3287815; 
584021, 3287805; 584013, 3287798; 584009, 3287787; 583999, 3287775; 
583971, 3287751; 583947, 3287735; 583927, 3287725; 583920, 3287718; 
583890, 3287704; 583850, 3287673; 583845, 3287665; 583851, 3287662; 
583860, 3287650; 583865, 3287640; 583865, 3287629; 583863, 3287622; 
583854, 3287609; 583840, 3287600; 583836, 3287584; 583829, 3287576; 
583838, 3287552; 583841, 3287535; 583841, 3287520; 583835, 3287501; 
583804, 3287452; 583790, 3287435; 583766, 3287416; 583727, 3287406; 
583706, 3287406; 583695, 3287398; 583686, 3287370; 583699, 3287298; 
583698, 3287288; 583694, 3287282; 583617, 3287257; 583610, 3287258; 
583605, 3287262; 583597, 3287280; 583584, 3287277; 583565, 3287270; 
583541, 3287255; 583534, 3287244; 583518, 3287233; 583510, 3287211; 
583496, 3287192; 583480, 3287183; 583459, 3287177; 583436, 3287178; 
583419, 3287184; 583400, 3287198; 583396, 3287205; 583387, 3287251.
    (ii) Note: Comal Springs Unit (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 188]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.001

    (7) Hueco Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583113, 3292498; 583114, 3292498; 
583115, 3292498; 583116, 3292498; 583117, 3292498; 583118, 3292497; 
583119, 3292497; 583120, 3292497; 583120, 3292496; 583121, 3292496; 
583122, 3292495; 583123, 3292495; 583124, 3292494; 583124, 3292493; 
583125, 3292493; 583126, 3292492; 583126, 3292491; 583127, 3292490; 
583127, 3292489; 583127, 3292489; 583128, 3292488; 583128, 3292487; 
583128, 3292486; 583128, 3292485; 583128, 3292484; 583128, 3292483; 
583128, 3292482; 583128, 3292481; 583128, 3292480;

[[Page 189]]

583128, 3292479; 583128, 3292478; 583127, 3292477; 583127, 3292477; 
583127, 3292476; 583126, 3292475; 583126, 3292474; 583125, 3292473; 
583124, 3292473; 583124, 3292472; 583123, 3292471; 583122, 3292471; 
583122, 3292470; 583121, 3292470; 583120, 3292469; 583119, 3292469; 
583118, 3292468; 583117, 3292468; 583116, 3292468; 583115, 3292468; 
583114, 3292468; 583113, 3292468; 583112, 3292468; 583111, 3292468; 
583111, 3292468; 583110, 3292468; 583109, 3292468; 583108, 3292469; 
583107, 3292469; 583106, 3292470; 583105, 3292470; 583104, 3292471; 
583104, 3292471; 583103, 3292472; 583102, 3292472; 583102, 3292473; 
583101, 3292474; 583100, 3292475; 583100, 3292475; 583100, 3292476; 
583099, 3292477; 583099, 3292478; 583099, 3292479; 583098, 3292480; 
583098, 3292481; 583098, 3292482; 583098, 3292483; 583098, 3292484; 
583098, 3292485; 583098, 3292486; 583098, 3292487; 583099, 3292488; 
583099, 3292488; 583099, 3292489; 583100, 3292490; 583100, 3292491; 
583101, 3292492; 583101, 3292493; 583102, 3292493; 583103, 3292494; 
583103, 3292495; 583104, 3292495; 583105, 3292496; 583106, 3292496; 
583107, 3292497; 583108, 3292497; 583108, 3292497; 583109, 3292498; 
583110, 3292498; 583111, 3292498; 583112, 3292498; 583113, 3292498.
    (ii) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583132, 3292420; 583133, 3292421; 
583133, 3292421; 583133, 3292422; 583134, 3292423; 583134, 3292424; 
583134, 3292425; 583135, 3292426; 583136, 3292426; 583136, 3292427; 
583137, 3292428; 583138, 3292428; 583138, 3292429; 583139, 3292430; 
583140, 3292430; 583141, 3292430; 583142, 3292431; 583143, 3292431; 
583143, 3292431; 583144, 3292432; 583145, 3292432; 583146, 3292432; 
583147, 3292432; 583148, 3292432; 583149, 3292432; 583150, 3292432; 
583151, 3292432; 583152, 3292431; 583153, 3292431; 583154, 3292431; 
583155, 3292430; 583155, 3292430; 583156, 3292429; 583157, 3292429; 
583158, 3292428; 583158, 3292427; 583159, 3292427; 583160, 3292426; 
583160, 3292425; 583161, 3292424; 583161, 3292423; 583162, 3292422; 
583162, 3292422; 583162, 3292421; 583162, 3292420; 583163, 3292419; 
583163, 3292418; 583163, 3292417; 583163, 3292416; 583163, 3292415; 
583162, 3292414; 583162, 3292413; 583162, 3292412; 583162, 3292411; 
583161, 3292410; 583161, 3292409; 583160, 3292409; 583160, 3292408; 
583159, 3292407; 583159, 3292406; 583158, 3292406; 583157, 3292405; 
583156, 3292404; 583156, 3292404; 583156, 3292403; 583155, 3292402; 
583155, 3292402; 583155, 3292401; 583154, 3292400; 583154, 3292399; 
583153, 3292398; 583152, 3292398; 583152, 3292397; 583151, 3292396; 
583150, 3292396; 583149, 3292395; 583149, 3292395; 583148, 3292394; 
583147, 3292394; 583146, 3292393; 583145, 3292393; 583144, 3292393; 
583143, 3292393; 583142, 3292393; 583141, 3292393; 583140, 3292393; 
583139, 3292393; 583138, 3292393; 583137, 3292393; 583137, 3292393; 
583136, 3292394; 583135, 3292394; 583134, 3292395; 583133, 3292395; 
583132, 3292396; 583132, 3292396; 583131, 3292397; 583130, 3292397; 
583129, 3292398; 583129, 3292399; 583128, 3292400; 583128, 3292400; 
583127, 3292401; 583127, 3292402; 583127, 3292403; 583126, 3292404; 
583126, 3292405; 583126, 3292406; 583126, 3292407; 583126, 3292408; 
583126, 3292409; 583126, 3292410; 583126, 3292411; 583126, 3292412; 
583127, 3292413; 583127, 3292413; 583127, 3292414; 583128, 3292415; 
583128, 3292416; 583129, 3292417; 583129, 3292418; 583130, 3292418; 
583131, 3292419; 583131, 3292420; 583132, 3292420.
    (iii) Note: Hueco Springs Unit (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 190]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.002

          Conservancy Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta conservatio).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Butte, Colusa, Mariposa, 
Merced, Solano, Stanislaus, Tehama, and Ventura Counties, California, on 
the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Conservancy fairy shrimp (Branchinecta conservatio) are the habitat 
components that provide:

[[Page 191]]

    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 19 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(2)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1 Tehama County, California.
    (i) Unit 1A: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Richardson Springs, and Acorn Hollow. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 588739, 
4429822; 588900, 4429500; 589500, 4429500; 589500, 4428600; 589500, 
4428000; 589800, 4427100; 590500, 4426400; 590500, 4425300; 591200, 
4424400; 591500, 4423300; 591562, 4422558; 590526, 4423686; 589986, 
4424273; 589816, 4424458; 589129, 4425207; 588454, 4426221; 588425, 
4426265; 588279, 4426485; 588213, 4426583; 588213, 4426584; 588600, 
4429100; 588733, 4429833; returning to 588739, 4429822.
    (ii) Unit 1B: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangle Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 593700, 4420900; 
593164, 4420815; 592329, 4421723; 592258, 4421800; 593000, 4421800; 
593100, 4421500; 593500, 4421400; returning to 593700, 4420900.
    (iii) Unit 1C: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangle Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594500, 4420300; 
593881, 4420035; 593371, 4420590; 594000, 4420800; 594400, 4420600; 
returning to 594500, 4420300.
    (iv) Unit 1D: Tehama County, and Butte County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 topographic quadrangles Richardson Springs NW, Campbell Mound, 
Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 597100, 4416400; 597100, 4415600; 597044, 4415525; 
596800, 4415200; 597100, 4415000; 597800, 4415500; 598100, 4415200; 
597600, 4414600; 597600, 4414400; 597300, 4413800; 597300, 4413300; 
598200, 4413900; 598400, 4413900; 598400, 4413600; 597422, 4411938; 
597281, 4412382; 596959, 4413403; 596640, 4414416; 596620, 4414481; 
596305, 4415484; 596303, 4415489; 596130, 4416040; 596091, 4416160; 
596028, 4416358; 596011, 4416411; 595993, 4416465; 595982, 4416500; 
596000, 4416500; 596100, 4416400; 596200, 4416500; 596300, 4416600; 
596400, 4416700; 596500, 4416700; 596500, 4416800; 596600, 4416800; 
returning to 597100, 4416400.
    (v) Unit 1E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 598900, 4411800; 
599400, 4411700; 599800, 4411700; 599800, 4411000; 599300, 4410700; 
599100, 4410800; 599000, 4410800; 598800, 4410600; 598500, 4410400; 
598300, 4410100; 598100, 4410000; 598070, 4409970; 598051, 4409993; 
598038, 4410010; 598014, 4410083; 597806, 4410737; 597725, 4410990; 
597461, 4411816; 597434, 4411900; 597600, 4411900; 598300, 4412700; 
598500, 4413300; 598900, 4413300; returning to 598900, 4411800.

    (vi) Note: Unit 1 (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 192]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.000

    (5) Unit 3: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Elmira, and Denverton. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594915, 4234098; 
594916, 4233314; 595044, 4233310; 595068, 4233296; 595131, 4233266; 
595174, 4233226; 595189, 4233210; 595239, 4233151; 595322, 4232978; 
595423, 4232778; 595483, 4232667; 595553,

[[Page 193]]

4232524; 595699, 4232243; 595966, 4231717; 594927, 4231710; 594445, 
4231707; 594409, 4231673; 594410, 4231616; 594434, 4231540; 594474, 
4231494; 594495, 4231457; 594497, 4231414; 594510, 4231370; 594543, 
4231356; 594575, 4231342; 594603, 4231341; 594614, 4231338; 594616, 
4231325; 594618, 4231311; 594614, 4231290; 594605, 4231284; 594583, 
4231275; 594573, 4231268; 594557, 4231245; 594550, 4231209; 594543, 
4231179; 594500, 4231200; 593800, 4231200; 593600, 4230500; 593291, 
4230515; 593291, 4230514; 589300, 4230700; 589179, 4230901; 589179, 
4230901; 589240, 4230894; 589274, 4230890; 589315, 4230894; 589321, 
4230909; 589313, 4231179; 589015, 4231215; 589100, 4231300; 589100, 
4231700; 588900, 4232300; 588900, 4233000; 589983, 4233500; 590000, 
4233500; 590100, 4233500; 590100, 4233300; 590600, 4233300; 591100, 
4232800; 591138, 4232825; 591143, 4232820; 591184, 4232856; 591700, 
4233200; 592513, 4233290; 592594, 4233291; 592594, 4233299; 592600, 
4233300; 592600, 4233800; 592900, 4233700; 592900, 4233751; 592901, 
4233751; 592900, 4233754; 592900, 4233800; 593400, 4234100; 594200, 
4234100; 594300, 4234900; 594500, 4234900; 594890, 4235396; returning to 
594915, 4234098.

    (6) Note: Unit 3 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 194]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.001

    (7) Unit 5: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangle Ripon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 662400, 4168300; 661600, 4168000; 661600, 
4168300; 660300, 4167800; 660600, 4167500; 660800, 4167200; 660000, 
4167200; 659500, 4168800; 661600, 4168800; 661600,

[[Page 195]]

4169400; 662400, 4169400; returning to 662400, 4168300.

    (8) Note: Unit 5 (Map 3) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.002
    

[[Page 196]]


    (9) Unit 6: Merced County, and Mariposa County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 topographic quadrangles Snelling, Merced Falls, Winton, 
Yosemite Lake, Haystack Mtn. Indian Gulch, Merced, Planada, Owens 
Reservoir, Illinois Hill, Plainsburg, Le Grand, and Raynor Creek. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 747003, 
4125902; 747142, 4125971; 747303, 4125987; 747358, 4126000; 747200, 
4126000; 747142, 4125971; 747123, 4125969; 747070, 4125950; 747003, 
4125902; 747000, 4125900; 746900, 4125900; 746600, 4125800; 746300, 
4125700; 746200, 4125600; 746200, 4125500; 745700, 4125500; 745700, 
4125100; 744500, 4125100; 744500, 4125300; 744400, 4125300; 744400, 
4125200; 743700, 4125200; 743700, 4125800; 744500, 4125800; 744500, 
4126200; 743700, 4126200; 743700, 4127000; 743600, 4127000; 742700, 
4127000; 742400, 4127000; 742000, 4127200; 742000, 4128600; 742800, 
4128600; 742800, 4129100; 742900, 4129100; 743000, 4129100; 743000, 
4129200; 743400, 4129300; 743600, 4129500; 743600, 4130284; 743605, 
4130284; 743600, 4130493; 743600, 4130700; 743595, 4130700; 743561, 
4132097; 743560, 4132170; 743556, 4132335; 743549, 4132692; 743537, 
4133202; 743529, 4133301; 743531, 4133352; 743530, 4133400; 743523, 
4133729; 743518, 4134016; 743515, 4134159; 743509, 4134382; 743500, 
4134708; 743504, 4134743; 743565, 4134782; 744447, 4135329; 746234, 
4136439; 746230, 4136445; 745985, 4136865; 745952, 4136931; 745915, 
4136978; 745914, 4136987; 745902, 4137008; 745748, 4137298; 745669, 
4137403; 745620, 4137437; 745503, 4137487; 745203, 4138201; 744984, 
4138471; 744895, 4138606; 744895, 4138606; 744830, 4138711; 744596, 
4139085; 744234, 4139637; 744233, 4139645; 744162, 4139744; 744162, 
4139744; 744013, 4140002; 744013, 4140002; 743998, 4140029; 743996, 
4140030; 743973, 4140072; 743907, 4140195; 743889, 4140229; 743877, 
4140264; 743750, 4140609; 743388, 4140868; 743091, 4141131; 743053, 
4141165; 742997, 4141268; 742771, 4141692; 742748, 4141734; 742355, 
4142343; 742336, 4142368; 742271, 4142457; 742238, 4142503; 742139, 
4142637; 742056, 4142749; 742002, 4142823; 741974, 4142874; 741808, 
4143176; 741722, 4143360; 741419, 4144010; 741385, 4144081; 741316, 
4144328; 741297, 4144395; 741245, 4144456; 741194, 4144530; 741162, 
4144608; 741076, 4144820; 740864, 4144897; 740843, 4144899; 740750, 
4144952; 740641, 4145056; 740535, 4145175; 740517, 4145182; 740490, 
4145240; 740487, 4145263; 740386, 4145415; 740321, 4145847; 740320, 
4146066; 740303, 4146114; 740276, 4146159; 740272, 4146225; 740293, 
4146273; 740293, 4146303; 740370, 4146426; 740415, 4146474; 740536, 
4146602; 740735, 4146722; 740825, 4146775; 741069, 4147251; 741071, 
4147549; 741071, 4147576; 740982, 4147830; 740955, 4147883; 740914, 
4147967; 740822, 4148059; 740772, 4148182; 740782, 4148363; 740776, 
4148391; 740695, 4148831; 740617, 4149151; 740447, 4149311; 740396, 
4149534; 740344, 4149561; 740303, 4149575; 740289, 4149588; 740238, 
4149636; 740225, 4149666; 740057, 4149659; 739993, 4149678; 739917, 
4149678; 739791, 4149621; 739705, 4149597; 739701, 4149596; 739602, 
4149593; 739521, 4149560; 739443, 4149542; 739197, 4149515; 738714, 
4149273; 738694, 4149252; 738674, 4149251; 738178, 4148999; 737835, 
4148823; 737747, 4148772; 737044, 4148135; 736672, 4147809; 736430, 
4147669; 735929, 4147379; 735716, 4147219; 735669, 4147184; 735605, 
4147136; 735437, 4147009; 735223, 4146848; 735183, 4146809; 735156, 
4146798; 735151, 4146778; 735022, 4146655; 734989, 4146630; 734609, 
4146349; 734480, 4146255; 734012, 4145909; 733808, 4145758; 733765, 
4145739; 733763, 4145732; 733370, 4145442; 732703, 4144952; 732391, 
4144910; 732197, 4144885; 731993, 4144850; 731062, 4144594; 730371, 
4144363; 729000, 4143905; 728736, 4143813; 728542, 4143745; 728346, 
4143647; 728018, 4143482; 727340, 4143194; 726795, 4142958; 726607, 
4142867; 726599, 4142856; 726577, 4142853; 725785, 4142417; 725793, 
4142408; 725843, 4142361; 726002, 4142378; 726117, 4142355; 726204, 
4142264; 726415, 4142046; 726420, 4141975; 726381, 4141921; 726367, 
4141880; 726261, 4141732; 726182, 4141648; 725935, 4141477; 725916, 
4141451; 725903, 4141379; 725914, 4141349; 725981, 4141288; 726033, 
4141240; 726145, 4141137; 726156, 4141109; 726147, 4141073; 726096, 
4140993; 726083, 4140896; 726089, 4140784; 726108, 4140739; 726268, 
4140551; 726269, 4140436; 726283, 4140368; 726313, 4140308; 726412, 
4140209; 726455, 4140025; 726457, 4140000; 726459, 4139959; 726715, 
4139715; 726786, 4139647; 726804, 4139630; 726822, 4139625; 726822, 
4139611; 726823, 4139582; 726809, 4139546; 726755, 4139466; 726754, 
4139433; 726931, 4139179; 727174, 4138842; 727220, 4138823; 727261, 
4138819; 727328, 4138864; 727331, 4138842; 727333, 4138831; 727335, 
4138819; 727343, 4138816; 727396, 4138803; 727406, 4138800; 727414, 
4138798; 727552, 4138779; 727711, 4138793; 727806, 4138786; 727819, 
4138766; 727845, 4138644; 727858, 4138617; 727881, 4138590; 727700, 
4138500; 727600, 4138400; 727400, 4138300; 727400, 4137800; 727300, 
4137800; 727300, 4137600; 727400, 4137600; 727400, 4137500; 727300, 
4137500; 727300, 4137400; 727400, 4137400; 727400, 4137200; 726500, 
4137200; 726500, 4136500; 726400, 4136400; 725800, 4136400; 725800, 
4137200; 725000, 4137200; 724900, 4138800; 725500, 4138800; 725500, 
4138700; 725800, 4138700; 725800, 4138800; 725900, 4138800; 725900, 
4139500; 726500, 4139500; 726500, 4139600; 725900, 4139600; 725800, 
4139600; 725800, 4140200; 725900, 4140200; 725900, 4140900; 725400, 
4140900; 725400, 4140800; 725100, 4140800; 725100, 4141000; 724900, 
4141000; 724900, 4141200; 724100, 4141200; 724100, 4141600; 723400, 
4141600; 723400, 4141100; 723200, 4141100; 723200, 4140600; 723400, 
4140500; 723400, 4139500; 724000, 4139500; 724000, 4139400; 723900, 
4138900; 723900, 4138700; 723500, 4138200; 723400, 4138200; 723400, 
4138300; 723000, 4138300; 723000, 4138700; 723000, 4138900; 723100, 
4139100; 723200, 4139400; 723300, 4139500; 722100, 4139500; 722000, 
4140500; 721900, 4141100; 721900, 4141900; 721900, 4143400; 720800, 
4143400; 720900, 4141800; 721000, 4141500; 721000, 4141200; 721100, 
4141100; 721000, 4141000; 717800, 4140900; 717700, 4142500; 714500, 
4142400; 714500, 4144900; 715500, 4144900; 715500, 4145000; 715800, 
4145000; 715900, 4145000; 716000, 4145000; 716100, 4145100; 716100, 
4145200; 716000, 4145200; 715900, 4145300; 715900, 4145400; 716000, 
4145500; 716000, 4145600; 716100, 4145700; 717000, 4145700; 717700, 
4145300; 717800, 4145300; 717800, 4145200; 717800, 4145100; 717600, 
4144900; 717600, 4144800; 717600, 4144700; 717800, 4144500; 717900, 
4144600; 718200, 4144600; 718400, 4144500; 718700, 4144500; 718700, 
4144800; 718600, 4145000; 718700, 4145100; 718700, 4145600; 718600, 
4145600; 718600, 4145700; 718700, 4145800; 718600, 4145900; 718500, 
4146000; 718500,

[[Page 197]]

4146100; 718600, 4146200; 718600, 4146500; 718300, 4146500; 718200, 
4146600; 718200, 4146800; 718300, 4146800; 718500, 4146900; 718600, 
4147000; 718600, 4147100; 718400, 4147200; 718500, 4147300; 718500, 
4147600; 718700, 4147600; 718700, 4147400; 719000, 4147500; 719100, 
4147700; 719300, 4147600; 719600, 4147900; 719700, 4148000; 719700, 
4148100; 719800, 4148200; 720000, 4148200; 720600, 4148200; 720600, 
4148300; 720700, 4148400; 720800, 4148400; 720900, 4148500; 722700, 
4148500; 722700, 4148600; 722900, 4148600; 723200, 4148700; 723400, 
4148700; 723200, 4148600; 723100, 4148500; 723000, 4148400; 723200, 
4148200; 723400, 4148200; 723500, 4148300; 723600, 4148400; 723600, 
4148500; 723800, 4148500; 723800, 4148400; 723900, 4148400; 723900, 
4148500; 724000, 4148700; 724200, 4148500; 724200, 4148900; 724300, 
4149000; 724300, 4149100; 724500, 4149000; 724500, 4149300; 724700, 
4149400; 724900, 4149600; 725000, 4149700; 725000, 4150000; 724900, 
4150100; 725000, 4150200; 725200, 4150200; 725300, 4150400; 725400, 
4150500; 725400, 4150600; 725100, 4150900; 724700, 4150900; 724700, 
4153400; 725000, 4153500; 725400, 4153900; 725600, 4154100; 725800, 
4154200; 726000, 4154300; 726200, 4154000; 726300, 4153800; 726300, 
4153700; 727800, 4153600; 727800, 4153400; 727900, 4153400; 727900, 
4153500; 728400, 4153600; 728700, 4153700; 729000, 4153700; 729000, 
4153600; 729100, 4153500; 729300, 4153400; 729400, 4153400; 729400, 
4153300; 729300, 4153200; 729500, 4153100; 729800, 4153100; 729900, 
4153200; 729900, 4154200; 730000, 4154200; 730100, 4154300; 730600, 
4154300; 730700, 4154400; 731000, 4154600; 731200, 4154700; 731500, 
4154700; 731800, 4154900; 732200, 4154900; 732600, 4154800; 733200, 
4154500; 733400, 4154500; 733700, 4154300; 734700, 4154300; 734900, 
4154600; 735100, 4154800; 735100, 4154900; 735500, 4155300; 735600, 
4155300; 735800, 4155500; 736100, 4155900; 737100, 4155400; 737157, 
4155367; 737800, 4155000; 738200, 4154200; 738300, 4153300; 739000, 
4152800; 739100, 4152200; 740200, 4151800; 740800, 4151500; 740800, 
4150300; 741100, 4149900; 741700, 4149400; 742100, 4148500; 742100, 
4147100; 743400, 4146100; 744000, 4145600; 744400, 4144600; 744300, 
4143900; 743900, 4142700; 744000, 4142000; 744200, 4141700; 745500, 
4140300; 746100, 4139500; 746800, 4138500; 747700, 4137700; 748500, 
4135800; 748700, 4135100; 749500, 4134000; 749501, 4133999; 750173, 
4132710; 750700, 4131700; 751600, 4130500; 752000, 4130200; 752094, 
4130188; 752157, 4130180; 752800, 4130100; 753300, 4130400; 753500, 
4130400; 753900, 4130200; 754000, 4129300; 753400, 4128400; 753900, 
4127700; 754400, 4127700; 754600, 4127400; 755300, 4128400; 755400, 
4128400; 755600, 4127700; 756900, 4126400; 757800, 4125800; 758400, 
4126300; 758500, 4126300; 758600, 4126000; 757900, 4125100; 757400, 
4125100; 757175, 4124750; 757166, 4124735; 756500, 4123700; 753500, 
4122400; 750200, 4122400; 750200, 4121400; 748600, 4121400; 748600, 
4121900; 747800, 4121900; 747800, 4123300; 748300, 4123300; 748300, 
4123500; 748500, 4123500; 748600, 4123500; 748600, 4123900; 747800, 
4123900; 747800, 4124600; 747400, 4125100; 747400, 4125500; 746900, 
4125500; 746900, 4125763; 746902, 4125767; 746921, 4125818; 746971, 
4125871; 746997, 4125897; returning to 747003, 4125902.

    (10) Note: Unit 6 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 198]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.003

    (11) Unit 7: Merced County, California.
    (i) Unit 7A: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Gustine, Stevinson, San Luis Ranch. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 
688600, 4128800; 689100, 4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 
689800, 4128500; 689900, 4128300; 690200,

[[Page 199]]

4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 4125500; 692700, 
4125500; 693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 693300, 
4123700; 693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 694079, 
4122821; 694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 692200, 
4122000; 692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 691400, 
4122800; 691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 691267, 
4123155; 691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 691217, 
4123291; 691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 691126, 
4123677; 691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 691177, 
4123739; 691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 691195, 
4123810; 691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 691214, 
4123980; 691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 691127, 
4124089; 691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 690900, 
4124400; 690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 690582, 
4124427; 690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 690546, 
4124493; 690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 690500, 
4124524; 690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 690388, 
4124590; 690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 690083, 
4124695; 690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 689988, 
4125006; 689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 689819, 
4125184; 689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 689658, 
4125595; 689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 689630, 
4125793; 689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 689400, 
4126600; 689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 689134, 
4126678; 689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 689020, 
4126961; 688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 688913, 
4127006; 689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 688949, 
4127292; 688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 688823, 
4127454; 688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 688696, 
4127650; 688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; returning to 
688300, 4129000.
    (ii) Unit 7B: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Stevinson, San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 4125600; 
695500, 4122000; 694900, 4122400; 694700, 4122700; 694500, 4122900; 
694500, 4123100; 694100, 4123400; 693800, 4123500; 693800, 4123800; 
693500, 4123900; 693500, 4124500; 693700, 4124700; 693800, 4125000; 
693600, 4125200; 693400, 4125300; 693122, 4125670; 693100, 4125700; 
693146, 4125746; 693200, 4125800; 693700, 4125900; 693700, 4127300; 
693800, 4127300; 693900, 4127000; 694200, 4126900; 694600, 4126400; 
694600, 4126200; 694700, 4126000; 695179, 4125726; returning to 695400, 
4125600.
    (iii) Unit 7C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Stevinson, Arena, San Luis Ranch, Turner Ranch: 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 
699300, 4126300; 699300, 4125400; 700100, 4125400; 700200, 4126000; 
700600, 4125700; 701100, 4125300; 701100, 4124300; 700300, 4124300; 
700300, 4123800; 700500, 4123800; 700600, 4123500; 701100, 4123400; 
701200, 4123200; 701400, 4123100; 701600, 4122700; 701900, 4122500; 
702600, 4122200; 702870, 4121705; 703200, 4121100; 703900, 4120500; 
704600, 4119800; 704600, 4119800; 704700, 4119700; 698900, 4119600; 
698800, 4119700; 698543, 4119957; 698558, 4119970; 698501, 4120012; 
698504, 4120069; 698626, 4120197; 698662, 4120077; 698694, 4120113; 
698668, 4121116; 698663, 4121510; 698594, 4121508; 698600, 4121600; 
699900, 4121600; 700000, 4120400; 700200, 4120400; 700200, 4122700; 
697000, 4122600; 696900, 4125100; 697700, 4125100; 697700, 4125300; 
697600, 4125400; 697700, 4125600; 698000, 4125700; 698200, 4125800; 
698300, 4126100; 698700, 4126500; 699500, 4126500; 699600, 4126300; 
returning to 699300, 4126300.
    (iv) Unit 7D: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Arena, Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 706800, 4120900; 706700, 
4120500; 706700, 4119700; 708100, 4119700; 708100, 4119600; 708000, 
4119500; 707900, 4119200; 707900, 4119000; 708000, 4118900; 708300, 
4118900; 708300, 4118100; 707900, 4118100; 707500, 4118500; 706500, 
4118500; 706000, 4118900; 705600, 4119300; 705200, 4119700; 704800, 
4120000; 704700, 4120100; 704700, 4120400; 705100, 4120400; 705100, 
4120600; 704900, 4120700; 704900, 4120800; 705100, 4120800; 704900, 
4121000; 705000, 4121100; 705100, 4121700; 705200, 4121700; 705300, 
4122000; 705700, 4122100; 705700, 4122200; 705400, 4122300; 705300, 
4122400; 705500, 4122600; 705400, 4122600; 705300, 4122500; 705200, 
4122500; 705100, 4122500; 704900, 4122500; 704900, 4122700; 704800, 
4122800; 704500, 4122800; 704300, 4122900; 704000, 4122800; 703900, 
4122900; 703400, 4124400; 703300, 4124600; 701300, 4126500; 700100, 
4127600; 700467, 4129067; 700500, 4129200; 700500, 4130600; 701000, 
4130600; 701000, 4130100; 701100, 4129800; 701200, 4129800; 701100, 
4130100; 701100, 4130600; 701700, 4130600; 701700, 4129200; 701800, 
4129200; 702800, 4129200; 703000, 4128800; 703300, 4128800; 703900, 
4128800; 703900, 4129000; 704200, 4129000; 704200, 4128500; 703300, 
4128400; 703400, 4128300; 703400, 4127900; 703500, 4127800; 703800, 
4127500; 703700, 4127300; 703500, 4127300; 703400, 4127100; 703400, 
4126100; 703500, 4126100; 704400, 4126100; 704300, 4126000; 704400, 
4125900; 704500, 4125300; 704500, 4124800; 705000, 4124800; 705000, 
4125300; 705700, 4125300; 705700, 4124900; 706600, 4125000; 706700, 
4123700; returning to 706700, 4122100.
    (v) Unit 7E: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Turner Ranch, Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 711500, 4122200; 
711500, 4121700; 711500, 4121200; 709900, 4121300; 709900, 4121900; 
709800, 4121900; 709800, 4121800; 709700, 4121500; 709500, 4121500; 
709300, 4121600; 708800, 4121400; 708700, 4121300; 706800, 4121300; 
returning to 706700, 4122100.
    (vi) Unit 7F: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Turner Ranch, Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 711200, 4120500; 711400, 4120400; 
711500, 4120500; 711600, 4119600; 711900, 4119600; 711900, 4119400; 
712100, 4119300; 712300, 4119300; 712300, 4119200; 712600, 4119200; 
712800, 4118800; 711600, 4118700; 711600, 4118500; 711400, 4118500;

[[Page 200]]

711300, 4118400; 711100, 4118100; 709900, 4118100; 709900, 4118800; 
709900, 4119000; 709700, 4119000; 709700, 4119600; 710300, 4119600; 
710300, 4119900; 710700, 4119900; 710700, 4120000; 710600, 4120000; 
710600, 4120100; 710700, 4120200; 710600, 4120300; 710700, 4120400; 
710700, 4120500; 710900, 4120400; 711100, 4120400; returning to 711200, 
4120500.

    (vii) Note: Unit 7 (Map 5) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.004
    

[[Page 201]]


    (12) Unit 8: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles San Guillermo, Lockwood Valley, Alamo Mountain, Lion Canyon, 
Topatopa Mountains. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 864689, 3849170; 865272, 3847801; 866149, 3846550; 
867028, 3843593; 867093, 3842494; 867037, 3842150; 866579, 3839353; 
865815, 3838706; 865267, 3839476; 864068, 3839404; 863282, 3837452; 
861766, 3835957; 860385, 3835574; 859656, 3836032; 858662, 3835872; 
857481, 3835501; 856246, 3836030; 854941, 3836052; 853594, 3836774; 
852265, 3837196; 851706, 3838166; 850507, 3838094; 849284, 3838422; 
848261, 3838762; 847708, 3839632; 847788, 3841642; 849375, 3841937; 
851020, 3842938; 851266, 3843856; 853063, 3845668; 853362, 3847390; 
854407, 3848355; 855307, 3848409; 857217, 3848323; 859016, 3848430; 
859968, 3849289; 861343, 3849773; 862794, 3850662; 863971, 3849428; 
returning to 864689, 3849170.

    (13) Note: Unit 8 (Map 6) follows:

[[Page 202]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.005

            Longhorn Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta longiantenna)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Contra Costa, 
Merced, and San Luis Obispo Counties, California, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
longhorn fairy shrimp

[[Page 203]]

(Branchinecta longiantenna) are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 23 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(2)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1: Contra Costa County.
    (i) Unit 1A: Contra Costa County. USGS 24,000 topographic quad Byron 
Hot Springs: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 614800, 4185400; 615100, 4185200; 615100, 4185500; 
615300, 4185500; 615400, 4185200; 615600, 4184900; 615800, 4184900; 
616000, 4184800; 616000, 4184700; 615800, 4184500; 615700, 4184500; 
615500, 4184200; 615100, 4184200; 614800, 4184200; 614700, 4184000; 
614600, 4184000; 614600, 4184500; 614900, 4185000; 614600, 4185300; 
614600, 4185900; 614700, 4185900; returning to 614800, 4185400.
    (ii) Unit 1B: Alameda County. USGS 24,000 topographic quad Byron Hot 
Springs: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 615500, 4181200; 615500, 4181100; 615600, 4181100; 615700, 
4181300; 615800, 4181200; 616000, 4180600; 616000, 4180500; 616200, 
4180200; 616200, 4179900; 615900, 4179900; 615900, 4179700; 616200, 
4179500; 616200, 4179000; 616100, 4179000; 615900, 4179200; 615900, 
4179400; 615700, 4179600; 615500, 4180100; 615100, 4180500; 614800, 
4180800; 614400, 4180900; 614100, 4181100; 614600, 4181500; 614700, 
4181500; 614700, 4181700; 614900, 4181700; 615200, 4181400; 615400, 
4181300; returning to 615500, 4181200.

    (iii) Note: Unit 1 (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 204]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.006

    (5) Unit 2: Merced County. USGS 24,000 topographic quads Gustine, 
Stevinson, San Luis Ranch: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 688600, 4128800; 689100, 
4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 689800, 4128500; 689900, 
4128300; 690200, 4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 
4125500; 692700, 4125500;

[[Page 205]]

693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 693300, 4123700; 
693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 694079, 4122821; 
694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 692200, 4122000; 
692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 691400, 4122800; 
691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 691267, 4123155; 
691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 691217, 4123291; 
691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 691126, 4123677; 
691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 691177, 4123739; 
691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 691195, 4123810; 
691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 691214, 4123980; 
691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 691127, 4124089; 
691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 690900, 4124400; 
690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 690582, 4124427; 
690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 690546, 4124493; 
690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 690500, 4124524; 
690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 690388, 4124590; 
690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 690083, 4124695; 
690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 689988, 4125006; 
689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 689819, 4125184; 
689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 689658, 4125595; 
689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 689630, 4125793; 
689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 689400, 4126600; 
689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 689134, 4126678; 
689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 689020, 4126961; 
688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 688913, 4127006; 
689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 688949, 4127292; 
688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 688823, 4127454; 
688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 688696, 4127650; 
688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; returning to 688300, 
4129000.

    (6) Note: Unit 2 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 206]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.007

    (7) Unit 3: San Luis Obispo County. USGS 24,000 topographic quads 
Simmler: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 774375, 3914002; 777312, 3913479; 778710, 3913564; 779726, 
3913325; 780573, 3912575; 780827, 3911688; 779496, 3910506; 779321, 
3910094; 780960, 3909492; 781390, 3909017; 782948, 3908110; 783520, 
3906942; 783765, 3906725; 783760,

[[Page 207]]

3906724; 782946, 3906690; 782936, 3906690; 782156, 3906654; 782132, 
3906653; 782082, 3908301; 780768, 3908263; 780485, 3908255; 780490, 
3908031; 780522, 3906619; 779393, 3906593; 777627, 3906558; 777613, 
3906978; 777456, 3906974; 777388, 3907272; 777578, 3909087; 777442, 
3909680; 774998, 3910333; 772742, 3911198; 772708, 3913400; 773483, 
3913848; returning to 774375, 3914002.

    (8) Note: Unit 3 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 208]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.008


[[Page 209]]



            Riverside Fairy Shrimp (Streptocephalus woottoni)

    (1) Critical habitat units for Ventura, Orange, and San Diego 
Counties, California, are depicted on the maps that follow.
    (2) Critical habitat consists of vernal pools, vernal pool 
complexes, and ephemeral ponds and depressions and their associated 
surrounding upslope areas with the soil and hydrologic regimes indicated 
on the maps below and in the legal descriptions.
    (3) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements for the 
Riverside fairy shrimp are those habitat components that are essential 
for the primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, reproduction, 
and dispersal. The primary constituent elements are found in those areas 
that support vernal pools or other ephemeral ponds and depressions, and 
their associated watersheds. The primary constituent elements determined 
essential to the conservation of Riverside fairy shrimp are:
    (i) Small to large pools or pool complexes that have the appropriate 
size and volume, local climate, topography, water temperature, water 
chemistry, soil conditions, and length of time of inundation with water 
necessary for Riverside fairy shrimp incubation and reproduction, as 
well as dry periods necessary to provide the conditions to maintain a 
dormant and viable cyst bank. Specifically, the conditions necessary to 
allow for successful reproduction of Riverside fairy shrimp fall within 
the following ranges:
    (A) Moderate to deep depths ranging from 10 in (25 cm) to 5-10 ft 
(1.5-3 m);
    (B) Pool or pond inundation lasting for a minimum of 2 months to 5-8 
months or more, i.e., a sufficient wet period in winter and spring 
months to allow the Riverside fairy shrimp to hatch, mature, and 
reproduce, followed by a dry period prior to the next winter and spring 
rains;
    (1) Water temperatures within the range of 41-77 degrees F (5-25 
degrees C);
    (2) Water chemistry with low total dissolved solids and alkalinity 
(means of 77 and 65 parts per million, respectively); and
    (3) Water pH within a range of 6.4-7.1.
    (ii) The immediately surrounding upslope area that provides the pool 
or pool complex with the following:
    (A) Hydrologic flows, both above-ground (sheet flow) and sub-surface 
through soil or sediments, to fill the pools and maintain the seasonal 
cycle of ponding and drying, at the appropriate rates;
    (B) A source of detritus and nutrients;
    (C) Sources of soil, ion and mineral transport to the pool or pool 
complex to provide and maintain the appropriate water chemistry 
conditions and impermeability of the pool basin(s); and
    (D) Habitat for animals that act as dispersers of cysts and vernal 
pool plant seeds or pollen, as well as habitat for the pollinators of 
the vernal pool plants that also form an integral part of the vernal 
pool's ecology.
    (iii) The size of the immediately surrounding upslope area varies 
greatly depending on a number of factors and has been assessed for each 
sub-unit. Factors that affect the size of the surrounding upslope area 
include surface and sub-surface hydrology, the topography of the area 
surrounding the pool or pools, the vegetative coverage, and the soil and 
bedrock substrate in the area. The upslope areas designated vary from a 
few acres to over 100 ac (40 ha) in size.
    (iv) Soils in the summit, rim and basin geomorphic positions with a 
clay component and/or an impermeable surface or subsurface layer that 
provide a unique assemblage of nutrient availability and redox 
conditions known to support vernal pool habitat. The biogeochemical 
environment strongly influences hydrologic properties and plays a 
critical role in nutrient cycling in vernal pool ecosystems (Hobson and 
Dahlgren 1998).
    (v) The matrix of vernal pools/ephemeral wetlands, the immediate 
upslope areas, upland habitats, and underlying soil substrates form 
hydrological and ecologically functional units. These features and the 
lands that they represent are essential to the conservation of the 
Riverside fairy shrimp. All lands identified as essential and proposed 
as critical habitat contain one or more of the primary constituent 
elements for the Riverside fairy shrimp.
    (4) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (5) Data layers defining map units were created on a base of USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat units were then mapped using 
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (6) Index map of critical habitat units for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 210]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.000

    (7) Unit 1: Ventura County, California.
    (i) Sub-unit 1A: City of Moorpark Greenbelt, north Tierra Rejada 
Valley from USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Simi Valley West. Lands bounded 
by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 329000, 3793300; 329400, 
3793300; 329400, 3792900; 329300, 3792900; 329300, 3792800; 329000, 
3792800; 329000, 3793300.
    (ii) Sub-unit 1B: south Tierra Rejada Valley. Lands bounded by the 
following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 330900, 3792500; 331100, 
3792500; 331100, 3792300; 331200, 3792300; 331200, 3792200; 331300, 
3792200; 331300, 3792100; 331400, 3792100; 331400, 3791400; 331300, 
3791400; 331300, 3791500; 331100, 3791500; 331100, 3791400; 331000, 
3791400; 331000, 3791300; 330600, 3791300; 330600, 3791900; 330500, 
3791900; 330500, 3792000; 330600, 3792000; 330600, 3792100; 330700, 
3792100; 330700, 3792300; 330800, 3792300; 330800, 3792400; 330900, 
3792400; 330900, 3792500.
    (iii) Note: Map of critical habitat Sub-units 1A and 1B for the 
Riverside fairy shrimp follows:

[[Page 211]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.001

    (8) Unit 2: Orange County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle 
map Santiago Peak.
    (i) Unit 2: Land within O'Neill Regional Park. Lands bounded by the 
following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 443400, 3725300; 443900, 
3725300; 443900, 3724900; 443800, 3724900; 443800, 3724800; 443600, 
3724800; 443600, 3724900; 443500, 3724900; 443500, 3725100; 443400, 
3725100; 443400, 3725300.
    (ii) Note: Map of critical habitat Unit 2 for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 212]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.002

    (9) Unit 3: North San Diego County, San Diego County, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Encinitas.
    (i) Unit 3: Land near Poinsettia Lane Commuter Station, Carlsbad 
Lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 470100, 
3663600; thence east to the North San Diego County Transit (NSDCT) 
boundary at UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3663600; thence south following the 
NSDCT boundary to UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 470300; thence south to UTM 
NAD27 coordinates 470300, 3663300; thence east to the NSDCT boundary at 
UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3663300; thence southeast following the NSDCT 
boundary lands to UTM NAD 27 x-coordinate 470400; thence south following 
UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 470400 to the NSDCT boundary; thence west and 
south following the NSDCT boundary to UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3662400; 
thence west following UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3662400 to the NSDCT 
boundary; thence northwest following the NSDCT boundary to UTM NAD27 x-
coordinate 470400; thence north along UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 470400 to 
UTM NAD27 coordinates 470400, 3662900; thence west to NSDCT lands at UTM 
NAD 27 y-coordinate 3662900; thence northwest following the NSDCT 
boundary returning to UTM NAD27 coordinates 470100, 3663600.
    (ii) Note: Map of critical habitat Unit 3 for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 213]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.003

    (10) Map Unit 4: South San Diego County, San Diego, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Imperial Beach.
    (i) Unit 4: Sweetwater Union High School District lands on Otay 
Mesa. Lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
498000, 3602800; 498100, 3602800; thence south to the Sweetwater Union 
High School District (SUHSD) boundary at UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 498100; 
thence west following the SUHSD boundary to UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 
498000; thence north following UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 498000 returning 
to UTM NAD27 coordinates 498000, 3602800.
    (ii) Note: Map of critical habitat Unit 4 for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 214]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.004

          San Diego Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta sandiegonensis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Orange and San Diego 
counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the San 
Diego fairy shrimp are:
    (i) Vernal pools with shallow to moderate depths (2 in (5 cm) to 12 
in (30 cm)) that hold water for sufficient lengths of time (7 to 60 
days) necessary for incubation, maturation, and reproduction of the San 
Diego fairy shrimp, in all but the driest years;
    (ii) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described in paragraph (2)(i) of this 
entry, providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate 
length in the pools (i.e., the vernal pool watershed); and
    (iii) Flat to gently sloping topography, and any soil type with a 
clay component and/or an impermeable surface or subsurface layer known 
to support vernal pool habitat (including Carlsbad, Chesterton, Diablo, 
Huerhuero, Linne, Olivenhain, Placentia, Redding, and Stockpen soils).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using a base of U.S. Geological Survey 7.5[min] quadrangle

[[Page 215]]

maps, and the critical habitat units were then mapped using UTM 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.000
    

[[Page 216]]


    (6) Unit 1: Orange County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle map Newport Beach.
    (i) Subunit 1C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 412805, 3721810; 412694, 3721593; 412668, 3721631; 412633, 
3721638; 412589, 3721661; 412539, 3721674; 412521, 3721676; 412436, 
3721693; 412465, 3721807; 412524, 3721907; 412616, 3721871; 412643, 
3721844; 412677, 3721827; 412744, 3721820; 412805, 3721810.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1, Subunit 1C (Map 2) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.001
    

[[Page 217]]


    (7) Unit 2: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle map Encinitas.
    (i) Subunit 2G. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 470300, 3663348; 470301, 3663346; 470323, 3663284; 470356, 
3663198; 470366, 3663172; 470382, 3663133; 470388, 3663119; 470399, 
3663092; 470399, 3663092; 470408, 3663065; 470418, 3663034; 470424, 
3663019; 470434, 3663002; 470442, 3662980; 470447, 3662960; 470459, 
3662925; 470476, 3662876; 470527, 3662739; 470531, 3662733; 470573, 
3662699; 470596, 3662675; 470596, 3662661; 470590, 3662625; 470584, 
3662600; 470568, 3662600; 470548, 3662600; 470500, 3662727; 470500, 
3662779; 470500, 3662800; 470492, 3662800; 470472, 3662800; 470430, 
3662912; 470400, 3662991; 470400, 3663000; 470397, 3663000; 470343, 
3663144; 470300, 3663252; 470300, 3663328; 470300, 3663330.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2, Subunit 2G (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 218]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.002

    (8) Unit 3: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle maps San Marcos, San Pasqual, and Ramona.
    (i) Subunit 3A. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 482519, 3667481; 482522, 3667490; 482746, 3667403; 482743, 
3667398; 482702, 3667300; 482600, 3667300; 482600, 3667232; 482556, 
3667127; 482419, 3667185; 482436, 3667237; 482433, 3667249; 482361, 
3667282; 482404, 3667370; 482467, 3667341; 482489, 3667400; 482500, 
3667400; 482500, 3667430.

[[Page 219]]

    (ii) Subunit 3C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 482054, 3666630; 481931, 3666341; 481800, 3666394; 481800, 
3666400; 481786, 3666400; 481600, 3666476; 481600, 3666500; 481542, 
3666500; 481586, 3666600; 481600, 3666600; 481600, 3666631; 481672, 
3666793. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
481457, 3666290; 481750, 3666164; 481792, 3666269; 481822, 3666258; 
481888, 3666230; 481888, 3666188; 481900, 3666135; 481900, 3666128; 
481900, 3666100; 481908, 3666100; 481910, 3666093; 481926, 3666044; 
481938, 3666006; 481954, 3665952; 481953, 3665951; 481872, 3665932; 
481893, 3665863; 481726, 3665813; 481717, 3665831; 481700, 3665878; 
481700, 3665900; 481692, 3665900; 481662, 3665987; 481637, 3666057; 
481623, 3666077; 481600, 3666087; 481600, 3666100; 481572, 3666100; 
481571, 3666100; 481406, 3666174; 481444, 3666261; 481455, 3666286.
    (iii) Subunit 3D. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 482905, 3666600; 482943, 3666600; 482951, 3666576; 
482878, 3666400; 482844, 3666400; 482800, 3666539; 482800, 3666566.
    (iv) Subunit 3E.1. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 505832, 3655634; 505833, 3655626; 505920, 3655402; 
506333, 3654967; 506504, 3655015; 506619, 3655015; 506795, 3655157; 
507417, 3654906; 507417, 3654593; 507713, 3654398; 507614, 3654262; 
506880, 3654385; 506410, 3654601; 505906, 3654692; 505398, 3655020; 
505000, 3655164; 505000, 3655250; 505000, 3655500; 505000, 3655532; 
505068, 3655630; 505199, 3655620; 505259, 3655600; 505403, 3655674; 
505514, 3655610; 505534, 3655573; 505660, 3655633; 505665, 3655636; 
505665, 3655636; 505692, 3655667; 505811, 3655671; 505832, 3655634; 
505832, 3655634.
    (v) Subunit 3E.2. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 509149, 3655266; 509295, 3655337; 509429, 3655206; 
509321, 3655061; 509275, 3655000; 509250, 3655000; 509250, 3654973; 
509174, 3654924; 509203, 3654625; 508642, 3654684; 508347, 3654484; 
508311, 3654514; 508344, 3654563; 508583, 3654776; 508577, 3654914; 
508488, 3654973; 508013, 3654934; 508029, 3655012; 507918, 3655209; 
507485, 3655284; 507301, 3655340; 507261, 3655424; 507203, 3655544; 
508301, 3655340; 508379, 3655228; 508429, 3655157; 508444, 3655152; 
508646, 3655084; 508760, 3655311; 509003, 3655196; 509131, 3655258.
    (vi) Subunit 3E.3. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 510101, 3654200; 510140, 3654178; 510198, 3654185; 
510244, 3654214; 510292, 3654240; 510317, 3654246; 510342, 3654205; 
510330, 3654166; 510323, 3654121; 510325, 3654076; 510321, 3654007; 
510314, 3654000; 510300, 3654000; 510300, 3653984; 510250, 3653938; 
510250, 3653938; 510210, 3653900; 510200, 3653900; 510152, 3653953; 
510148, 3653968; 510158, 3654004; 510110, 3654061; 510023, 3654160; 
510062, 3654196; 510098, 3654200; 510100, 3654200; 510100, 3654200. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 511334, 3655370; 
511340, 3655365; 511345, 3655353; 511397, 3655274; 511404, 3655265; 
511416, 3655273; 511460, 3655300; 511473, 3655300; 511500, 3655262; 
511500, 3655250; 511500, 3655218; 511500, 3655214; 511331, 3655102; 
511310, 3655088; 511300, 3655099; 511300, 3655100; 511299, 3655100; 
511292, 3655107; 511250, 3655150; 511208, 3655192; 511200, 3655200; 
511200, 3655265; 511250, 3655310; 511299, 3655354; 511333, 3655371.
    (vii) Subunit 3E.4. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 512552, 3654788; 512561, 3654778; 512553, 3654759; 
512542, 3654734; 512535, 3654677; 512533, 3654565; 512532, 3654547; 
512531, 3654515; 512530, 3654422; 512485, 3654420; 512487, 3654359; 
512313, 3654385; 512139, 3654363; 511954, 3654363; 511937, 3654353; 
511935, 3654350; 511874, 3654257; 511806, 3654242; 511802, 3654342; 
511873, 3654405; 511946, 3654429; 511947, 3654432; 511948, 3654430; 
512095, 3654525; 512106, 3654533; 512441, 3654750; 512442, 3654750; 
512443, 3654750; 512500, 3654787; 512500, 3654785; 512517, 3654799; 
512532, 3654810; 512533, 3654809.
    (viii) Note: Map of Unit 3, Subunits 3A, 3C, and 3D (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 220]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.003

    (ix) Note: Map of Unit 3, Subunits 3E.1, 3E.2, 3E.3, and 3E.4 (Map 
5) follows:

[[Page 221]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.004

    (9) Unit 4: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle maps Del Mar, La Jolla, and La Mesa.
    (i) Subunit 4A/B. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 485317, 3645035; 485298, 3645039; 485274, 3645039; 
485259, 3645035; 485245, 3645032; 485244, 3645032; 485241, 3645032; 
485226, 3645028; 485213, 3645026; 485209, 3645025; 485187, 3645020; 
485173, 3645017; 485153, 3645012; 485139, 3645009; 485128, 3645009; 
485114, 3645012; 485101, 3645018; 485090, 3645027; 485078, 3645035; 
485065, 3645043; 485052, 3645052; 485033,

[[Page 222]]

3645066; 485019, 3645074; 485009, 3645081; 485001, 3645086; 484987, 
3645095; 484971, 3645103; 484957, 3645107; 484940, 3645108; 484923, 
3645108; 484912, 3645106; 484901, 3645102; 484897, 3645098; 484890, 
3645093; 484886, 3645088; 484884, 3645085; 484883, 3645077; 484886, 
3645067; 484890, 3645055; 484899, 3645041; 484906, 3645034; 484915, 
3645027; 484921, 3645018; 484929, 3645005; 484935, 3644996; 484943, 
3644981; 484947, 3644970; 484947, 3644958; 484945, 3644947; 484939, 
3644936; 484933, 3644928; 484925, 3644922; 484916, 3644917; 484904, 
3644916; 484891, 3644921; 484873, 3644929; 484860, 3644939; 484860, 
3644939; 484850, 3644950; 484841, 3644961; 484829, 3644979; 484822, 
3644989; 484817, 3644997; 484812, 3645003; 484806, 3645012; 484796, 
3645023; 484795, 3645024; 484785, 3645030; 484771, 3645032; 484758, 
3645034; 484741, 3645032; 484729, 3645030; 484715, 3645026; 484709, 
3645024; 484704, 3645022; 484697, 3645018; 484691, 3645012; 484688, 
3645008; 484685, 3645004; 484675, 3644990; 484670, 3644981; 484665, 
3644967; 484662, 3644959; 484659, 3644953; 484656, 3644947; 484651, 
3644936; 484650, 3644934; 484639, 3644920; 484633, 3644912; 484629, 
3644906; 484622, 3644899; 484615, 3644896; 484605, 3644894; 484600, 
3644893; 484589, 3644893; 484575, 3644897; 484561, 3644903; 484550, 
3644908; 484539, 3644916; 484531, 3644929; 484523, 3644951; 484520, 
3644957; 484518, 3644963; 484517, 3644969; 484515, 3644975; 484512, 
3644991; 484507, 3645006; 484498, 3645018; 484491, 3645021; 484490, 
3645022; 484487, 3645023; 484472, 3645024; 484459, 3645023; 484458, 
3645023; 484458, 3645023; 484450, 3645023; 484426, 3645025; 484397, 
3645030; 484378, 3645037; 484367, 3645047; 484358, 3645060; 484352, 
3645072; 484349, 3645083; 484350, 3645096; 484357, 3645102; 484368, 
3645107; 484379, 3645111; 484393, 3645112; 484410, 3645110; 484414, 
3645108; 484414, 3645108; 484429, 3645101; 484441, 3645097; 484451, 
3645092; 484460, 3645085; 484472, 3645078; 484486, 3645069; 484498, 
3645062; 484498, 3645062; 484512, 3645058; 484515, 3645057; 484520, 
3645057; 484529, 3645056; 484544, 3645055; 484564, 3645053; 484586, 
3645053; 484600, 3645054; 484618, 3645060; 484632, 3645062; 484634, 
3645062; 484634, 3645062; 484636, 3645063; 484646, 3645065; 484649, 
3645066; 484650, 3645066; 484665, 3645068; 484691, 3645073; 484704, 
3645078; 484714, 3645087; 484718, 3645095; 484720, 3645102; 484721, 
3645109; 484721, 3645119; 484721, 3645123; 484720, 3645131; 484715, 
3645143; 484708, 3645157; 484701, 3645163; 484691, 3645171; 484683, 
3645177; 484669, 3645185; 484662, 3645189; 484651, 3645194; 484650, 
3645195; 484649, 3645196; 484647, 3645199; 484637, 3645201; 484622, 
3645206; 484621, 3645208; 484620, 3645208; 484620, 3645209; 484607, 
3645222; 484602, 3645230; 484598, 3645243; 484595, 3645261; 484592, 
3645283; 484589, 3645300; 484589, 3645300; 484588, 3645313; 484587, 
3645331; 484582, 3645350; 484578, 3645361; 484573, 3645370; 484564, 
3645376; 484555, 3645381; 484543, 3645385; 484531, 3645386; 484523, 
3645385; 484510, 3645382; 484502, 3645378; 484487, 3645371; 484478, 
3645370; 484465, 3645367; 484449, 3645365; 484440, 3645365; 484429, 
3645366; 484419, 3645373; 484412, 3645379; 484409, 3645388; 484406, 
3645399; 484406, 3645403; 484406, 3645404; 484406, 3645404; 484406, 
3645407; 484408, 3645413; 484413, 3645418; 484416, 3645426; 484423, 
3645430; 484427, 3645432; 484432, 3645436; 484440, 3645439; 484451, 
3645448; 484458, 3645454; 484465, 3645459; 484471, 3645465; 484476, 
3645472; 484479, 3645476; 484483, 3645490; 484483, 3645497; 484481, 
3645508; 484476, 3645519; 484470, 3645526; 484459, 3645530; 484447, 
3645535; 484422, 3645543; 484412, 3645546; 484406, 3645547; 484389, 
3645553; 484377, 3645559; 484367, 3645572; 484363, 3645578; 484362, 
3645585; 484363, 3645594; 484368, 3645599; 484368, 3645599; 484369, 
3645600; 484372, 3645605; 484377, 3645611; 484380, 3645626; 484382, 
3645635; 484386, 3645643; 484386, 3645644; 484387, 3645655; 484387, 
3645663; 484387, 3645664; 484385, 3645677; 484382, 3645688; 484371, 
3645700; 484363, 3645706; 484348, 3645713; 484335, 3645718; 484318, 
3645720; 484307, 3645718; 484297, 3645717; 484289, 3645713; 484283, 
3645711; 484274, 3645709; 484265, 3645712; 484255, 3645715; 484245, 
3645723; 484244, 3645723; 484237, 3645728; 484219, 3645734; 484209, 
3645732; 484197, 3645729; 484186, 3645724; 484177, 3645720; 484167, 
3645715; 484155, 3645708; 484143, 3645699; 484130, 3645694; 484115, 
3645691; 484104, 3645693; 484093, 3645702; 484085, 3645711; 484077, 
3645718; 484074, 3645730; 484076, 3645740; 484083, 3645747; 484098, 
3645753; 484110, 3645754; 484123, 3645755; 484135, 3645754; 484149, 
3645752; 484160, 3645755; 484167, 3645758; 484173, 3645761; 484178, 
3645765; 484182, 3645769; 484185, 3645774; 484191, 3645785; 484199, 
3645795; 484205, 3645802; 484212, 3645811; 484220, 3645818; 484229, 
3645823; 484238, 3645822; 484241, 3645821; 484244, 3645820; 484250, 
3645816; 484256, 3645810; 484258, 3645804; 484262, 3645801; 484264, 
3645799; 484267, 3645796; 484270, 3645794; 484277, 3645788; 484292, 
3645778; 484307, 3645773; 484325, 3645771; 484343, 3645773; 484353, 
3645775; 484362, 3645778; 484376, 3645781; 484384, 3645782; 484396, 
3645780; 484407, 3645778; 484417, 3645773; 484425, 3645770; 484442, 
3645764; 484445, 3645762; 484454, 3645753; 484460, 3645744; 484467, 
3645739; 484475, 3645734; 484485, 3645731; 484491, 3645730; 484499, 
3645727; 484504, 3645722; 484512, 3645718; 484518, 3645714; 484524, 
3645705; 484526, 3645693; 484527, 3645686; 484524, 3645666; 484521, 
3645660; 484515, 3645649; 484507, 3645632; 484505, 3645617; 484506, 
3645610; 484510, 3645602; 484511, 3645600; 484512, 3645600; 484512, 
3645600; 484512, 3645600; 484515, 3645597; 484521, 3645593; 484528, 
3645590; 484538, 3645589; 484548, 3645583; 484556, 3645574; 484566, 
3645563; 484571, 3645552; 484577, 3645534; 484581, 3645520; 484587, 
3645507; 484590, 3645496; 484594, 3645482; 484600, 3645459; 484604, 
3645442; 484610, 3645431; 484615, 3645423; 484621, 3645410; 484629, 
3645399; 484631, 3645397; 484631, 3645397; 484632, 3645396; 484637, 
3645392; 484643, 3645387; 484647, 3645382; 484647, 3645382; 484650, 
3645378; 484661, 3645369; 484674, 3645356; 484687, 3645347; 484700, 
3645335; 484704, 3645332; 484723, 3645320; 484737, 3645313; 484751, 
3645305; 484769, 3645292; 484789, 3645285; 484806, 3645275; 484810, 
3645274; 484817, 3645270; 484827, 3645268; 484835, 3645267; 484840, 
3645268; 484847, 3645269; 484853, 3645274; 484857, 3645279; 484860, 
3645287; 484865, 3645298; 484871, 3645306; 484879, 3645314; 484885, 
3645324; 484891, 3645331; 484899, 3645342; 484907, 3645352; 484916, 
3645357; 484924, 3645358; 484935, 3645357; 484945, 3645354; 484950, 
3645345; 484957, 3645338; 484965, 3645330; 484970, 3645324; 484976, 
3645317; 484985, 3645304; 484993, 3645296; 484996, 3645293; 485007, 
3645285; 485015, 3645282; 485021,

[[Page 223]]

3645281; 485031, 3645280; 485035, 3645280; 485044, 3645280; 485056, 
3645279; 485065, 3645279; 485076, 3645278; 485093, 3645273; 485113, 
3645266; 485126, 3645261; 485136, 3645258; 485144, 3645253; 485150, 
3645252; 485162, 3645242; 485175, 3645233; 485189, 3645219; 485202, 
3645210; 485214, 3645199; 485217, 3645198; 485219, 3645197; 485226, 
3645189; 485236, 3645180; 485246, 3645172; 485259, 3645165; 485274, 
3645158; 485286, 3645150; 485293, 3645147; 485304, 3645144; 485320, 
3645144; 485334, 3645145; 485351, 3645151; 485360, 3645156; 485367, 
3645162; 485369, 3645166; 485371, 3645171; 485372, 3645175; 485374, 
3645180; 485375, 3645189; 485374, 3645194; 485374, 3645205; 485376, 
3645221; 485379, 3645238; 485383, 3645255; 485388, 3645281; 485391, 
3645291; 485398, 3645304; 485405, 3645312; 485406, 3645312; 485390, 
3645351; 485385, 3645385; 485377, 3645442; 485356, 3645586; 485340, 
3645756; 485335, 3645772; 485318, 3645827; 485318, 3645827; 485310, 
3645851; 485309, 3645984; 485375, 3646007; 485375, 3646007; 485388, 
3646011; 485407, 3646016; 485485, 3646037; 485696, 3646058; 485786, 
3646083; 485789, 3646083; 485876, 3646098; 485954, 3646155; 486023, 
3646185; 486099, 3646175; 486160, 3646136; 486200, 3646117; 486222, 
3646106; 486223, 3646100; 486232, 3646056; 486215, 3645983; 486196, 
3645951; 486213, 3645920; 486218, 3645920; 486183, 3645872; 486189, 
3645811; 486190, 3645412; 485919, 3645438; 485918, 3645438; 485917, 
3645371; 486016, 3645368; 486080, 3645305; 486040, 3645234; 486027, 
3645244; 485982, 3645240; 485825, 3645240; 485751, 3645241; 485738, 
3645193; 485708, 3645150; 485701, 3645138; 485693, 3645136; 485681, 
3645130; 485679, 3645130; 485671, 3645127; 485656, 3645121; 485644, 
3645114; 485631, 3645108; 485623, 3645103; 485618, 3645100; 485615, 
3645098; 485599, 3645096; 485591, 3645094; 485586, 3645093; 485581, 
3645092; 485571, 3645092; 485561, 3645095; 485550, 3645099; 485533, 
3645100; 485533, 3645100; 485518, 3645103; 485504, 3645104; 485489, 
3645102; 485479, 3645100; 485470, 3645097; 485464, 3645092; 485461, 
3645088; 485451, 3645078; 485446, 3645072; 485445, 3645070; 485445, 
3645069; 485441, 3645060; 485440, 3645059; 485440, 3645058; 485440, 
3645052; 485385, 3645047; 485372, 3645046; 485369, 3645046; 485369, 
3645044; 485369, 3645023; 485365, 3645017; 485365, 3645016; 485364, 
3645016; 485364, 3645016; 485341, 3645027; 485326, 3645032; 485322, 
3645033.
    (ii) Subunit 4C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 490395, 3629279; 490395, 3629231; 490396, 3629048; 490358, 
3628917; 490295, 3628700; 490293, 3628636; 490280, 3628634; 490111, 
3628613; 490000, 3628601; 489913, 3628573; 489739, 3628518; 489724, 
3628567; 489718, 3628588; 489705, 3628631; 489842, 3628715; 489893, 
3628747; 489985, 3628789; 490101, 3628795; 490203, 3628901; 490202, 
3628998; 490304, 3629099; 490306, 3629152; 490301, 3629236; 490299, 
3629280; 490342, 3629279; 490364, 3629279.
    (iii) Subunit 4D. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 494410, 3622458; 494410, 3622458; 494415, 3622443; 
494429, 3622410; 494425, 3622393; 494409, 3622376; 494394, 3622372; 
494374, 3622371; 494341, 3622377; 494327, 3622361; 494325, 3622291; 
494300, 3622294; 494300, 3622300; 494250, 3622300; 494226, 3622303; 
494227, 3622331; 494234, 3622339; 494242, 3622347; 494240, 3622360; 
494228, 3622373; 494210, 3622384; 494200, 3622392; 494200, 3622400; 
494192, 3622400; 494186, 3622411; 494180, 3622431; 494100, 3622428; 
494102, 3622400; 494100, 3622400; 494100, 3622392; 494093, 3622379; 
494071, 3622370; 494044, 3622367; 494024, 3622370; 494006, 3622381; 
494000, 3622388; 494000, 3622400; 493991, 3622400; 493979, 3622418; 
493969, 3622437; 493839, 3622432; 493839, 3622463; 493839, 3622466; 
493839, 3622467; 493839, 3622468; 493867, 3622468; 494023, 3622470; 
494092, 3622471; 494099, 3622471; 494417, 3622476; 494417, 3622475; 
494417, 3622475. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 494403, 3622266; 494430, 3622258; 494439, 3622241; 494444, 
3622219; 494433, 3622200; 494400, 3622200; 494400, 3622136; 494399, 
3622134; 494389, 3622114; 494300, 3622115; 494300, 3622151; 494308, 
3622175; 494300, 3622214; 494300, 3622265.
    (iv) Subunit 4E. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 479564, 3643663; 479567, 3643643; 479569, 3643624; 479569, 
3643612; 479569, 3643604; 479565, 3643579; 479562, 3643558; 479558, 
3643541; 479555, 3643523; 479552, 3643502; 479550, 3643476; 479551, 
3643456; 479560, 3643436; 479574, 3643422; 479580, 3643414; 479580, 
3643414; 479590, 3643399; 479596, 3643380; 479600, 3643346; 479600, 
3643346; 479600, 3643346; 479596, 3643219; 479596, 3643164; 479605, 
3643123; 479608, 3643108; 479611, 3643082; 479612, 3643060; 479610, 
3643042; 479611, 3643020; 479606, 3643005; 479602, 3642994; 479597, 
3642980; 479594, 3642970; 479593, 3642966; 479590, 3642954; 479589, 
3642951; 479582, 3642943; 479575, 3642938; 479567, 3642936; 479565, 
3642937; 479564, 3642936; 479541, 3642932; 479537, 3642904; 479500, 
3642905; 479500, 3643000; 479400, 3643000; 479400, 3643055; 479400, 
3643061; 479400, 3643100; 479386, 3643100; 479377, 3643100; 479308, 
3643100; 479308, 3643103; 479252, 3643201; 479259, 3643248; 479330, 
3643265; 479376, 3643287; 479381, 3643289; 479403, 3643300; 479415, 
3643362; 479424, 3643410; 479428, 3643412; 479432, 3643426; 479443, 
3643437; 479443, 3643437; 479490, 3643487; 479502, 3643499; 479503, 
3643651; 479504, 3643652; 479511, 3643660; 479524, 3643673; 479548, 
3643698; 479553, 3643685; 479556, 3643684; 479559, 3643677; 479561, 
3643673.
    (v) Subunit 4F. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 479996, 3643593; 479997, 3643543; 479997, 3643513; 479913, 
3643503; 479900, 3643503; 479900, 3643577; 479900, 3643683; 479998, 
3643682.
    (vi) Subunit 4G. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 484021, 3642526; 484021, 3642515; 484019, 3642503; 484019, 
3642503; 484015, 3642495; 484008, 3642489; 484005, 3642487; 483999, 
3642483; 483988, 3642477; 483978, 3642473; 483969, 3642470; 483965, 
3642469; 483952, 3642466; 483943, 3642465; 483931, 3642465; 483921, 
3642466; 483909, 3642470; 483898, 3642470; 483891, 3642472; 483881, 
3642475; 483862, 3642479; 483847, 3642484; 483832, 3642490; 483823, 
3642494; 483823, 3642494; 483814, 3642497; 483795, 3642503; 483778, 
3642505; 483756, 3642504; 483742, 3642499; 483727, 3642491; 483712, 
3642484; 483696, 3642476; 483682, 3642473; 483669, 3642475; 483662, 
3642480; 483659, 3642490; 483659, 3642502; 483664, 3642514; 483682, 
3642533; 483690, 3642536; 483703, 3642538; 483721, 3642540; 483740, 
3642541; 483760, 3642541; 483777,

[[Page 224]]

3642538; 483788, 3642540; 483790, 3642540; 483805, 3642537; 483826, 
3642531; 483846, 3642527; 483865, 3642528; 483880, 3642532; 483882, 
3642532; 483898, 3642540; 483912, 3642548; 483927, 3642557; 483943, 
3642565; 483955, 3642571; 483968, 3642573; 483978, 3642570; 483988, 
3642566; 484001, 3642560; 484008, 3642553; 484016, 3642542; 484020, 
3642535.
    (vii) Subunit 4H. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 483842, 3642261; 483853, 3642265; 483867, 3642269; 
483879, 3642272; 483892, 3642272; 483905, 3642274; 483912, 3642274; 
483917, 3642275; 483933, 3642275; 483948, 3642277; 483964, 3642279; 
483976, 3642280; 483993, 3642281; 484005, 3642281; 484013, 3642279; 
484023, 3642276; 484028, 3642270; 484030, 3642263; 484030, 3642255; 
484029, 3642248; 484025, 3642241; 484020, 3642233; 484014, 3642224; 
484002, 3642214; 483985, 3642202; 483972, 3642193; 483953, 3642177; 
483939, 3642167; 483933, 3642159; 483933, 3642146; 483939, 3642132; 
483948, 3642118; 483954, 3642108; 483955, 3642106; 483955, 3642105; 
483934, 3642094; 483873, 3642068; 483839, 3642059; 483835, 3642058; 
483834, 3642058; 483819, 3642055; 483809, 3642053; 483796, 3642052; 
483747, 3642050; 483677, 3642050; 483628, 3642051; 483601, 3642056; 
483596, 3642059; 483549, 3642079; 483543, 3642082; 483549, 3642088; 
483558, 3642093; 483570, 3642095; 483580, 3642095; 483589, 3642094; 
483597, 3642092; 483606, 3642090; 483607, 3642090; 483607, 3642090; 
483635, 3642088; 483682, 3642088; 483719, 3642094; 483754, 3642105; 
483783, 3642129; 483796, 3642147; 483797, 3642148; 483803, 3642165; 
483806, 3642181; 483810, 3642198; 483814, 3642219; 483818, 3642238; 
483823, 3642249; 483824, 3642251; 483832, 3642258; 483841, 3642261.
    (viii) Subunit 4I. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 485100, 3641415; 485231, 3641411; 485237, 3641411; 
485445, 3641409; 485450, 3641409; 485450, 3641400; 485444, 3641310; 
485444, 3641310; 485438, 3641220; 485369, 3641214; 485290, 3641219; 
485258, 3641235; 485211, 3641234; 485143, 3641234; 485111, 3641262; 
485101, 3641270; 485069, 3641328; 485056, 3641340; 485041, 3641355; 
485022, 3641356; 485015, 3641375; 485004, 3641397; 485000, 3641419; 
485019, 3641424; 485035, 3641417; 485036, 3641417; 485039, 3641417.
    (ix) Subunit 4J. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 485600, 3639788; 485601, 3639788; 485612, 3639787; 485615, 
3639782; 485615, 3639781; 485609, 3639777; 485604, 3639774; 485600, 
3639771; 485595, 3639769; 485578, 3639758; 485558, 3639749; 485534, 
3639741; 485503, 3639730; 485490, 3639724; 485478, 3639714; 485466, 
3639709; 485445, 3639701; 485441, 3639700; 485417, 3639692; 485400, 
3639687; 485385, 3639682; 485363, 3639673; 485322, 3639658; 485308, 
3639654; 485285, 3639648; 485267, 3639644; 485247, 3639637; 485195, 
3639619; 485173, 3639614; 485170, 3639614; 485153, 3639615; 485139, 
3639618; 485125, 3639622; 485114, 3639632; 485106, 3639643; 485100, 
3639655; 485097, 3639660; 485095, 3639672; 485099, 3639680; 485100, 
3639681; 485102, 3639685; 485107, 3639693; 485112, 3639703; 485114, 
3639705; 485123, 3639716; 485131, 3639722; 485136, 3639730; 485134, 
3639744; 485125, 3639756; 485115, 3639770; 485104, 3639781; 485104, 
3639787; 485105, 3639787; 485104, 3639797; 485600, 3639797.
    (x) Subunit 4K. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 486900, 3633200; 486911, 3633200; 486913, 3633170; 486914, 
3633158; 486917, 3633125; 486934, 3632893; 486937, 3632893; 486941, 
3632892; 486943, 3632892; 486942, 3632891; 486940, 3632890; 486995, 
3632852; 486996, 3632831; 486996, 3632805; 486971, 3632804; 486964, 
3632804; 486964, 3632819; 486948, 3632822; 486941, 3632873; 486939, 
3632873; 486916, 3632876; 486915, 3632877; 486915, 3632877; 486909, 
3632877; 486903, 3632877; 486900, 3632877; 486895, 3632877; 486859, 
3632877; 486791, 3632884; 486731, 3632895; 486720, 3632900; 486693, 
3632912; 486682, 3632917; 486674, 3632921; 486668, 3632923; 486627, 
3632941; 486618, 3632944; 486596, 3632950; 486580, 3632937; 486579, 
3632937; 486400, 3632968; 486192, 3633005; 486136, 3633015; 486136, 
3633015; 486135, 3633139; 486200, 3633155; 486220, 3633160; 486220, 
3633161; 486331, 3633188; 486332, 3633188; 486332, 3633189; 486381, 
3633201; 486402, 3633206; 486482, 3633225; 486603, 3633253; 486689, 
3633272; 486690, 3633272; 486700, 3633274; 486771, 3633284; 486775, 
3633284; 486786, 3633284; 486900, 3633299.
    (xi) Subunit 4L. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 487340, 3633277; 487340, 3633277; 487361, 3633261; 487346, 
3633241; 487346, 3633241; 487346, 3633241; 487298, 3633197; 487280, 
3633208; 487280, 3633208; 487280, 3633209; 487268, 3633218; 487200, 
3633269; 487196, 3633272; 487160, 3633234; 487100, 3633264; 487073, 
3633277; 487065, 3633300; 487062, 3633309; 487053, 3633340; 487147, 
3633365; 487147, 3633366; 487152, 3633366; 487204, 3633380.
    (xii) Subunit 4M. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 487669, 3631049; 487669, 3631036; 487667, 3630972; 
487660, 3630780; 487672, 3630772; 487816, 3630687; 487818, 3630675; 
487828, 3630556; 487829, 3630556; 488292, 3630338; 488292, 3630320; 
488294, 3630143; 488295, 3630029; 488260, 3630028; 488195, 3630027; 
488076, 3630043; 487879, 3630039; 487830, 3630081; 487805, 3630102; 
487714, 3630177; 487798, 3630210; 487829, 3630273; 487830, 3630336; 
487830, 3630388; 487516, 3630559; 487501, 3630568; 487340, 3630655; 
487335, 3630674; 487313, 3630766; 487384, 3630777; 487428, 3630783; 
487503, 3630920; 487508, 3631141; 487677, 3631228; 487672, 3631125; 
487670, 3631078.
    (xiii) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunits 4A/B, 4G, 4H, 4I, and 4J (Map 
6) follows:

[[Page 225]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.005

    (xiv) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunits 4C, 4K, 4L and 4M (Map 7) 
follows:

[[Page 226]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.006

    (xv) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunit 4D (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 227]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.007

    (xvi) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunits 4E and 4F (Map 9) follows:

[[Page 228]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.008

    (10) Unit 5: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle maps Imperial Beach, Jamul Mountains, Otay Mesa, and Otay 
Mountain.
    (i) Subunit 5A. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 506870, 3606405; 506878, 3606405; 506888, 3606405; 506887, 
3606404; 506881, 3606394; 506880, 3606392; 506879, 3606390; 506882, 
3606388; 506874, 3606348; 506856, 3606282; 506837, 3606194; 506847, 
3606090; 506880, 3606025; 506858, 3606009; 506843, 3605998; 506802, 
3605981; 506795, 3605978; 506749, 3605974; 506739,

[[Page 229]]

3605981; 506713, 3605998; 506692, 3606035; 506675, 3606077; 506660, 
3606147; 506656, 3606157; 506647, 3606180; 506644, 3606186; 506636, 
3606200; 506625, 3606220; 506593, 3606288; 506586, 3606303; 506555, 
3606368; 506541, 3606400; 506539, 3606405; 506528, 3606429; 506522, 
3606487; 506609, 3606517; 506609, 3606518; 506613, 3606522; 506620, 
3606526; 506631, 3606530; 506657, 3606530; 506685, 3606523; 506688, 
3606523; 506691, 3606524; 506702, 3606526; 506707, 3606529; 506719, 
3606537; 506724, 3606543; 506728, 3606550; 506732, 3606567; 506733, 
3606573; 506734, 3606582; 506753, 3606589; 506741, 3606620; 506742, 
3606626; 506744, 3606633; 506745, 3606642; 506748, 3606650; 506754, 
3606656; 506760, 3606661; 506766, 3606664; 506773, 3606667; 506780, 
3606666; 506788, 3606665; 506793, 3606660; 506801, 3606654; 506806, 
3606648; 506813, 3606638; 506819, 3606631; 506827, 3606625; 506837, 
3606621; 506844, 3606619; 506846, 3606618; 506853, 3606616; 506857, 
3606614; 506858, 3606461; 506858, 3606449; 506858, 3606449; 506858, 
3606436; 506858, 3606427; 506858, 3606405; 506858, 3606405. Excluding 
land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 506704, 
3606405; 506655, 3606405; 506655, 3606405; 506655, 3606400; 506656, 
3606300; 506656, 3606200; 506656, 3606186; 506656, 3606186; 506706, 
3606186; 506831, 3606187; 506831, 3606252; 506847, 3606275; 506858, 
3606290; 506858, 3606290; 506858, 3606372; 506858, 3606392; 506858, 
3606405. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
505791, 3606031; 505841, 3605966; 505884, 3605895; 505914, 3605830; 
505935, 3605785; 505950, 3605753; 505951, 3605750; 505964, 3605715; 
505973, 3605708; 505983, 3605665; 505863, 3605614; 505847, 3605635; 
505834, 3605651; 505825, 3605658; 505797, 3605677; 505774, 3605686; 
505774, 3605767; 505774, 3605767; 505774, 3605807; 505774, 3606046; 
505774, 3606046.
    (ii) Subunit 5B. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 504332, 3605189; 504347, 3605165; 504372, 3605163; 504405, 
3605173; 504429, 3605160; 504432, 3605139; 504454, 3605119; 504474, 
3605134; 504505, 3605127; 504533, 3605097; 504559, 3605077; 504597, 
3605074; 504629, 3605076; 504630, 3604936; 504630, 3604918; 504629, 
3604782; 504627, 3604782; 504627, 3604746; 504626, 3604744; 504627, 
3604742; 504626, 3604631; 504603, 3604604; 504587, 3604590; 504573, 
3604589; 503692, 3604599; 503641, 3604600; 503620, 3604621; 503508, 
3604831; 503453, 3604971; 503470, 3604979; 503500, 3604973; 503517, 
3604970; 503525, 3604977; 503534, 3604982; 503556, 3604994; 503626, 
3604992; 503626, 3605008; 503626, 3605032; 503628, 3605033; 503628, 
3605033; 503705, 3605099; 503742, 3605171; 503743, 3605172; 503754, 
3605194. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
503241, 3604951; 503260, 3604945; 503260, 3604964; 503275, 3604981; 
503314, 3604988; 503319, 3604989; 503389, 3604822; 503508, 3604612; 
503537, 3604561; 503567, 3604506; 503620, 3604411; 503620, 3604400; 
503619, 3604330; 503617, 3604074; 503617, 3603990; 503609, 3603990; 
503569, 3603990; 503464, 3603991; 502923, 3603996; 502813, 3603997; 
502813, 3603997; 502800, 3604601; 502800, 3604620; 502799, 3604653; 
502800, 3604654; 502820, 3604686; 502830, 3604730; 502835, 3604781; 
502836, 3604804; 502994, 3604803; 502991, 3604794; 503003, 3604742; 
503041, 3604705; 503064, 3604692; 503074, 3604694; 503104, 3604726; 
503111, 3604741; 503137, 3604801; 503208, 3604801; 503208, 3604953.
    (iii) Subunit 5C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 505948, 3603807; 505970, 3603764; 505991, 3603750; 
506009, 3603736; 505983, 3603699; 505954, 3603652; 505908, 3603585; 
505841, 3603550; 505808, 3603538; 505522, 3603537; 505458, 3603536; 
505450, 3603546; 505435, 3603553; 505408, 3603570; 505401, 3603574; 
505369, 3603601; 505358, 3603624; 505365, 3603650; 505375, 3603667; 
505374, 3603667; 505390, 3603794; 505391, 3603794; 505416, 3603798; 
505467, 3603821; 505484, 3603845; 505500, 3603876; 505487, 3603903; 
505566, 3604008; 505566, 3604011; 505568, 3604010; 505578, 3604030; 
505600, 3604057; 505623, 3604065; 505623, 3604065; 505622, 3604070; 
505617, 3604088; 505625, 3604130; 505632, 3604141; 505633, 3604141; 
505633, 3604141; 505641, 3604152; 505675, 3604184; 505720, 3604211; 
505732, 3604218; 505732, 3604218; 505732, 3604218; 505785, 3604243; 
505820, 3604252; 505844, 3604235; 505902, 3604197; 505948, 3604161; 
505958, 3604137; 505958, 3604117; 505946, 3604091; 505926, 3604057; 
505920, 3604041; 505929, 3604037; 505942, 3604028; 505949, 3604021; 
505955, 3604011; 505961, 3603997; 505959, 3603982; 505951, 3603973; 
505948, 3603966; 505942, 3603961; 505929, 3603951; 505914, 3603946; 
505912, 3603945; 505912, 3603928; 505926, 3603866; 505936, 3603840.
    (iv) Subunit 5D. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 509019, 3602417; 509019, 3602284; 509015, 3602132; 509048, 
3602002; 509135, 3601973; 509203, 3602071; 509235, 3602133; 509236, 
3602136; 509268, 3602255; 509270, 3602335; 509272, 3602407; 509308, 
3602461; 509348, 3602490; 509438, 3602540; 509604, 3602573; 509727, 
3602641; 509821, 3602670; 509926, 3602613; 510009, 3602537; 510009, 
3602450; 509976, 3602327; 509915, 3602212; 509832, 3602096; 509727, 
3601865; 509712, 3601746; 509692, 3601743; 509659, 3601737; 509628, 
3601732; 509604, 3601726; 509576, 3601713; 509533, 3601697; 509504, 
3601687; 509419, 3601669; 509357, 3601654; 509354, 3601654; 509315, 
3601643; 509277, 3601623; 509010, 3601592; 508505, 3601541; 508494, 
3601540; 508266, 3601517; 508266, 3601517; 508266, 3601517; 508265, 
3601517; 507688, 3601459; 507688, 3601459; 507534, 3601443; 507508, 
3601733; 507507, 3601736; 507509, 3601735; 507571, 3601753; 507517, 
3601850; 507484, 3601937; 507560, 3601995; 507589, 3602056; 507582, 
3602147; 507614, 3602241; 507654, 3602208; 507690, 3602147; 507719, 
3602172; 507730, 3602248; 507737, 3602331; 507748, 3602410; 507787, 
3602450; 507813, 3602403; 507860, 3602320; 507921, 3602190; 507983, 
3602049; 508003, 3602033; 508113, 3601944; 508141, 3601999; 508161, 
3602070; 508181, 3602147; 508217, 3602168; 508243, 3602118; 508279, 
3602013; 508394, 3601901; 508524, 3601901; 508554, 3601918; 508651, 
3601973; 508712, 3602061; 508719, 3602071; 508719, 3602165; 508719, 
3602255; 508745, 3602302; 508795, 3602414; 508819, 3602464; 508839, 
3602504; 508867, 3602504; 508887, 3602499; 508907, 3602494; 508936, 
3602486; 509019, 3602425.
    (v) Subunit 5F. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 500168, 3603213; 500175, 3603212; 500176, 3603212; 500176, 
3603205; 500175, 3603200; 500174, 3603154; 500170, 3603022; 500168, 
3602973; 500167, 3602921; 500166, 3602890; 500165, 3602890; 500150, 
3602901; 500145,

[[Page 230]]

3602889; 500144, 3602888; 500084, 3602881; 500029, 3602874; 500047, 
3602855; 500052, 3602849; 500042, 3602844; 500028, 3602840; 500014, 
3602839; 500000, 3602840; 499992, 3602842; 499987, 3602844; 499974, 
3602850; 499969, 3602853; 499961, 3602857; 499950, 3602865; 499940, 
3602875; 499933, 3602885; 499942, 3602885; 499947, 3602885; 499952, 
3602885; 499956, 3602890; 499956, 3602971; 499956, 3602974; 499956, 
3602992; 499956, 3603141; 499964, 3603142; 500014, 3603147; 500048, 
3603151; 500046, 3603200; 500046, 3603215; 500046, 3603220; 500164, 
3603213. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
499760, 3602958; 499763, 3602950; 499763, 3602887; 499792, 3602887; 
499808, 3602860; 499825, 3602835; 499861, 3602824; 499904, 3602816; 
499951, 3602808; 499986, 3602804; 500000, 3602800; 500003, 3602796; 
500004, 3602796; 500018, 3602793; 500030, 3602787; 500042, 3602779; 
500052, 3602769; 500060, 3602758; 500066, 3602745; 500069, 3602731; 
500069, 3602728; 500070, 3602718; 500070, 3602716; 500076, 3602703; 
500080, 3602689; 500081, 3602676; 500080, 3602662; 500076, 3602648; 
500070, 3602636; 500062, 3602624; 500052, 3602614; 500041, 3602606; 
500028, 3602600; 500026, 3602600; 500025, 3602597; 500019, 3602585; 
500011, 3602573; 500001, 3602564; 500000, 3602563; 499990, 3602556; 
499977, 3602550; 499965, 3602546; 499963, 3602527; 499972, 3602500; 
499975, 3602477; 499969, 3602456; 499952, 3602435; 499929, 3602421; 
499913, 3602434; 499909, 3602430; 499897, 3602422; 499895, 3602421; 
499891, 3602411; 499891, 3602373; 499888, 3602336; 499887, 3602329; 
499876, 3602304; 499862, 3602296; 499828, 3602282; 499813, 3602276; 
499788, 3602265; 499750, 3602262; 499728, 3602264; 499717, 3602275; 
499710, 3602283; 499706, 3602313; 499684, 3602337; 499685, 3602340; 
499698, 3602361; 499703, 3602395; 499702, 3602396; 499696, 3602408; 
499695, 3602410; 499692, 3602422; 499692, 3602436; 499692, 3602444; 
499691, 3602448; 499675, 3602476; 499694, 3602512; 499724, 3602552; 
499748, 3602585; 499763, 3602614; 499765, 3602639; 499763, 3602641; 
499745, 3602636; 499706, 3602616; 499662, 3602599; 499641, 3602608; 
499629, 3602639; 499623, 3602686; 499599, 3602723; 499595, 3602715; 
499598, 3602705; 499600, 3602690; 499598, 3602677; 499594, 3602663; 
499592, 3602659; 499591, 3602656; 499588, 3602651; 499580, 3602639; 
499577, 3602636; 499577, 3602589; 499586, 3602524; 499588, 3602463; 
499563, 3602456; 499538, 3602479; 499502, 3602507; 499483, 3602555; 
499471, 3602590; 499437, 3602611; 499431, 3602650; 499429, 3602688; 
499407, 3602712; 499395, 3602747; 499389, 3602793; 499385, 3602832; 
499373, 3602870; 499351, 3602865; 499347, 3602855; 499328, 3602823; 
499318, 3602784; 499302, 3602767; 499276, 3602768; 499254, 3602783; 
499225, 3602803; 499224, 3602803; 499224, 3602802; 499232, 3602791; 
499238, 3602778; 499242, 3602764; 499247, 3602766; 499260, 3602767; 
499267, 3602766; 499274, 3602766; 499278, 3602765; 499281, 3602764; 
499288, 3602763; 499292, 3602761; 499294, 3602761; 499306, 3602759; 
499318, 3602753; 499330, 3602745; 499340, 3602735; 499348, 3602724; 
499353, 3602711; 499357, 3602698; 499358, 3602684; 499358, 3602681; 
499358, 3602680; 499360, 3602666; 499358, 3602652; 499355, 3602638; 
499350, 3602629; 499361, 3602628; 499374, 3602624; 499387, 3602618; 
499398, 3602610; 499407, 3602602; 499409, 3602601; 499416, 3602589; 
499422, 3602576; 499425, 3602567; 499426, 3602563; 499427, 3602549; 
499426, 3602535; 499422, 3602522; 499416, 3602509; 499411, 3602501; 
499417, 3602494; 499425, 3602483; 499428, 3602477; 499431, 3602474; 
499441, 3602465; 499449, 3602453; 499455, 3602440; 499458, 3602431; 
499459, 3602427; 499460, 3602413; 499459, 3602399; 499455, 3602386; 
499449, 3602373; 499441, 3602362; 499431, 3602352; 499424, 3602347; 
499425, 3602346; 499460, 3602319; 499485, 3602289; 499501, 3602264; 
499532, 3602246; 499549, 3602226; 499553, 3602205; 499550, 3602183; 
499555, 3602176; 499555, 3602176; 499559, 3602169; 499561, 3602164; 
499565, 3602150; 499566, 3602136; 499565, 3602122; 499561, 3602109; 
499558, 3602104; 499555, 3602097; 499547, 3602085; 499537, 3602075; 
499526, 3602067; 499513, 3602061; 499500, 3602057; 499486, 3602056; 
499472, 3602057; 499459, 3602061; 499446, 3602067; 499434, 3602075; 
499429, 3602080; 499422, 3602079; 499408, 3602081; 499395, 3602084; 
499382, 3602090; 499371, 3602098; 499361, 3602108; 499353, 3602119; 
499347, 3602132; 499346, 3602136; 499343, 3602145; 499342, 3602159; 
499343, 3602170; 499343, 3602173; 499347, 3602187; 499353, 3602199; 
499360, 3602210; 499359, 3602212; 499351, 3602245; 499356, 3602271; 
499347, 3602291; 499323, 3602295; 499298, 3602298; 499278, 3602309; 
499269, 3602305; 499256, 3602301; 499242, 3602300; 499228, 3602301; 
499215, 3602305; 499202, 3602311; 499190, 3602319; 499181, 3602329; 
499176, 3602335; 499184, 3602299; 499187, 3602288; 499176, 3602307; 
499174, 3602310; 499156, 3602340; 499154, 3602344; 499137, 3602396; 
499134, 3602404; 499133, 3602407; 499113, 3602496; 499110, 3602510; 
499107, 3602523; 499106, 3602527; 499105, 3602531; 499082, 3602625; 
499077, 3602646; 499075, 3602652; 499075, 3602668; 499072, 3602728; 
499072, 3602735; 499071, 3602748; 499075, 3602763; 499088, 3602809; 
499090, 3602814; 499096, 3602835; 499115, 3602853; 499119, 3602857; 
499137, 3602874; 499163, 3602885; 499198, 3602900; 499200, 3602901; 
499215, 3602907; 499243, 3602919; 499245, 3602920; 499251, 3602920; 
499308, 3602924; 499316, 3602925; 499327, 3602922; 499373, 3602911; 
499437, 3602860; 499440, 3602857; 499457, 3602838; 499463, 3602838; 
499558, 3602840; 499558, 3602990; 499661, 3602989; 499737, 3602987. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 498628, 3602069; 
498638, 3602063; 498692, 3602024; 498727, 3601981; 498745, 3601957; 
498752, 3601948; 498759, 3601937; 498766, 3601929; 498767, 3601929; 
498780, 3601925; 498793, 3601919; 498804, 3601911; 498814, 3601901; 
498822, 3601890; 498828, 3601877; 498832, 3601864; 498832, 3601863; 
498832, 3601855; 498868, 3601832; 498873, 3601829; 498923, 3601788; 
498966, 3601760; 498973, 3601760; 499043, 3601753; 499149, 3601715; 
499155, 3601713; 499221, 3601690; 499266, 3601661; 499266, 3601661; 
499307, 3601634; 499343, 3601618; 499343, 3601618; 499325, 3601653; 
499324, 3601659; 499324, 3601659; 499320, 3601682; 499346, 3601698; 
499389, 3601697; 499424, 3601689; 499449, 3601704; 499483, 3601715; 
499517, 3601715; 499532, 3601732; 499547, 3601770; 499559, 3601784; 
499585, 3601800; 499608, 3601782; 499633, 3601747; 499659, 3601712; 
499714, 3601684; 499763, 3601668; 499792, 3601630; 499824, 3601610; 
499838, 3601603; 499848, 3601619; 499896, 3601624; 499940, 3601606; 
499958, 3601597; 499984, 3601634; 500021, 3601684; 500044, 3601716; 
500045, 3601719; 500045, 3601719; 500089, 3601730; 500190, 3601721; 
500242, 3601714; 500245, 3601710; 500249, 3601711; 500249,

[[Page 231]]

3601709; 500267, 3601635; 500267, 3601634; 500274, 3601604; 500294, 
3601588; 500303, 3601557; 500308, 3601530; 500323, 3601507; 500342, 
3601488; 500340, 3601466; 500334, 3601439; 500341, 3601411; 500350, 
3601380; 500375, 3601350; 500380, 3601319; 500372, 3601300; 500372, 
3601299; 500369, 3601300; 500352, 3601304; 500322, 3601311; 500298, 
3601309; 500279, 3601300; 500274, 3601298; 500267, 3601300; 500248, 
3601308; 500211, 3601326; 500184, 3601327; 500163, 3601321; 500163, 
3601320; 500154, 3601304; 500152, 3601300; 500149, 3601296; 500133, 
3601264; 500120, 3601254; 500108, 3601231; 500107, 3601230; 500107, 
3601229; 500104, 3601204; 500064, 3601189; 500030, 3601181; 500003, 
3601183; 499982, 3601184; 499924, 3601177; 499905, 3601168; 499878, 
3601149; 499852, 3601133; 499822, 3601134; 499757, 3601145; 499711, 
3601147; 499651, 3601146; 499590, 3601148; 499557, 3601151; 499556, 
3601151; 499540, 3601152; 499512, 3601153; 499500, 3601152; 499471, 
3601148; 499429, 3601140; 499380, 3601146; 499345, 3601135; 499317, 
3601110; 499269, 3601093; 499249, 3601100; 499239, 3601146; 499227, 
3601146; 499194, 3601145; 499158, 3601143; 499137, 3601133; 499129, 
3601107; 499124, 3601078; 499098, 3601074; 499074, 3601079; 499061, 
3601055; 499065, 3601024; 499064, 3600987; 499049, 3600935; 499018, 
3600891; 498982, 3600880; 498970, 3600869; 498914, 3600841; 498851, 
3600818; 498757, 3600792; 498667, 3600774; 498571, 3600766; 498528, 
3600778; 498484, 3600804; 498435, 3600849; 498407, 3600889; 498376, 
3600936; 498349, 3600957; 498309, 3600976; 498270, 3600995; 498249, 
3600977; 498217, 3600951; 498210, 3600920; 498202, 3600891; 498203, 
3600889; 498204, 3600704; 498208, 3600700; 498208, 3600700; 498208, 
3600699; 498221, 3600669; 498234, 3600637; 498233, 3600631; 497938, 
3600602; 497938, 3600539; 497930, 3600538; 497768, 3600522; 497762, 
3600531; 497744, 3600568; 497727, 3600599; 497726, 3600600; 497711, 
3600627; 497687, 3600650; 497647, 3600666; 497616, 3600687; 497606, 
3600714; 497602, 3600738; 497622, 3600756; 497656, 3600760; 497697, 
3600761; 497738, 3600776; 497761, 3600802; 497790, 3600834; 497827, 
3600868; 497842, 3600880; 497864, 3600920; 497917, 3601050; 497926, 
3601090; 497924, 3601089; 497922, 3601094; 497923, 3601094; 497923, 
3601099; 497923, 3601136; 497924, 3601169; 497924, 3601201; 497924, 
3601264; 497924, 3601265; 497925, 3601391; 497925, 3601442; 497926, 
3601682; 497926, 3601686; 497940, 3601685; 497983, 3601684; 498048, 
3601683; 498275, 3601679; 498282, 3601678; 498285, 3601725; 498295, 
3601889; 498304, 3602048; 498306, 3602073; 498614, 3602069; 498615, 
3602069.
    (vi) Subunit 5G. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 499163, 3604679; 499168, 3604677; 499169, 3604676; 499169, 
3604671; 499174, 3604638; 499175, 3604631; 499177, 3604618; 499175, 
3604601; 499173, 3604575; 499176, 3604567; 499190, 3604533; 499200, 
3604524; 499227, 3604500; 499242, 3604487; 499250, 3604456; 499251, 
3604452; 499286, 3604445; 499299, 3604469; 499543, 3604452; 499556, 
3604416; 499565, 3604389; 499629, 3604368; 499699, 3604386; 499700, 
3604385; 499744, 3604322; 499744, 3604300; 499745, 3604266; 499747, 
3604175; 499748, 3604122; 499748, 3604122; 499749, 3604100; 499750, 
3604061; 499739, 3604057; 499700, 3604042; 499648, 3604021; 499618, 
3604022; 499549, 3604024; 499533, 3604008; 499525, 3604000; 499500, 
3603974; 499440, 3603913; 499439, 3603900; 499431, 3603830; 499429, 
3603817; 499404, 3603839; 499398, 3603849; 499369, 3603891; 499356, 
3603915; 499337, 3603927; 499328, 3603924; 499305, 3603918; 499263, 
3603904; 499237, 3603929; 499238, 3603972; 499247, 3604004; 499245, 
3604008; 499242, 3604014; 499239, 3604020; 499237, 3604027; 499236, 
3604034; 499235, 3604041; 499235, 3604048; 499236, 3604055; 499237, 
3604058; 499228, 3604075; 499190, 3604094; 499200, 3604109; 499218, 
3604140; 499258, 3604151; 499259, 3604151; 499270, 3604156; 499292, 
3604156; 499325, 3604156; 499377, 3604142; 499427, 3604118; 499460, 
3604091; 499487, 3604114; 499517, 3604142; 499557, 3604141; 499570, 
3604141; 499593, 3604115; 499622, 3604098; 499646, 3604112; 499648, 
3604135; 499644, 3604167; 499640, 3604175; 499620, 3604210; 499579, 
3604252; 499575, 3604255; 499557, 3604274; 499551, 3604279; 499533, 
3604297; 499474, 3604333; 499452, 3604342; 499412, 3604360; 499376, 
3604370; 499328, 3604385; 499258, 3604401; 499240, 3604407; 499213, 
3604414; 499162, 3604442; 499150, 3604454; 499138, 3604466; 499124, 
3604500; 499124, 3604501; 499123, 3604508; 499118, 3604536; 499111, 
3604581; 499110, 3604584; 499109, 3604607; 499108, 3604623; 499108, 
3604623; 499107, 3604623; 499106, 3604640; 499103, 3604677; 499103, 
3604682; 499120, 3604694; 499120, 3604695; 499121, 3604695. Land bounded 
by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 498823, 3603831; 498873, 
3603865; 498928, 3603903; 498930, 3603895; 498938, 3603850; 498912, 
3603794; 498870, 3603746; 498833, 3603700; 498795, 3603670; 498762, 
3603651; 498719, 3603629; 498670, 3603600; 498663, 3603579; 498678, 
3603566; 498669, 3603545; 498651, 3603535; 498622, 3603534; 498625, 
3603525; 498634, 3603530; 498648, 3603533; 498661, 3603535; 498675, 
3603533; 498689, 3603530; 498701, 3603524; 498713, 3603516; 498723, 
3603506; 498731, 3603495; 498737, 3603482; 498740, 3603468; 498741, 
3603463; 498747, 3603476; 498755, 3603484; 498773, 3603507; 498810, 
3603545; 498859, 3603574; 498901, 3603605; 498943, 3603631; 498976, 
3603632; 499011, 3603645; 499027, 3603658; 499026, 3603657; 499024, 
3603656; 499010, 3603652; 498996, 3603651; 498983, 3603652; 498969, 
3603656; 498960, 3603660; 498956, 3603662; 498945, 3603670; 498935, 
3603680; 498927, 3603691; 498921, 3603704; 498918, 3603717; 498916, 
3603731; 498916, 3603732; 498918, 3603745; 498921, 3603759; 498927, 
3603771; 498935, 3603783; 498945, 3603792; 498956, 3603800; 498969, 
3603806; 498983, 3603810; 498988, 3603810; 498996, 3603811; 499010, 
3603810; 499024, 3603806; 499036, 3603800; 499048, 3603792; 499058, 
3603783; 499066, 3603771; 499072, 3603759; 499075, 3603745; 499076, 
3603731; 499075, 3603717; 499072, 3603704; 499066, 3603691; 499058, 
3603680; 499056, 3603679; 499082, 3603687; 499082, 3603687; 499088, 
3603650; 499088, 3603612; 499094, 3603574; 499107, 3603535; 499120, 
3603511; 499139, 3603492; 499127, 3603448; 499102, 3603430; 499075, 
3603416; 499056, 3603387; 499061, 3603365; 499101, 3603365; 499143, 
3603379; 499174, 3603384; 499205, 3603385; 499211, 3603370; 499223, 
3603341; 499229, 3603313; 499237, 3603306; 499241, 3603296; 499242, 
3603293; 499246, 3603283; 499249, 3603265; 499248, 3603257; 499248, 
3603254; 499247, 3603250; 499247, 3603249; 499244, 3603249; 499218, 
3603250; 499214, 3603250; 499024, 3603257; 499021, 3603257; 499021, 
3603258; 499023, 3603301; 499025, 3603366; 499026, 3603409; 499067, 
3603488; 499062, 3603580; 499036, 3603611;

[[Page 232]]

499033, 3603608; 499030, 3603605; 498978, 3603558; 498955, 3603537; 
498939, 3603507; 498935, 3603498; 498891, 3603486; 498787, 3603476; 
498783, 3603476; 498784, 3603469; 498796, 3603264; 498780, 3603265; 
498746, 3603266; 498638, 3603269; 498631, 3603269; 498450, 3603275; 
498389, 3603277; 498348, 3603279; 498341, 3603279; 498341, 3603310; 
498341, 3603354; 498340, 3603460; 498340, 3603493; 498339, 3603675; 
498466, 3603673; 498564, 3603672; 498745, 3603667; 498786, 3603788; 
498788, 3603795; 498793, 3603800; 498800, 3603808; 498818, 3603827. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 499520, 3603710; 
499537, 3603690; 499502, 3603686; 499500, 3603686; 499465, 3603682; 
499465, 3603676; 499467, 3603527; 499468, 3603437; 499470, 3603335; 
499470, 3603331; 499475, 3603330; 499515, 3603321; 499527, 3603292; 
499528, 3603290; 499542, 3603257; 499546, 3603249; 499537, 3603249; 
499468, 3603247; 499445, 3603247; 499443, 3603247; 499367, 3603246; 
499358, 3603246; 499295, 3603248; 499267, 3603249; 499267, 3603249; 
499267, 3603250; 499268, 3603254; 499276, 3603292; 499277, 3603296; 
499285, 3603334; 499289, 3603354; 499297, 3603389; 499309, 3603417; 
499330, 3603436; 499349, 3603447; 499351, 3603462; 499353, 3603474; 
499347, 3603487; 499328, 3603492; 499281, 3603507; 499260, 3603569; 
499265, 3603615; 499261, 3603624; 499258, 3603652; 499257, 3603663; 
499255, 3603681; 499265, 3603698; 499283, 3603709; 499294, 3603710; 
499300, 3603714; 499312, 3603709; 499313, 3603709; 499328, 3603706; 
499332, 3603704; 499348, 3603695; 499382, 3603690; 499383, 3603690; 
499430, 3603695; 499486, 3603704; 499497, 3603706.
    (vii) Subunit 5H. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 507788, 3609712; 507858, 3609742; 507950, 3609771; 
508044, 3609778; 508178, 3609744; 508218, 3609710; 508262, 3609710; 
508280, 3609740; 508330, 3609757; 508397, 3609740; 508403, 3609790; 
508604, 3609787; 508699, 3609699; 508787, 3609559; 508746, 3609407; 
508557, 3609308; 508392, 3609308; 508090, 3609118; 507643, 3609056; 
507269, 3609054; 507257, 3609091; 507269, 3609148; 507269, 3609191; 
507290, 3609251; 507329, 3609280; 507389, 3609280; 507367, 3609319; 
507310, 3609369; 507310, 3609419; 507338, 3609448; 507401, 3609470; 
507382, 3609518; 507394, 3609547; 507391, 3609636; 507388, 3609713.
    (viii) Subunit 5I. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 522790, 3603588; 522715, 3603505; 522712, 3603500; 
522700, 3603500; 522700, 3603479; 522699, 3603478; 522663, 3603371; 
522692, 3603132; 522639, 3603116; 522566, 3603131; 522529, 3603165; 
522517, 3603225; 522514, 3603355; 522496, 3603446; 522488, 3603478; 
522497, 3603494; 522563, 3603563; 522641, 3603627; 522720, 3603689; 
522759, 3603708; 522791, 3603699; 522800, 3603685; 522800, 3603617.
    (ix) Note: Map of Unit 5, Subunits 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5H (Map 10) 
follows:

[[Page 233]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.009

    (x) Note: Map of Unit 5, Subunits 5F and 5G (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 234]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.010

    (xi) Note: Map of Unit 5, Subunit 5I (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 235]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.011

             Vernal Pool Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta lynchi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Jackson County, Oregon, 
and Alameda, Amador, Butte, Contra Costa, Fresno, Kings, Madera, 
Mariposa, Merced, Monterey, Napa, Placer, Sacramento, San Benito, San 
Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Shasta, Solano, Stanislaus, 
Tehama, Tulare, Ventura, and Yuba Counties, California on the map below:

[[Page 236]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for vernal 
pool fairy shrimp (Branchinecta lynchi) are the habitat components that 
provide:
    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 18 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(3)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1: Jackson County, Oregon
    (i) Unit 1A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 514300, 4710800; 514300, 4710300; 514100, 4710300; 
514100, 4709900; 513900, 4709900; 513900, 4709700; 513600, 4709700; 
513600, 4709800; 513500, 4709800; 513500, 4710000; 513700, 4710000; 
513700, 4710300; 513200, 4710300; 513200, 4710600; 513100, 4710600; 
513100, 4710800; returning to 514300, 4710800;
    (ii) Unit 1B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 514100, 4707500; 514100, 4707300; 514000, 4707300; 
514000, 4707200; 513900, 4707200; 513900, 4707000; 513600, 4707000; 
513600, 4707300; 513700, 4707300; 513700, 4707400; 513800, 4707400; 
513800, 4707500; 513400, 4707500; 513400, 4708000; 514700, 4708000; 
514700, 4707700; 514600, 4707700; 514600, 4707600; 514200, 4707600; 
514200, 4707500; returning to 514100, 4707500;
    (iii) Unit 1C: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 511800, 4707800; 511800, 4707300; 511900, 4707300; 
511900, 4706800; 512000, 4706800; 512000, 4706600; 511800, 4706600; 
511800, 4706700; 511300, 4706700; 511300, 4706800; 511200, 4706800; 
511200, 4706900; 511100, 4706900; 511100, 4707000; 511000, 4707000; 
511000, 4707200; 511100, 4707200; 511100, 4707300; 511200, 4707300; 
511200, 4707400; 511100, 4707400; 511100, 4707500; 511200, 4707500; 
511200, 4707600; 511400, 4707600; 511400, 4707700; 511600, 4707700; 
511600, 4707800; returning to 511800, 4707800.
    (iv) Unit 1D: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 515900, 4706700; 515900, 4706500; 516000, 4706500; 
516000, 4706400; 516100, 4706400; 516100, 4706600; 516000, 4706600; 
516000, 4706700; 515900, 4706700; 515900, 4707000; 516200, 4707000; 
516200, 4706900; 516300, 4706900; 516300, 4706700; 516400, 4706700; 
516400, 4706800; 516500, 4706800; 516500, 4707000; 516700, 4707000; 
516700, 4706900; 516900, 4706900; 516900, 4707000; 517000, 4707000; 
517000, 4707100; 517100, 4707100; 517100, 4706900; 517400, 4706900; 
517400, 4706700; 517300, 4706700; 517300, 4706500; 517200, 4706500; 
517200, 4706400; 517100, 4706400; 517100, 4706300; 516700, 4706300; 
516700, 4705600; 516500, 4705600; 516500, 4705500; 516600, 4705500; 
516600, 4705400; 516700, 4705400; 516700, 4704800; 516600, 4704800; 
516600, 4704600; 516300, 4704600; 516300, 4704500; 516400, 4704500; 
516400, 4704400; 516500, 4704400; 516500, 4704300; 515800, 4704300; 
515800, 4704600; 516000, 4704600; 516000, 4704700; 515500, 4704700; 
515500, 4704800; 515400, 4704800; 515400, 4705100; 515500, 4705100; 
515500, 4705200; 515700, 4705200; 515700, 4705300; 515800, 4705300; 
515800, 4705900; 515700, 4705900; 515700, 4706200; 515600, 4706200; 
515600, 4706400; 515500, 4706400; 515500, 4706500; 515100, 4706500; 
515100, 4706700; 515000, 4706700; 515000, 4706900; 514700, 4706900; 
514700, 4707000; 514600, 4707000; 514600, 4707200; 514700, 4707200; 
514700, 4707300; 515000, 4707300; 515000, 4707200; 515100, 4707200; 
515100, 4707100; 515200, 4707100; 515200, 4707000; 515300, 4707000; 
515300, 4706800; 515400, 4706800; 515400, 4706700; 515500, 4706700; 
515500, 4706600; 515600, 4706600; 515600, 4706700; returning to 515900, 
4706700;
    (v) Unit 1E: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N):510800, 4707100; 510800, 4706900; 511000, 4706900; 
511000, 4706500; 510700, 4706500; 510700, 4706300; 510500, 4706300; 
510500, 4706000; 510400, 4706000; 510400, 4706100; 510300, 4706100; 
510300, 4706300; 510100, 4706300; 510100, 4706400; 510000, 4706400; 
510000, 4706500; 509800, 4706500; 509800, 4706700; 510000, 4706700;

[[Page 237]]

510000, 4706900; 510100, 4706900; 510100, 4707000; 510200, 4707000; 
510200, 4706900; 510500, 4706900; 510500, 4707000; 510600, 4707000; 
510600, 4707100; returning to 510800, 4707100.
    (vi) Unit 1F: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 511300, 4706000; 511300, 4705900; 511500, 4705900; 
511500, 4705100; 511400, 4705100; 511400, 4704800; 511200, 4704800; 
511200, 4705000; 511000, 4705000; 511000, 4705200; 510900, 4705200; 
510900, 4705300; 510800, 4705300; 510800, 4705900; 511000, 4705900; 
511000, 4706000; 511300, 4706000; excluding 511200, 4705500; 511200, 
4705300; 511300, 4705300; 511300, 4705500; returning to 511200, 4705500;
    (vii) Unit 1G: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 517600, 4705100; 517600, 4705000; 517800, 4705000; 
517800, 4704900; 517900, 4704900; 517900, 4704800; 519100, 4704800; 
519100, 4704700; 519300, 4704700; 519300, 4704600; 519400, 4704600; 
519400, 4704300; 519100, 4704300; 519100, 4704200; 518600, 4704200; 
518600, 4704100; 517900, 4704100; 517900, 4704200; 517700, 4704200; 
517700, 4704000; 517200, 4704000; 517200, 4704100; 517100, 4704100; 
517100, 4704300; 517000, 4704300; 517000, 4704700; 516900, 4704700; 
516900, 4704900; 517000, 4704900; 517000, 4705000; 517100, 4705000; 
517100, 4705100; returning to 517600, 4705100
    (5) Unit 2: Jackson County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 2A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 514200, 4699200; 514200, 4698800; 514300, 4698800; 
514300, 4698900; 514400, 4698900; 514400, 4699000; 514900, 4699000; 
514900, 4698900; 515100, 4698900; 515100, 4699100; 515200, 4699100; 
515200, 4699000; 515500, 4699000; 515500, 4698800; 515600, 4698800; 
515600, 4699000; 515700, 4699000; 515700, 4698900; 515800, 4698900; 
515800, 4698500; 515500, 4698500; 515500, 4698700; 515400, 4698700; 
515400, 4698600; 515300, 4698600; 515300, 4698500; 515100, 4698500; 
515100, 4698600; 514900, 4698600; 514900, 4698500; 514400, 4698500; 
514400, 4698600; 514300, 4698600; 514300, 4698400; 513400, 4698400; 
513400, 4698500; 513300, 4698500; 513300, 4698600; 513400, 4698600; 
513400, 4698700; 513500, 4698700; 513500, 4698800; 513700, 4698800; 
513700, 4699000; 513800, 4699000; 513800, 4699100; 513900, 4699100; 
513900, 4699200; returning to 514200, 4699200.
    (ii) Unit 2B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 517300, 4698400; 517300, 4698300; 517500, 4698300; 
517500, 4698200; 517600, 4698200; 517600, 4698300; 517900, 4698300; 
517900, 4697800; 518500, 4697800; 518500, 4697700; 518600, 4697700; 
518600, 4697600; 518800, 4697600; 518800, 4697700; 519100, 4697700; 
519100, 4697600; 519300, 4697600; 519300, 4697500; 519400, 4697500; 
519400, 4697400; 519500, 4697400; 519500, 4697300; 519700, 4697300; 
519700, 4697200; 519800, 4697200; 519800, 4697100; 520000, 4697100; 
520000, 4696800; 519900, 4696800; 519900, 4696700; 520400, 4696700; 
520400, 4696600; 520500, 4696600; 520500, 4696300; 520400, 4696300; 
520400, 4696100; 520500, 4696100; 520500, 4696200; 520600, 4696200; 
520600, 4696100; 520700, 4696100; 520700, 4695900; 520600, 4695900; 
520600, 4695800; 520500, 4695800; 520500, 4695500; 520700, 4695500; 
520700, 4695400; 520800, 4695400; 520800, 4694400; 520700, 4694400; 
520700, 4694500; 520500, 4694500; 520500, 4694600; 520400, 4694600; 
520400, 4694700; 520300, 4694700; 520300, 4694800; 519900, 4694800; 
519900, 4694900; 519500, 4694900; 519500, 4695200; 519400, 4695200; 
519400, 4695600; 519300, 4695600; 519300, 4695800; 519200, 4695800; 
519200, 4695900; 519100, 4695900; 519100, 4696000; 519000, 4696000; 
519000, 4696200; 519300, 4696200; 519300, 4696300; 519100, 4696300; 
519100, 4696400; 518900, 4696400; 518900, 4696500; 518800, 4696500; 
518800, 4696400; 518600, 4696400; 518600, 4696700; 518500, 4696700; 
518500, 4696800; 518400, 4696800; 518400, 4696900; 518300, 4696900; 
518300, 4697000; 518200, 4697000; 518200, 4697100; 518100, 4697100; 
518100, 4697200; 517600, 4697200; 517600, 4697300; 517300, 4697300; 
517300, 4697400; 517100, 4697400; 517100, 4697600; 517000, 4697600; 
517000, 4697800; 516900, 4697800; 516900, 4698400; returning to 517300, 
4698400.
    (iii) Unit 2C: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 516100, 4697800; 516100, 4697400; 515000, 4697400; 
515000, 4697800; 515200, 4697800; 515200, 4697700; 515300, 4697700; 
515300, 4697800; returning to 516100, 4697800.
    (iv) Unit 2D. Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 517000, 4697200; 517000, 4697100; 517200, 4697100; 
517200, 4697000; 517300, 4697000; 517300, 4696900; 517400, 4696900; 
517400, 4696600; 517200, 4696600; 517200, 4696700; 516800, 4696700; 
516800, 4696600; 516300, 4696600; 516300, 4696500; 516200, 4696500; 
516200, 4696200; 515900, 4696200; 515900, 4696900; 516100, 4696900; 
516100, 4697000; 516500, 4697000; 516500, 4697100; 516800, 4697100; 
516800, 4697200; returning to 517000, 4697200.
    (v) Unit 2E: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 515500, 4696600; 515500, 4696400; 515100, 4696400; 
515100, 4696300; 515200, 4696300; 515200, 4695800; 515000, 4695800; 
515000, 4695900; 514500, 4695900; 514500, 4695800; 514300, 4695800; 
514300, 4695900; 514200, 4695900; 514200, 4696000; 514100, 4696000; 
514100, 4695900; 514000, 4695900; 514000, 4695800; 513900, 4695800; 
513900, 4695900; 513800, 4695900; 513800, 4696600; 513500, 4696600; 
513500, 4696800; 515600, 4696800; 515600, 4696600; returning to 515500, 
4696600; excluding 514500, 4696500; 514500, 4696400; 514300, 4696400; 
514300, 4696500; 514200, 4696500; 514200, 4696400; 514100, 4696400; 
514100, 4696300; 514700, 4696300; 514700, 4696500; returning to 514500, 
4696500.
    (6) Unit 3: Jackson County, Oregon.

[[Page 238]]

    (i) Unit 3A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 511600, 4698900; 511600, 4699000; 511400, 4699000; 
511400, 4699100; 511100, 4699100; 511100, 4699200; 510700, 4699200; 
510700, 4699300; 510600, 4699300; 510600, 4699500; 510900, 4699500; 
510900, 4699600; 511200, 4699600; 511200, 4699700; 511300, 4699700; 
511300, 4699900; 511400, 4699900; 511400, 4700000; 511500, 4700000; 
511500, 4699900; 511600, 4699900; 511600, 4699800; 511700, 4699800; 
511700, 4699900; 511900, 4699900; 511900, 4698900; returning to 511600, 
4698900.
    (ii) Unit 3B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point, Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 511600, 4698900; 511600, 4698600; 
511300, 4698600; 511300, 4698700; 511200, 4698700; 511200, 4698600; 
511000, 4698600; 511000, 4698500; 510700, 4698500; 510700, 4698600; 
510500, 4698600; 510500, 4698500; 509600, 4698500; 509600, 4698100; 
509400, 4698100; 509400, 4698000; 509200, 4698000; 509200, 4697800; 
509300, 4697800; 509300, 4697600; 509400, 4697600; 509400, 4697200; 
509500, 4697200; 509500, 4697000; 510100, 4697000; 510100, 4697100; 
511700, 4697100; 511700, 4697000; 511900, 4697000; 511900, 4696400; 
510800, 4696400; 510800, 4696300; 510600, 4696300; 510600, 4696400; 
510300, 4696400; 510300, 4696500; 509700, 4696500; 509700, 4696600; 
509600, 4696600; 509600, 4696500; 508900, 4696500; 508900, 4696600; 
508600, 4696600; 508600, 4696700; 508400, 4696700; 508400, 4696800; 
508300, 4696800; 508300, 4696900; 508200, 4696900; 508200, 4697000; 
508100, 4697000; 508100, 4697100; 508000, 4697100; 508000, 4697300; 
508100, 4697300; 508100, 4697600; 508400, 4697600; 508400, 4697700; 
508600, 4697700; 508600, 4697800; 508500, 4697800; 508500, 4698000; 
508400, 4698000; 508400, 4698400; 508500, 4698400; 508500, 4698500; 
508800, 4698500; 508800, 4698600; 508900, 4698600; 508900, 4698300; 
509000, 4698300; 509000, 4698400; 509100, 4698400; 509100, 4698600; 
509200, 4698600; 509200, 4698700; 509500, 4698700; 509500, 4698900; 
509800, 4698900; 509800, 4699000; 510100, 4699000; 510100, 4699100; 
511000, 4699100; 511000, 4699000; 511300, 4699000; 511300, 4698900; 
511600, 4698900; excluding 508500, 4697300; 508500, 4697100; returning 
to 508600, 4697100; 508600, 4697300; 508500, 4697300; also excluding 
508800, 4697800; 508800, 4697700; 509100, 4697700; 509100, 4697800; 
returning to 508800, 4697800;
    (iii) Unit 3C: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 506800, 4697600; 506800, 4697500; 506900, 4697500; 
506900, 4697300; 506800, 4697300; 506800, 4697200; 506700, 4697200; 
506700, 4696700; 507000, 4696700; 507000, 4697000; 506900, 4697000; 
506900, 4697200; 507000, 4697200; 507000, 4697400; 507100, 4697400; 
507100, 4697500; 507200, 4697500; 507200, 4697400; 507300, 4697400; 
507300, 4697300; 507400, 4697300; 507400, 4697100; 507500, 4697100; 
507500, 4697000; 507600, 4697000; 507600, 4696900; 507700, 4696900; 
507700, 4696700; 507900, 4696700; 507900, 4696000; 508300, 4696000; 
508300, 4695000; 507800, 4695000; 507800, 4695200; 507400, 4695200; 
507400, 4695400; 506900, 4695400; 506900, 4695800; 506800, 4695800; 
506800, 4695900; 506400, 4695900; 506400, 4695800; 505600, 4695800; 
505600, 4696000; 505800, 4696000; 505800, 4696700; 506200, 4696700; 
506200, 4696800; 506100, 4696800; 506100, 4697300; 506200, 4697300; 
506200, 4697600; returning to 506800, 4697600.
    (7) Unit 4: Jackson County, Oregon
    (i) Unit 4A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 507200, 4703500; 507200, 4703400; 507300, 4703400; 
507300, 4703300; 507800, 4703300; 507800, 4703200; 507900, 4703200; 
507900, 4703100; 508000, 4703100; 508000, 4703000; 508100, 4703000; 
508100, 4702900; 508200, 4702900; 508200, 4702800; 508300, 4702800; 
508300, 4702700; 508400, 4702700; 508400, 4702500; 508500, 4702500; 
508500, 4702300; 508600, 4702300; 508600, 4701900; 508800, 4701900; 
508800, 4701500; 508700, 4701500; 508700, 4701400; 508600, 4701400; 
508600, 4701300; 508400, 4701300; 508400, 4701500; 508300, 4701500; 
508300, 4701900; 508200, 4701900; 508200, 4702000; 508100, 4702000; 
508100, 4702100; 508000, 4702100; 508000, 4702200; 507900, 4702200; 
507900, 4702300; 507800, 4702300; 507800, 4702400; 507700, 4702400; 
507700, 4702500; 507600, 4702500; 507600, 4702400; 507500, 4702400; 
507500, 4702300; 507300, 4702300; 507300, 4702200; 507400, 4702200; 
507400, 4702100; 507600, 4702100; 507600, 4702000; 507700, 4702000; 
507700, 4701800; 507800, 4701800; 507800, 4701700; 507900, 4701700; 
507900, 4701400; 507700, 4701400; 507700, 4701500; 507600, 4701500; 
507600, 4701600; 507300, 4701600; 507300, 4701700; 507100, 4701700; 
507100, 4701800; 507000, 4701800; 507000, 4701900; 506900, 4701900; 
506900, 4702000; 506800, 4702000; 506800, 4702200; 506700, 4702200; 
506700, 4702400; 506600, 4702400; 506600, 4702500; 506500, 4702500; 
506500, 4702700; 506600, 4702700; 506600, 4702900; 506700, 4702900; 
506700, 4703100; 506800, 4703100; 506800, 4703400; 507000, 4703400; 
507000, 4703500; returning to 507200, 4703500;
    (ii) Unit 4B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 503800, 4700900; 503800, 4700800; 503900, 4700800; 
503900, 4700700; 504000, 4700700; 504000, 4700600; 504300, 4700600; 
504300, 4700500; 504400, 4700500; 504400, 4699500; 504200, 4699500; 
504200, 4699200; 504100, 4699200; 504100, 4699100; 504000, 4699100; 
504000, 4698900; 503800, 4698900; 503800, 4699000; 503700, 4699000; 
503700, 4699400; 503800, 4699400; 503800, 4699800; 503700, 4699800; 
503700, 4700900; returning to 503800, 4700900.

    (iii) Note: Units 1-4 (Map 1) follow:

[[Page 239]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.009

    (8) Unit 5: Shasta County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Palo Cedro, Enterprise, Balls Ferry, Cottonwood. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 562500, 4487400; 
562700, 4487100; 562900, 4487200; 563200, 4487200; 563300, 4487000; 
563300, 4486700; 563800, 4486400; 564300, 4484700; 564300, 4484400; 
564500, 4484100; 564500,

[[Page 240]]

4483800; 564600, 4483700; 564600, 4483400; 564400, 4483100; 564100, 
4482800; 564100, 4482600; 564300, 4482600; 564300, 4482400; 564300, 
4482300; 564200, 4482200; 564100, 4482100; 564000, 4482100; 564200, 
4481800; 564200, 4480900; 563600, 4480900; 563300, 4481000; 563100, 
4480900; 562900, 4480900; 562500, 4481200; 562400, 4481500; 562400, 
4481700; 562300, 4482400; 562000, 4482500; 561900, 4482800; 561800, 
4483300; 561500, 4483700; 561000, 4484000; 560700, 4485400; 560700, 
4486500; 560800, 4486700; 561000, 4486900; 561200, 4487000; 561300, 
4487600; 561600, 4487900; 562000, 4487900; returning to 562500, 4487400;
    (9) Unit 6: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Red Bluff East, Red Bluff West, Gerber, West of Gerber, 
Corning, Henleyville. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 563400, 4444500; 563400, 4444400; 563500, 4444400; 
563700, 4444400; 563800, 4443800; 564200, 4443800; 564300, 4443600; 
564200, 4443400; 564100, 4443200; 564000, 4443200; 564000, 4443000; 
564100, 4443000; 564100, 4442800; 564100, 4442700; 564100, 4442600; 
564200, 4442600; 564300, 4442900; 564400, 4443100; 564400, 4443400; 
564700, 4443400; 565200, 4443400; 565500, 4443300; 565800, 4442900; 
566100, 4442900; 566200, 4442500; 566100, 4442400; 566100, 4442100; 
565800, 4441900; 566000, 4441600; 566000, 4441500; 565400, 4441200; 
565500, 4441000; 565400, 4440800; 565400, 4440200; 565400, 4439000; 
566100, 4439000; 566100, 4439300; 566500, 4439900; 566400, 4440400; 
566000, 4440600; 567500, 4441200; 567900, 4441200; 568673, 4440582; 
568400, 4440400; 568300, 4439900; 568700, 4439100; 569500, 4439400; 
569850, 4438750; 570194, 4438101; 569400, 4438200; 569000, 4438300; 
568600, 4438400; 567800, 4438400; 567600, 4438400; 567400, 4438200; 
567000, 4438100; 567000, 4438000; 566800, 4437700; 566800, 4437400; 
566200, 4437400; 566200, 4438200; 565900, 4438400; 565400, 4438000; 
564200, 4438000; 564200, 4437800; 563900, 4437800; 563600, 4437600; 
563400, 4437400; 563400, 4436900; 563400, 4436600; 563200, 4436600; 
563200, 4436200; 563200, 4435800; 563500, 4435800; 563700, 4436100; 
564200, 4436400; 564500, 4436500; 564700, 4436500; 564900, 4436400; 
564900, 4436200; 564800, 4435800; 565100, 4435800; 564800, 4435500; 
564500, 4435500; 564400, 4435400; 564200, 4435200; 564100, 4435000; 
563800, 4434900; 563600, 4434700; 563500, 4434500; 563400, 4434500; 
563200, 4434200; 563600, 4434200; 563600, 4432600; 563700, 4432600; 
563500, 4432100; 564500, 4431968; 564500, 4431500; 565400, 4431500; 
565400, 4431400; 567000, 4431300; 567000, 4430700; 566800, 4430500; 
567400, 4430500; 567500, 4429600; 566800, 4429600; 566300, 4429600; 
566100, 4429700; 566100, 4429100; 566000, 4429200; 565800, 4429300; 
565500, 4429200; 565300, 4429200; 565100, 4429000; 564600, 4429000; 
564300, 4428700; 564000, 4428700; 563700, 4428500; 563700, 4428200; 
564100, 4428200; 564600, 4428200; 565500, 4428300; 566600, 4428100; 
566600, 4428000; 567000, 4428000; 567100, 4427900; 567300, 4427200; 
566900, 4427200; 566100, 4426900; 566000, 4426700; 565500, 4426700; 
565400, 4426600; 565297, 4426600; 565307, 4427383; 564276, 4427370; 
564270, 4428012; 564280, 4428155; 563943, 4428136; 563688, 4428134; 
563596, 4428131; 563607, 4427381; 563688, 4427377; 563689, 4426540; 
563940, 4426553; 564800, 4426576; 564800, 4426200; 564800, 4425900; 
563700, 4425800; 562600, 4425100; 562300, 4425000; 562100, 4425000; 
562000, 4425000; 561800, 4424900; 561700, 4424800; 561600, 4424800; 
561500, 4424800; 561300, 4424800; 561200, 4424800; 560900, 4424900; 
560700, 4424900; 560400, 4425000; 560100, 4424900; 559800, 4424800; 
559800, 4424500; 559700, 4424400; 559400, 4424300; 559300, 4424400; 
559200, 4424500; 559100, 4424500; 558900, 4424700; 558700, 4424800; 
558300, 4424800; 558100, 4424800; 557900, 4424600; 557700, 4424500; 
557300, 4424300; 557000, 4424200; 556800, 4424100; 556600, 4424100; 
556100, 4424000; 555900, 4424000; 555800, 4423900; 555800, 4423800; 
555500, 4423800; 555400, 4423800; 555300, 4423700; 555200, 4423600; 
555100, 4423600; 555000, 4423600; 554600, 4424900; 555100, 4425600; 
557200, 4426300; 557800, 4426800; 558300, 4426500; 559500, 4428300; 
558200, 4428200; 557800, 4428500; 557400, 4429300; 558000, 4429900; 
558600, 4430000; 558600, 4431100; 560000, 4431600; 559200, 4431900; 
558300, 4432000; 557400, 4432200; 557400, 4432600; 558400, 4433100; 
558400, 4433600; 557800, 4433600; 557500, 4433800; 557300, 4434400; 
555100, 4434800; 555100, 4435400; 557000, 4436200; 557900, 4439000; 
557000, 4439000; 554600, 4437400; 553200, 4437000; 553200, 4437600; 
554500, 4438100; 555400, 4439700; 556500, 4439800; 556500, 4441800; 
558500, 4442600; 558500, 4443000; 557400, 4442900; 557000, 4443000; 
556800, 4443400; 557500, 4444300; 558000, 4443700; 558400, 4443700; 
559800, 4443900; 559800, 4443700; 559700, 4443500; 559700, 4443200; 
559900, 4443400; 560000, 4443500; 560500, 4443500; 560700, 4443600; 
561000, 4443700; 561700, 4443900; 562400, 4444000; 562500, 4444100; 
562600, 4444100; 562600, 4444500; 562900, 4444500; returning to 563400, 
4444500;
    (10) Unit 7: Tehama County, California.
    (i) Unit 7A: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Acorn Hollow and Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 588739, 4429822; 
588900, 4429500; 589500, 4429500; 589500, 4428600; 589500, 4428000; 
589800, 4427100; 590500, 4426400; 590500, 4425300; 591200, 4424400; 
591500, 4423300; 591562, 4422558; 590526, 4423686; 589986, 4424273; 
589816, 4424458; 589129, 4425207; 588454, 4426221; 588425, 4426265; 
588279, 4426485; 588213, 4426583; 588213, 4426584; 588600, 4429100; 
588733, 4429833; returning to 588739, 4429822;
    (ii) Unit 7B: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sloughhouse. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 593700, 4420900; 593164, 4420815; 592329, 4421723; 
592258, 4421800; 593000, 4421800; 593100, 4421500; 593500, 4421400; 
returning to 593700, 4420900;
    (iii) Unit 7C: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richard Springs NW. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594500, 4420300; 593881, 4420035; 593371, 
4420590; 594000, 4420800; 594400, 4420600; returning to 594500, 4420300;
    (iv) Unit 7D: Tehama and Butte Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Campbell Mound, Richardson Springs, and 
Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded

[[Page 241]]

by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 597100, 4416400; 
597100, 4415600; 597044, 4415525; 596800, 4415200; 597100, 4415000; 
597800, 4415500; 598100, 4415200; 597600, 4414600; 597600, 4414400; 
597300, 4413800; 597300, 4413300; 598200, 4413900; 598400, 4413900; 
598400, 4413600; 597422, 4411938; 597281, 4412382; 596959, 4413403; 
596640, 4414416; 596620, 4414481; 596305, 4415484; 596303, 4415489; 
596130, 4416040; 596091, 4416160; 596028, 4416358; 596011, 4416411; 
595993, 4416465; 595982, 4416500; 596000, 4416500; 596100, 4416400; 
596200, 4416500; 596300, 4416600; 596400, 4416700; 596500, 4416700; 
596500, 4416800; 596600, 4416800; returning to 597100, 4416400.
    (v) Unit 7E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 598900, 4411800; 599400, 4411700; 599800, 
4411700; 599800, 4411000; 599300, 4410700; 599100, 4410800; 599000, 
4410800; 598800, 4410600; 598500, 4410400; 598300, 4410100; 598100, 
4410000; 598070, 4409970; 598051, 4409993; 598038, 4410010; 598014, 
4410083; 597806, 4410737; 597725, 4410990; 597461, 4411816; 597434, 
4411900; 597600, 4411900; 598300, 4412700; 598500, 4413300; 598900, 
4413300; returning to 598900, 4411800;
    (vi) Unit 7F: Butte County, California, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 599500, 4406200; 
600300, 4406000; 601200, 4405600; 601800, 4405600; 602000, 4405500; 
602200, 4405200; 602500, 4405200; 602700, 4404900; 603300, 4404700; 
604500, 4404200; 605200, 4404200; 605600, 4404000; 605600, 4403600; 
605100, 4403300; 604700, 4403400; 604500, 4403300; 604475, 4403175; 
604400, 4403100; 604300, 4403100; 604200, 4403000; 604100, 4402900; 
604000, 4402900; 603800, 4402800; 603800, 4402600; 603600, 4402400; 
603400, 4402400; 603200, 4402500; 603100, 4402400; 602900, 4402400; 
602900, 4402100; 602700, 4402100; 602300, 4402600; 602300, 4402700; 
601800, 4403300; 601714, 4403300; 601553, 4403500; 601501, 4403499; 
601465, 4403621; 601319, 4403663; 601226, 4403595; 601089, 4403571; 
600979, 4403503; 600901, 4403569; 600860, 4403446; 600704, 4403566; 
600542, 4403475; 600507, 4403530; 600473, 4403563; 600453, 4403580; 
600369, 4403651; 600344, 4403642; 600232, 4403605; 599983, 4403679; 
599973, 4403678; 599801, 4403662; 599725, 4403718; 599651, 4403697; 
599493, 4403839; 599328, 4403862; 599302, 4403865; 599269, 4403870; 
599084, 4403634; 599024, 4403611; 598987, 4404400; 598980, 4404543; 
598971, 4404723; 598955, 4405388; 598953, 4405458; 598951, 4405529; 
598947, 4405677; 598934, 4405719; 598919, 4405750; 599000, 4405800; 
598900, 4406100; 598700, 4406000; 598694, 4406000; 598635, 4406058; 
598598, 4406103; 598583, 4406127; 598567, 4406159; 598549, 4406210; 
598544, 4406234; 598540, 4406255; 598533, 4406421; 598522, 4406815; 
598516, 4407133; 598511, 4407496; 598513, 4407515; 598525, 4407568; 
598527, 4407571; 598527, 4407589; 598580, 4407812; 598800, 4407900; 
598900, 4408100; 599200, 4408400; 600200, 4408900; 600300, 4408800; 
600300, 4408400; 600000, 4408100; 600400, 4407600; 599500, 4406700; 
returning to 599500, 4406200.
    (11) Unit 8: Tehama and Glenn Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Kirkwood and Black Butte Dam. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 572100, 4410900; 
572100, 4410100; 571800, 4409600; 570500, 4409000; 570200, 4409000; 
570200, 4409300; 569700, 4409300; 569700, 4409000; 569800, 4407700; 
569900, 4407000; 569800, 4406100; 569800, 4405643; 569800, 4405500; 
569400, 4405500; 569107, 4405647; 568600, 4405900; 568300, 4405900; 
567809, 4405654; 567500, 4405500; 567200, 4405500; 565000, 4405500; 
564769, 4405673; 564600, 4405800; 564100, 4405800; 563860, 4405680; 
563700, 4405600; 563400, 4405400; 563214, 4405679; 563200, 4405700; 
562800, 4405800; 561400, 4406200; 560900, 4406200; 560600, 4406300; 
560500, 4406400; 560400, 4406600; 560400, 4406900; 560800, 4406900; 
560800, 4407300; 561200, 4407300; 561200, 4411300; 565500, 4411300; 
565500, 4410500; 568400, 4410500; 568400, 4410600; 568400, 4411400; 
570500, 4411400; 570800, 4411700; 571400, 4411500; 571500, 4411000; 
returning to 572100, 4410900;
    (12) Unit 9: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Chico. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 605100, 4399600; 606500, 4399500; 606797, 4399330; 
606777, 4399300; 606724, 4399252; 606568, 4399265; 606528, 4399272; 
606479, 4399279; 606478, 4399279; 606394, 4399264; 606362, 4399238; 
606329, 4399210; 606274, 4399169; 606209, 4399135; 606125, 4399122; 
606060, 4399122; 605967, 4399131; 605899, 4399134; 605857, 4399134; 
605822, 4399130; 605789, 4399116; 605781, 4399138; 605775, 4399149; 
605764, 4399152; 605763, 4399152; 605701, 4399142; 605589, 4399116; 
605504, 4399107; 605432, 4399110; 605319, 4399064; 605233, 4399045; 
605173, 4399034; 605135, 4399023; 605134, 4399023; 605127, 4399023; 
605109, 4399023; 605080, 4399025; 605063, 4399025; 605002, 4399051; 
604957, 4399069; 604907, 4399092; 604029, 4399508; 603896, 4399435; 
603886, 4399435; 603879, 4399436; 603300, 4399523; 603300, 4399600; 
602900, 4399600; 603500, 4399800; 604700, 4400200; returning to 605100, 
4399600.

    (13) Note: Units 5-9 (Map 2) follow:

[[Page 242]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.010

    (14) Unit 10: Glenn and Colusa Counties, California. This unit was 
excluded from the designation pursuant to Section 4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (15) Unit 11: Yuba County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Browns Valley and Wheatland. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates

[[Page 243]]

(E,N): 635000, 4332200; 635000, 4329900; 634600, 4329900; 633800, 
4329900; 633600, 4330100; 633500, 4330100; 633300, 4330100; 633300, 
4330300; 632700, 4330100; 632400, 4329900; 632400, 4329000; 631300, 
4329000; 631300, 4329200; 631600, 4329200; 631600, 4329800; 631900, 
4329800; 631900, 4330600; 632800, 4330600; 633000, 4330900; 633000, 
4331300; 633100, 4331500; 633500, 4331700; 633800, 4331500; 633800, 
4332200; returning to 635000, 4332200.
    (16) Unit 12: Placer County, California.
    (i) Unit 12A: Placer County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Lincoln. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 647900, 4313400; 647900, 4312700; 648000, 4312500; 
647900, 4311500; 647700, 4311500; 647600, 4311300; 647300, 4311400; 
646900, 4311400; 646900, 4311300; 647200, 4311300; 647500, 4311200; 
647800, 4311200; 647900, 4311100; 647800, 4311000; 646900, 4311000; 
646800, 4310900; 646800, 4310800; 647400, 4310800; 647500, 4310900; 
647600, 4310800; 647800, 4310700; 648000, 4310700; 648000, 4310000; 
648000, 4309700; 647200, 4309700; 647200, 4309200; 646700, 4309100; 
646700, 4308800; 646600, 4308800; 646100, 4309100; 646100, 4308200; 
646126, 4308174; 646012, 4308259; 645967, 4308294; 645917, 4308327; 
645822, 4308387; 645337, 4308742; 645215, 4308841; 645100, 4308942; 
644197, 4309858; 644195, 4309860; 644194, 4309862; 644149, 4309914; 
643464, 4310618; 643700, 4310500; 644000, 4310900; 644300, 4310400; 
645400, 4310400; 645800, 4310200; 646100, 4310200; 646300, 4310000; 
647500, 4310000; 647500, 4310200; 646800, 4310200; 646500, 4310300; 
646500, 4310600; 646600, 4310700; 646100, 4310700; 645900, 4310800; 
645900, 4311200; 646100, 4311100; 646500, 4311100; 646500, 4311200; 
646300, 4311200; 646300, 4311400; 646400, 4311700; 646800, 4311700; 
646800, 4311900; 646800, 4312000; 646900, 4312100; 646800, 4312500; 
647000, 4312600; 647100, 4312800; 647300, 4312800; 647400, 4312700; 
647400, 4312800; 647300, 4312900; 647100, 4312900; 646800, 4312698; 
646800, 4313000; 646900, 4313400; 647100, 4313800; 647300, 4314200; 
648300, 4314200; 648300, 4313900; returning to 647900, 4313400;
    (ii) Unit 12B: Placer County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Lincoln. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 644400, 4306677; 644400, 4305900; 644700, 4305900; 
644700, 4305400; 644800, 4305400; 644800, 4305200; 645100, 4305200; 
645100, 4305100; 645200, 4305000; 645400, 4305100; 645526, 4305100; 
645502, 4305086; 645456, 4305073; 645413, 4305069; 645405, 4305070; 
645394, 4305065; 645377, 4305040; 645344, 4305023; 645314, 4305010; 
645277, 4304988; 645258, 4304970; 645235, 4304941; 645228, 4304937; 
645208, 4304916; 645145, 4304856; 645068, 4304806; 644987, 4304762; 
644904, 4304734; 644828, 4304731; 644796, 4304732; 644778, 4304737; 
644764, 4304744; 644764, 4304742; 644744, 4304744; 644707, 4304725; 
644667, 4304698; 644626, 4304669; 644600, 4304649; 644575, 4304634; 
644563, 4304634; 644560, 4304636; 644554, 4304639; 644540, 4304653; 
644526, 4304663; 644515, 4304656; 644483, 4304652; 644439, 4304646; 
644388, 4304643; 644357, 4304642; 644327, 4304640; 644316, 4304635; 
644300, 4304631; 644300, 4304900; 644100, 4304900; 644100, 4305000; 
644000, 4305000; 644000, 4306669; returning to 644400, 4306677.

    (iii) Note: Units 11-12 (Map 3) follow:

[[Page 244]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.011

    (17) Unit 13: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Carmichael. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 649800, 4269600; 649800, 4268700; 650400, 
4268900; 650800, 4268800; 651000, 4268800; 651000, 4269400; 651800, 
4269300; 651500, 4268800; 651600, 4267900; 651600, 4266500; 651500, 
4266400; 651500, 4266300;

[[Page 245]]

651100, 4266300; 651100, 4266000; 651570, 4265812; 651589, 4265075; 
651600, 4264400; 651400, 4264400; 651400, 4264200; 650500, 4264200; 
650500, 4264300; 650400, 4264300; 650400, 4264600; 650000, 4264700; 
649900, 4265100; 649400, 4265100; 649100, 4265000; 648900, 4265100; 
648700, 4265100; 648700, 4265300; 648700, 4265500; 649900, 4265500; 
649900, 4266000; 648300, 4266000; 648300, 4266200; 648500, 4266400; 
648700, 4266200; 649000, 4266200; 649300, 4266400; 649400, 4266600; 
649635, 4266678; 649700, 4266700; 649794, 4266693; 650200, 4267100; 
650400, 4267000; 650600, 4267000; 650800, 4267200; 650900, 4267500; 
650800, 4267900; 650500, 4267800; 650300, 4268100; 649900, 4268400; 
649400, 4268100; 649100, 4267800; 649100, 4267500; 649400, 4267400; 
649200, 4267100; 648400, 4267100; 648300, 4267700; 648000, 4268000; 
648600, 4268500; 649400, 4268900; 649400, 4269200; 649600, 4269600; 
returning to 649800, 4269600.
    (18) Unit 14: Sacramento and Amador County, California.
    (i) Unit 14A: Sacramento and Amador County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Carbondale, Sloughhouse, Goose Creek, and 
Clay. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 673200, 4256400; 672800, 4255100; 672800, 4254800; 673100, 
4254900; 673800, 4254900; 674000, 4254600; 674000, 4254400; 674500, 
4254000; 674500, 4253700; 674100, 4253500; 674100, 4252900; 674300, 
4252300; 674500, 4251900; 674500, 4251600; 673400, 4251500; 673300, 
4251400; 673300, 4251200; 673900, 4251000; 674000, 4250500; 674300, 
4250000; 674300, 4249800; 674200, 4249700; 673900, 4249700; 673600, 
4249900; 672500, 4249900; 672315, 4249992; 671900, 4250200; 671300, 
4250200; 671100, 4250500; 671000, 4250500; 671000, 4249800; 670700, 
4249800; 670700, 4249500; 670800, 4249300; 670800, 4249000; 670900, 
4248900; 670900, 4248500; 670500, 4248300; 670500, 4248125; 670400, 
4248100; 670400, 4248000; 670100, 4248000; 670100, 4247800; 670500, 
4247500; 671100, 4247500; 671600, 4247700; 671800, 4247600; 671900, 
4247300; 671900, 4247100; 671500, 4246800; 671600, 4246600; 671800, 
4246000; 671800, 4246000; 671255, 4245364; 670800, 4245000; 670000, 
4244200; 670000, 4244100; 670500, 4243800; 670200, 4243400; 670200, 
4243300; 670300, 4243200; 670400, 4243100; 670600, 4242600; 671200, 
4242900; 671600, 4243000; 671600, 4242700; 670700, 4242100; 669800, 
4242100; 669300, 4241900; 668900, 4241900; 668700, 4241800; 668500, 
4241600; 668400, 4241600; 668200, 4241700; 668000, 4242000; 667900, 
4242000; 667400, 4241600; 667400, 4241800; 666400, 4241700; 665400, 
4241700; 665400, 4242700; 665000, 4242700; 665000, 4242300; 664800, 
4242300; 664800, 4242200; 664700, 4242200; 664600, 4242100; 664500, 
4242100; 664500, 4241300; 664000, 4241300; 664000, 4241000; 663500, 
4241000; 663500, 4240900; 663400, 4240800; 663300, 4240800; 663300, 
4240600; 663100, 4240600; 663100, 4240900; 662800, 4240900; 662800, 
4240500; 662700, 4240400; 662700, 4240000; 662500, 4240000; 662500, 
4239600; 662100, 4239600; 662100, 4239400; 662000, 4239300; 661700, 
4239300; 661700, 4239200; 661400, 4239000; 661400, 4239900; 661500, 
4239900; 661500, 4241600; 661500, 4241900; 661700, 4242000; 662200, 
4242000; 662200, 4241600; 662900, 4241600; 662800, 4242300; 662500, 
4242300; 662600, 4243000; 662900, 4243100; 663400, 4243100; 663400, 
4243800; 663050, 4243800; 663029, 4243841; 663000, 4243900; 662500, 
4243900; 662700, 4244700; 662850, 4244800; 663000, 4244900; 663100, 
4245300; 663800, 4245300; 663900, 4245500; 664400, 4245600; 664500, 
4245200; 664600, 4245200; 664750, 4245238; 664900, 4245275; 665000, 
4245300; 664900, 4245700; 664900, 4246500; 664400, 4246500; 663900, 
4246700; 662500, 4246300; 662233, 4246300; 662100, 4246400; 661700, 
4246400; 661900, 4247000; 662000, 4247300; 661800, 4247500; 660900, 
4247500; 660900, 4247140; 660850, 4247100; 659700, 4247100; 659500, 
4247300; 659500, 4248300; 660000, 4248300; 659900, 4249600; 660000, 
4249900; 659900, 4250200; 659400, 4249700; 659400, 4249500; 659300, 
4249200; 659100, 4249000; 659100, 4248900; 659200, 4248800; 659100, 
4248700; 658900, 4248700; 658800, 4248600; 658600, 4248600; 658500, 
4248800; 658400, 4248900; 658200, 4249000; 658200, 4248900; 658300, 
4248700; 658500, 4248500; 658500, 4248400; 658400, 4248300; 658400, 
4247900; 658100, 4247900; 658000, 4248500; 656700, 4248500; 656300, 
4248900; 655900, 4248200; 656100, 4248100; 656100, 4248000; 656000, 
4247800; 655200, 4247800; 655200, 4247200; 654700, 4247200; 654700, 
4248750; 654800, 4248900; 654700, 4249000; 655100, 4249000; 655800, 
4249000; 656300, 4249700; 656600, 4249500; 657200, 4250200; 656700, 
4251100; 657700, 4251100; 657700, 4251500; 656700, 4251400; 656700, 
4252100; 656500, 4252300; 656500, 4252600; 657000, 4253700; 657400, 
4254600; 657800, 4254300; 657800, 4254200; 657800, 4254200; 658100, 
4254000; 658900, 4253500; 659000, 4253500; 659300, 4253300; 660000, 
4254500; 660100, 4254800; 660200, 4254900; 660300, 4255200; 660600, 
4255300; 660700, 4255400; 660800, 4256000; 660754, 4256046; 660777, 
4256046; 661541, 4256060; 661554, 4255796; 661731, 4252263; 661736, 
4252142; 662180, 4252172; 662313, 4252175; 662583, 4252191; 663009, 
4252217; 663119, 4252198; 663221, 4252234; 663275, 4252290; 663311, 
4252341; 663324, 4252391; 663344, 4252446; 663378, 4252511; 663390, 
4252591; 663409, 4252710; 663437, 4252770; 663510, 4252890; 663546, 
4252914; 663590, 4252922; 663630, 4252907; 663726, 4252900; 663761, 
4252901; 663800, 4252916; 663817, 4252959; 663824, 4252991; 663760, 
4253075; 663650, 4253199; 663651, 4253232; 663667, 4253286; 663741, 
4253408; 663807, 4253488; 663832, 4253490; 663904, 4253486; 663962, 
4253498; 664039, 4253560; 664088, 4253602; 664125, 4253617; 664219, 
4253695; 664248, 4253699; 664313, 4253672; 664369, 4253606; 664471, 
4253613; 664566, 4253675; 664591, 4253700; 664647, 4253753; 664752, 
4253850; 664854, 4253953; 664868, 4254000; 664877, 4254124; 664856, 
4254193; 664883, 4254238; 664977, 4254334; 665118, 4254420; 665174, 
4254468; 665227, 4254492; 665313, 4254463; 665390, 4254424; 665514, 
4254389; 665619, 4254438; 665656, 4254494; 665723, 4254546; 665757, 
4254558; 665800, 4254553; 665853, 4254513; 665880, 4254493; 665956, 
4254434; 665960, 4254402; 666029, 4254364; 666067, 4254367; 666114, 
4254379; 666168, 4254392; 666236, 4254440; 666273, 4254448; 666310, 
4254440; 666339, 4254435; 666417, 4254404; 666451, 4254362; 666491, 
4254319; 666523, 4254309; 666581, 4254312; 666652, 4254306; 666705, 
4254261; 666722, 4254230; 666740, 4254164; 666742, 4254084; 666763, 
4253987; 666791, 4253947; 666826, 4253919; 666849, 4253913; 666914, 
4253917; 666977, 4253951; 667057, 4253975; 667142, 4253997; 667253, 
4253980; 667277, 4253964; 667302, 4253968; 667313, 4253981; 667315, 
4254007; 667377, 4254034; 667482, 4254039; 667618,

[[Page 246]]

4254026; 667801, 4253975; 667959, 4253881; 668167, 4253821; 668360, 
4253834; 668422, 4253849; 668525, 4253837; 668643, 4253804; 668700, 
4253743; 668799, 4253665; 668877, 4253610; 668998, 4253531; 669098, 
4253487; 669171, 4253483; 669251, 4253471; 669328, 4253465; 669399, 
4253396; 669461, 4253324; 669558, 4253276; 669619, 4253256; 669665, 
4253257; 669859, 4253247; 670012, 4253179; 670143, 4253173; 670241, 
4253188; 670278, 4253185; 670320, 4253159; 670371, 4253105; 670419, 
4253074; 670499, 4253007; 670537, 4252992; 670594, 4252927; 670626, 
4252873; 670642, 4252848; 670663, 4252843; 670712, 4252851; 670732, 
4252875; 670716, 4252907; 670727, 4252921; 670756, 4252934; 670807, 
4252923; 670850, 4252924; 670883, 4252896; 670912, 4252829; 670949, 
4252789; 670975, 4252773; 671041, 4252762; 671109, 4252759; 671191, 
4252663; 671270, 4252568; 671315, 4252537; 671376, 4252519; 671438, 
4252504; 671509, 4252465; 671531, 4252448; 671559, 4252450; 671603, 
4252490; 671631, 4252509; 671674, 4252515; 671716, 4252510; 671773, 
4252503; 671827, 4252497; 671848, 4252476; 671934, 4252419; 671943, 
4252426; 671963, 4252453; 671990, 4252458; 672004, 4252435; 672042, 
4252400; 672107, 4252306; 672117, 4252284; 672129, 4252256; 672134, 
4252244; 672152, 4252230; 672159, 4252200; 672153, 4252190; 672148, 
4252180; 672110, 4252165; 672104, 4252149; 672109, 4252101; 672114, 
4252080; 672113, 4252055; 672107, 4251980; 672120, 4251908; 672151, 
4251893; 672177, 4251906; 672185, 4251900; 672199, 4251865; 672213, 
4251830; 672245, 4251802; 672263, 4251784; 672271, 4251775; 672271, 
4251787; 672265, 4252117; 672263, 4252199; 672247, 4252916; 672246, 
4252941; 672231, 4253670; 672225, 4253953; 672223, 4254006; 672220, 
4254157; 672219, 4254229; 672217, 4254287; 672192, 4255610; 672200, 
4255600; 672400, 4255600; 672700, 4256400; returning to 673200, 4256400.
    (ii) Unit 14B: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Sloughhouse. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 660660, 4256508; 660681, 4256119; 660600, 
4256200; 660300, 4256100; 660000, 4256200; 659800, 4256300; 659850, 
4256450; 659900, 4256600; 660200, 4256500; 660300, 4256800; 660515, 
4256728; 660633, 4256644; 660645, 4256626; returning to 660660, 4256508.

    (iii) Note: Units 13-14 (Map 4) follow:

[[Page 247]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.012

    (19) Unit 16: Solano County, California.
    (i) Unit 16A: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira, Denverton, and Fairfield South. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594915, 4234098; 
594916, 4233314; 595044, 4233310; 595068, 4233296; 595131, 4233266; 
595174, 4233226; 595189, 4233210; 595239,

[[Page 248]]

4233151; 595322, 4232978; 595423, 4232778; 595483, 4232667; 595553, 
4232524; 595699, 4232243; 595966, 4231717; 594927, 4231710; 594445, 
4231707; 594409, 4231673; 594410, 4231616; 594434, 4231540; 594474, 
4231494; 594495, 4231457; 594497, 4231414; 594510, 4231370; 594543, 
4231356; 594575, 4231342; 594603, 4231341; 594614, 4231338; 594616, 
4231325; 594618, 4231311; 594614, 4231290; 594605, 4231284; 594583, 
4231275; 594573, 4231268; 594557, 4231245; 594550, 4231209; 594543, 
4231179; 594500, 4231200; 593800, 4231200; 593600, 4230500; 593291, 
4230515; 593291, 4230514; 593700, 4229900; 594000, 4229700; 593900, 
4229600; 593900, 4229500; 594000, 4229400; 593900, 4229300; 593900, 
4229100; 594300, 4229000; 594300, 4228500; 593700, 4228400; 593500, 
4228100; 592800, 4228100; 592700, 4228000; 592600, 4228000; 592500, 
4227900; 592200, 4227800; 592000, 4227500; 591700, 4227400; 591500, 
4227200; 591200, 4227100; 590900, 4227000; 590700, 4227100; 590400, 
4227100; 589400, 4227400; 589265, 4227400; 589026, 4227463; 588707, 
4227579; 587979, 4227869; 587973, 4227872; 587467, 4228036; 587339, 
4228077; 587009, 4228197; 586933, 4228334; 586900, 4228400; 586700, 
4228500; 586600, 4229000; 586400, 4229100; 586200, 4229100; 586100, 
4229300; 585400, 4229900; 585400, 4230100; 585500, 4230200; 585000, 
4230300; 585100, 4230400; 585000, 4230500; 585111, 4230567; 585124, 
4230550; 585327, 4230585; 585319, 4230629; 585295, 4230649; 585270, 
4230662; 585500, 4230800; 585600, 4231100; 585903, 4231100; 585908, 
4231071; 585926, 4231064; 585956, 4231058; 586038, 4231061; 586045, 
4231073; 586045, 4231088; 586027, 4231096; 586022, 4231100; 586267, 
4231100; 586273, 4231084; 586323, 4231038; 586340, 4230994; 587435, 
4231016; 587882, 4231052; 587967, 4231111; 587991, 4231124; 588015, 
4231126; 588034, 4231123; 588075, 4231099; 588085, 4231097; 588116, 
4231095; 588700, 4230900; 588842, 4230900; 588842, 4230900; 588925, 
4230897; 588989, 4230899; 589090, 4230913; 589179, 4230901; 589179, 
4230901; 589240, 4230894; 589274, 4230890; 589315, 4230894; 589321, 
4230909; 589313, 4231179; 589015, 4231215; 589100, 4231300; 589100, 
4231700; 588600, 4231600; 588440, 4231680; 588417, 4232400; 588500, 
4232400; 588500, 4232500; 588600, 4232500; 588600, 4232800; 588400, 
4233000; 588600, 4233300; 588700, 4233500; 589300, 4233500; 589983, 
4233500; 590000, 4233500; 590100, 4233500; 590100, 4233300; 590600, 
4233300; 591100, 4232800; 591138, 4232825; 591143, 4232820; 591184, 
4232856; 591700, 4233200; 592513, 4233290; 592594, 4233291; 592594, 
4233299; 592600, 4233300; 592600, 4233800; 592900, 4233700; 592900, 
4233751; 592901, 4233751; 592900, 4233754; 592900, 4233800; 593400, 
4234100; 594200, 4234100; 594300, 4234900; 594500, 4234900; 594890, 
4235396; returning to 594915, 4234098.
    (ii) Unit 16B: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira and Denverton. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 589698, 4236560; 589600, 4234900; 589700, 
4234900; 589700, 4234500; 590100, 4234500; 590100, 4234064; 590100, 
4234000; 589400, 4234000; 589000, 4234400; 588500, 4234400; 588500, 
4236400; 588549, 4236449; 588944, 4236551; 589524, 4236558; 589670, 
4236559; returning to 589698, 4236560.
    (iii) Unit 16C: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 593200, 4242200; 593200, 4240600; 593211, 4240600; 
593255, 4239807; 592030, 4239793; 592062, 4240126; 592044, 4240137; 
592026, 4240170; 592026, 4240181; 592030, 4240261; 592300, 4240800; 
592100, 4240800; 591800, 4241000; 591700, 4241100; 591600, 4241200; 
591600, 4241300; 591600, 4241700; 591700, 4241700; 591800, 4241600; 
591900, 4241600; 592000, 4241500; 592200, 4241300; 592300, 4240900; 
returning to 593200, 4242200.
    (iv) Unit 16D: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Dozier. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 600400, 4243000; 600400, 4242200; 601300, 4242200; 
601300, 4241416; 601002, 4241415; 600878, 4241415; 600446, 4241414; 
600021, 4241414; 599000, 4241412; 599000, 4242300; 599600, 4242300; 
599600, 4243000; returning to 600400, 4243000.
    (20) Unit 17: Napa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Cuttings Wharf. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 563200, 4230600; 563800, 4229500; 564100, 
4229600; 564300, 4229200; 563200, 4228900; 563000, 4228900; 562800, 
4228500; 562622, 4228500; 562261, 4228644; 561890, 4228781; 561756, 
4228832; 561798, 4228870; 561864, 4228920; 562198, 4229067; 562156, 
4229301; 562420, 4229359; 562483, 4229527; 562531, 4229524; 562620, 
4229552; 562652, 4229575; 562655, 4229641; 562604, 4229686; 562537, 
4229781; 562480, 4229857; 562528, 4230295; 562458, 4230498; 562480, 
4230568; 562477, 4230610; 562477, 4230692; 562464, 4230746; 562476, 
4230800; 562500, 4230800; 563200, 4230900; returning to 563200, 4230600.

    (21) Note: Units 16-17 (Map 5) follow:

[[Page 249]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.013

    (22) Unit 18: San Joaquin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Valley Springs SW, Linden, Farmington, and Peters. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 676000, 
4212400; 676600, 4211200; 676300, 4211200; 676400, 4211000; 676300, 
4210600; 676200, 4210500; 676100, 4210500; 675800, 4210300; 675600, 
4210200; 675700,

[[Page 250]]

4210000; 675900, 4209700; 675900, 4209600; 676500, 4209600; 676700, 
4210100; 676700, 4210800; 676800, 4210900; 677200, 4211300; 678700, 
4211300; 678800, 4210500; 680200, 4210400; 680200, 4209700; 681100, 
4209700; 681800, 4210300; 682002, 4210263; 682013, 4209755; 682023, 
4209287; 681500, 4209100; 681300, 4208500; 680800, 4208400; 680800, 
4206100; 680500, 4205700; 680400, 4205100; 679700, 4204600; 679700, 
4203300; 679200, 4203300; 679200, 4203400; 679000, 4203400; 679000, 
4203300; 678500, 4203300; 678400, 4203100; 678300, 4203100; 678300, 
4203000; 678400, 4202900; 678400, 4202700; 677700, 4202200; 677600, 
4201700; 677500, 4201700; 677425, 4201625; 677367, 4201600; 675800, 
4201600; 675700, 4203000; 675900, 4203000; 675900, 4203200; 675700, 
4203200; 675700, 4204800; 672500, 4204700; 672500, 4205600; 672800, 
4205800; 672800, 4206300; 672100, 4206300; 672100, 4206500; 671800, 
4206500; 671600, 4206700; 671600, 4207100; 673200, 4207100; 673200, 
4207400; 674000, 4207400; 674000, 4207700; 674700, 4207500; 674700, 
4207200; 675100, 4207200; 675600, 4207400; 675600, 4208100; 675300, 
4208100; 675300, 4208000; 674500, 4208000; 674400, 4208100; 674200, 
4208200; 673930, 4208380; 673907, 4208701; 674800, 4208800; 674700, 
4209300; 674600, 4209300; 674600, 4209600; 673900, 4209600; 673900, 
4209800; 673500, 4209700; 673200, 4209600; 673200, 4209500; 673100, 
4209500; 673100, 4211900; 673500, 4211800; 673900, 4211700; 673900, 
4211400; 674100, 4211400; 674100, 4211500; 674300, 4211500; 674300, 
4211600; 674900, 4211400; 675200, 4211500; 675200, 4211700; 675300, 
4211800; 675300, 4211867; 675350, 4211900; 675500, 4211900; 675500, 
4212000; 675500, 4212400; returning to 676000, 4212400;
    (23) Unit 19: Contra Costa County, California.
    (i) Unit 19A: Contra Costa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Brentwood and Antioch South. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 612500, 4195900; 
611700, 4194500; 611700, 4194300; 611400, 4193400; 610900, 4193500; 
610200, 4193700; 609900, 4193900; 609700, 4194000; 609100, 4194000; 
608100, 4194300; 608500, 4194900; 608400, 4195100; 608600, 4195300; 
608600, 4195900; 609600, 4195900; 609500, 4195600; 609200, 4195100; 
609200, 4195000; 609300, 4194900; 609900, 4194800; 610200, 4194800; 
610500, 4195100; 611200, 4195900; 612100, 4196300; returning to 612500, 
4195900;
    (ii) Unit 19B: Contra Costa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Clifton Court Forebay and Byron Hot Springs. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 621800, 
4191200; 622200, 4190700; 622275, 4190400; 622400, 4189900; 623000, 
4189300; 622900, 4188700; 622200, 4188700; 622100, 4188800; 621900, 
4189000; 621700, 4189300; 621400, 4189700; 621200, 4190000; 621200, 
4190400; 621100, 4190400; 621100, 4188700; 620900, 4188700; 620600, 
4188400; 620400, 4188600; 620400, 4188100; 620500, 4187900; 620600, 
4187800; 620700, 4187700; 620900, 4187700; 621100, 4187500; 620500, 
4187100; 620500, 4186900; 621319, 4187272; 621338, 4187281; 621600, 
4187400; 622000, 4187000; 622400, 4186400; 622600, 4186100; 622500, 
4186000; 622500, 4185800; 622000, 4185300; 621200, 4185300; 621000, 
4185500; 620800, 4185500; 620500, 4185200; 620200, 4185300; 619900, 
4185600; 619600, 4185500; 619400, 4185700; 618200, 4186600; 618100, 
4187100; 617700, 4187400; 617800, 4187900; 618200, 4188100; 618500, 
4188300; 618400, 4188600; 617700, 4188800; 617800, 4188900; 617618, 
4188855; 617400, 4189000; 617400, 4189200; 618200, 4189500; 618100, 
4189800; 618200, 4190100; 618700, 4190300; 618700, 4190700; 619000, 
4191000; 619300, 4191100; 619600, 4191100; 619800, 4190700; 619900, 
4190700; 620100, 4190900; 620400, 4190900; 620400, 4190900; 620500, 
4191200; returning to 621800, 4191200;
    (iii) Unit 19C: Alameda County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Altamont and Livermore. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 610800, 4177500; 610800, 4177200; 
611200, 4177200; 611900, 4176700; 612300, 4176700; 612400, 4176700; 
612400, 4177200; 613300, 4177200; 613300, 4177200; 613400, 4177000; 
613300, 4176900; 613300, 4176800; 613300, 4176700; 613200, 4176700; 
613200, 4176300; 613400, 4176300; 613400, 4176200; 613500, 4176200; 
613500, 4176300; 613600, 4176400; 613700, 4176400; 613700, 4176600; 
614400, 4175500; 614300, 4175400; 614200, 4175400; 614100, 4175300; 
614000, 4175300; 613900, 4175200; 613800, 4175100; 613700, 4175100; 
613700, 4175200; 613600, 4175200; 613600, 4176100; 613300, 4176100; 
613200, 4175900; 613100, 4175900; 612800, 4176100; 612700, 4176100; 
612500, 4175900; 612400, 4175900; 612400, 4176300; 612100, 4176300; 
612100, 4176400; 612000, 4176500; 611800, 4176500; 611600, 4176500; 
611600, 4175300; 611400, 4175300; 611200, 4175400; 610900, 4175400; 
610800, 4175900; 610400, 4175900; 610300, 4175200; 610200, 4175100; 
610000, 4175000; 610000, 4174800; 609100, 4175400; 608600, 4175600; 
608400, 4175900; 610000, 4175900; 610000, 4176500; 610400, 4176500; 
610400, 4178500; 610800, 4178300; returning to 610800, 4177500;
    (24) Unit 20: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Ripon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 662400, 4168300; 661600, 4168000; 661600, 4168300; 
660300, 4167800; 660600, 4167500; 660800, 4167200; 660000, 4167200; 
659500, 4168800; 661600, 4168800; 661600, 4169400; 662400, 4169400; 
returning to 662400, 4168300;

    (25) Note: Maps of Units 18, 19, and 20 (Maps 6 and 7) follow:

[[Page 251]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.014


[[Page 252]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.015

    (26) Unit 21: Stanislaus County, California.
    (i) Unit 21A: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell and Montpelier. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 704200, 4166200; 704000, 4166200; 
703800, 4166400; 703400, 4166600; 703400, 4166800; 703500, 4166800; 
703600, 4166900; 703700, 4167000;

[[Page 253]]

703700, 4167200; 704600, 4167600; 704700, 4167600; 704800, 4167500; 
705000, 4167400; 705300, 4167400; 705300, 4166400; 705000, 4166300; 
704400, 4166300; returning to 704200, 4166200;
    (ii) Unit 21B: Stanislaus, Merced, and Mariposa Counties, 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle La Grange, Cooperstown, 
Paulsell, Turlock Lake, Snelling, Montpelier and Merced Falls. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 725100, 
4167900; 725300, 4167200; 726200, 4167100; 726500, 4166800; 726500, 
4166600; 726727, 4166429; 727300, 4166000; 727700, 4165800; 729000, 
4165800; 730100, 4165400; 730400, 4165100; 730500, 4164900; 730700, 
4164100; 731300, 4164100; 731700, 4163800; 731800, 4163400; 732200, 
4162800; 732200, 4162500; 732700, 4162700; 733000, 4162600; 733600, 
4162100; 733700, 4161500; 733600, 4161000; 734600, 4160400; 734727, 
4160273; 734800, 4160200; 734800, 4160135; 734800, 4159500; 734400, 
4158700; 734300, 4158100; 734500, 4157900; 734700, 4158000; 734900, 
4158300; 735000, 4158800; 735500, 4158800; 735505, 4158795; 735700, 
4158600; 735674, 4158472; 735600, 4158100; 736171, 4157529; 736200, 
4157500; 736800, 4157300; 736900, 4157100; 736900, 4156500; 736712, 
4156500; 736300, 4156500; 736000, 4156300; 735500, 4156300; 734100, 
4156900; 733400, 4157100; 731700, 4156900; 730900, 4156500; 728900, 
4156600; 728700, 4156700; 728700, 4156800; 728600, 4156900; 728300, 
4156900; 728100, 4156800; 727900, 4156800; 727100, 4156800; 726900, 
4156600; 726700, 4156500; 726300, 4156500; 726100, 4156600; 725800, 
4156500; 725600, 4156400; 725500, 4156300; 725400, 4156200; 725100, 
4156100; 725000, 4156000; 724900, 4156000; 724800, 4156100; 724300, 
4156100; 724300, 4155700; 723800, 4155700; 723900, 4155300; 723300, 
4155400; 722700, 4155100; 722700, 4155400; 722300, 4155400; 722300, 
4156800; 722900, 4156800; 722900, 4157400; 723500, 4157400; 723500, 
4157000; 723700, 4157000; 723700, 4156900; 724300, 4156900; 724300, 
4157400; 724200, 4157400; 724200, 4157400; 724100, 4158200; 723800, 
4158200; 723700, 4159000; 722500, 4159000; 722500, 4159200; 722400, 
4159200; 722300, 4159300; 722200, 4159300; 721600, 4159300; 721600, 
4159500; 721500, 4159600; 721500, 4159800; 721600, 4159800; 721600, 
4159900; 721700, 4159900; 721700, 4160500; 721100, 4160500; 721100, 
4160100; 720800, 4160100; 720800, 4160500; 719500, 4160500; 719500, 
4160300; 720000, 4159600; 719600, 4159600; 719600, 4159500; 719500, 
4159500; 719400, 4159500; 719300, 4159400; 719100, 4159400; 719000, 
4159400; 718900, 4159300; 718700, 4159100; 718600, 4159000; 718600, 
4158900; 718400, 4158900; 718200, 4158800; 718200, 4158700; 718300, 
4158600; 718400, 4158500; 718500, 4158500; 718600, 4158400; 718700, 
4158400; 718900, 4158300; 719000, 4158100; 719000, 4157900; 718700, 
4157600; 718000, 4157700; 717800, 4157400; 717900, 4157200; 718000, 
4157000; 718400, 4157300; 718700, 4156700; 718700, 4156300; 717500, 
4156300; 717500, 4156700; 717100, 4156700; 717100, 4156300; 716600, 
4156300; 716600, 4155800; 716300, 4155700; 716200, 4155000; 715900, 
4154900; 715900, 4155100; 715800, 4155200; 715800, 4155300; 715700, 
4155400; 715600, 4155700; 715500, 4155800; 715400, 4155800; 715300, 
4156600; 715400, 4156600; 715400, 4157200; 715400, 4157400; 715500, 
4157400; 715500, 4157600; 717600, 4157600; 717600, 4159700; 718100, 
4160200; 718200, 4160500; 718400, 4160800; 718700, 4161100; 716800, 
4161100; 716800, 4160400; 715253, 4160400; 714900, 4160400; 714900, 
4160900; 715000, 4160900; 715000, 4161000; 715200, 4161000; 715200, 
4161100; 714400, 4161100; 714400, 4161200; 713700, 4161200; 713700, 
4161100; 713300, 4161100; 713200, 4161200; 713100, 4161100; 713100, 
4161000; 713400, 4160700; 713400, 4160600; 713600, 4160500; 713800, 
4160800; 713900, 4160800; 714000, 4160700; 714000, 4160400; 711133, 
4160301; 711100, 4161900; 709500, 4161900; 709500, 4163500; 707900, 
4163500; 707900, 4163100; 707000, 4163100; 707000, 4165600; 707400, 
4165600; 707400, 4165800; 706700, 4166100; 706500, 4165800; 706200, 
4166000; 706300, 4166300; 706200, 4166400; 706200, 4166500; 706300, 
4166500; 706300, 4166700; 706200, 4166700; 706200, 4167100; 706500, 
4167100; 706700, 4166700; 706800, 4166700; 706800, 4166300; 707000, 
4166300; 707000, 4166100; 707200, 4166100; 707200, 4166700; 707400, 
4166700; 707800, 4166000; 707800, 4165600; 708000, 4165800; 708200, 
4165800; 708400, 4165700; 708400, 4165500; 708200, 4165400; 708200, 
4165300; 708300, 4165200; 708400, 4165200; 708500, 4165300; 708600, 
4165400; 708800, 4165400; 709100, 4165100; 710200, 4165100; 710200, 
4166400; 710100, 4166400; 710100, 4166500; 710000, 4166500; 709900, 
4166500; 709900, 4166700; 709800, 4166700; 709800, 4167100; 710200, 
4166800; 711000, 4167600; 711600, 4167800; 712400, 4167800; 712400, 
4167300; 712900, 4167300; 712900, 4167200; 712600, 4166900; 711800, 
4167000; 711600, 4166800; 711600, 4166600; 711800, 4166500; 711800, 
4166600; 711900, 4166600; 712000, 4166300; 712100, 4166500; 712200, 
4166500; 712300, 4166400; 712500, 4166400; 712500, 4166200; 712700, 
4166200; 712700, 4166300; 712800, 4166300; 713000, 4166100; 712923, 
4166062; 712800, 4166000; 712700, 4165800; 712500, 4165800; 712500, 
4165600; 712700, 4165600; 712600, 4165400; 712400, 4165500; 712300, 
4165400; 712500, 4165300; 712500, 4165200; 712400, 4165100; 712600, 
4165100; 712600, 4165000; 712600, 4164900; 712700, 4164800; 712600, 
4164700; 712500, 4164800; 712400, 4164800; 712400, 4164300; 712800, 
4164500; 713100, 4164300; 713200, 4164100; 712900, 4163800; 712900, 
4163700; 713100, 4163800; 713500, 4164000; 713600, 4164000; 713600, 
4164100; 713700, 4164300; 714200, 4164300; 714400, 4164500; 714500, 
4164800; 714600, 4164800; 714800, 4164700; 714800, 4164200; 714400, 
4164000; 714400, 4163600; 714500, 4163500; 715200, 4164000; 715300, 
4164200; 715400, 4164200; 715300, 4163900; 715100, 4163700; 715000, 
4163500; 714800, 4163300; 714900, 4163200; 715000, 4163200; 715700, 
4163200; 715900, 4163100; 716000, 4162900; 716100, 4162800; 716200, 
4162800; 716300, 4162900; 716400, 4163000; 716500, 4163100; 716600, 
4163200; 716600, 4163500; 716500, 4163600; 716500, 4163800; 716600, 
4164100; 716800, 4164500; 716700, 4164900; 716800, 4165300; 717200, 
4165800; 717200, 4166100; 717000, 4166400; 716600, 4166400; 716400, 
4166300; 716400, 4166900; 716600, 4166900; 716800, 4167100; 716800, 
4167300; 717000, 4167400; 717500, 4167400; 718100, 4167300; 718500, 
4167100; 718600, 4166600; 718700, 4166400; 719100, 4166700; 719300, 
4166800; 719500, 4166800; 719500, 4166500; 719600, 4166400; 719600, 
4166100; 719800, 4166100; 719900, 4166300; 719900, 4166200; 720700, 
4166200; 720700, 4163700; 721533, 4163700; 721700, 4163700; 722400, 
4164100; 722400, 4164155; 722400, 4165300; 722200, 4165300; 722200, 
4165400; 721500, 4165400; 721500,

[[Page 254]]

4166100; 721000, 4166300; 720700, 4166500; 720900, 4166600; 721000, 
4166700; 721100, 4166900; 721000, 4167000; 720300, 4167000; 720100, 
4166900; 720200, 4166700; 720200, e 55'4166600; 720100, 4166500; 
720000,4166500; 719800,4166800; 719500,4167400; 719500,4167600; 
719700,4167800; 720500,4167800; 720700,4167700; 720900,4167500; 
721100,4167400; 721300,4167700; 721700,4167700; 722000,4167600; 
722500,4167600; 722900,4167500; 723300,4167400; 723000,4168400; 
723000,4169200; 723300,4169700; 723800,4169800; 724100,4169800; 
724600,4169200; 724700,4168300; returning to 725100,4167900;
    (iii) Unit 21C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Turlock Lake. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 713800,4155400; 712600,4155200; 712600,4156800; 
712900,4156800; 712900,4157100; 714800,4157200; 714800,4156800; 
714300,4156300; 714200,4156200; 714000,4155500; 714000,4155400; 
returning to 713800,4155400;
    (27) Unit 22: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Merced Falls, Snelling, Indian Gulch, Haystack Mtn., Yosemite 
Lake, Winton, Owens Reservoir, Planada, Le Grand, Plainsburg, and 
Merced. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 737800,4155000; 738200,4154200; 738300,4153300; 739000,4152800; 
739100,4152200; 740200,4151800; 740800,4151500; 740800,4150300; 
741100,4149900; 741700,4149400; 742100,4148500; 742100,4147100; 
743400,4146100; 744000,4145600; 744400,4144600; 744300,4143900; 
743900,4142700; 744000,4142000; 744200,4141700; 745500,4140300; 
745500,4139600; 745500,4139576; 745500,4139500; 745432,4139432; 
745400,4139400; 745339,4139307; 745338,4139306; 745334,4139300; 
745500,4139300; 745500,4139100; 745500,4137700; 746600,4137100; 
747300,4137300; 747200,4135800; 747600,4135300; 747600,4134800; 
748100,4134400; 747800,4133700; 748400,4133300; 748600,4133900; 
749500,4133400; 749600,4132100; 750400,4131600; 750100,4129800; 
751693,4129800; 751681,4129794; 751664,4129785; 751654,4129772; 
751560,4129753; 751457,4129733; 751416,4129705; 751410,4129701; 
751400,4129700; 751399,4129700; 751326,4129693; 751299,4129685; 
751191,4129530; 751123,4129507; 751088,4129488; 751053,4129470; 
751004,4129410; 751002,4129402; 750955,4129261; 750909,4129180; 
750848,4129037; 750790,4128977; 750766,4128953; 750609,4128861; 
750506,4128806; 750420,4128760; 750409,4128754; 750305,4128665; 
750239,4128660; 750017,4128694; 750006,4128700; 749963,4128723; 
749886,4128721; 749824,4128725; 749716,4128734; 749672,4128755; 
749591,4128753; 749563,4128739; 749458,4128596; 749410,4128574; 
749363,4128542; 749133,4128508; 749013,4128457; 749005,4128453; 
749002,4128451; 748903,4128379; 748906,4128277; 748917,4128239; 
748933,4128123; 748899,4128013; 748784,4127941; 748764,4127912; 
748753,4127851; 748635,4127644; 748439,4127570; 748396,4127553; 
748343,4127521; 748306,4127500; 748300,4127486; 748287,4127458; 
748295,4127296; 748300,4127277; 748320,4127203; 748332,4127134; 
748321,4127094; 748292,4127060; 748196,4126992; 748194,4126991; 
748166,4126932; 748141,4126839; 748080,4126756; 748085,4126672; 
748075,4126641; 748037,4126635; 747962,4126676; 747898,4126700; 
747863,4126691; 747823,4126667; 747794,4126628; 747766,4126528; 
747692,4126358; 747650,4126316; 747562,4126246; 747502,4126125; 
747478,4126053; 747451,4126022; 747406,4126011; 747358,4126000; 
747200,4126000; 747142,4125971; 747123,4125969; 747070,4125950; 
747003,4125902; 747000,4125900; 746900,4125900; 746600,4125800; 
746300,4125700; 746200,4125600; 746200,4125500; 745700,4125500; 
745700,4125100; 744500,4125100; 744500,4125300; 744400,4125300; 
744400,4125200; 743700,4125200; 743700,4125800; 744500,4125800; 
744500,4126200; 743700,4126200; 743700,4127000; 743600,4127000; 
742700,4127000; 742400,4127000; 742000,4127200; 742000,4128600; 
742800,4128600; 742800,4129100; 742900,4129100; 743000,4129100; 
743000,4129200; 743400,4129300; 743600,4129500; 743600,4130284; 
743605,4130284; 743600,4130493; 743600,4130700; 743595,4130700; 
743561,4132097; 743560,4132170; 743556,4132335; 744000,4133400; 
743530,4133400; 743523,4133729; 743518,4134016; 743515,4134159; 
743509,4134382; 743500,4134708; 743504,4134743; 743565,4134782; 
744447,4135329; 746234,4136439; 746230,4136445; 745985,4136865; 
745952,4136931; 745915,4136978; 745914,4136987; 745902,4137008; 
745748,4137298; 745669,4137403; 745620,4137437; 745503,4137487; 
745203,4138201; 744984,4138471; 744895,4138606; 744895,4138606; 
744830,4138711; 744596,4139085; 744234,4139637; 744233,4139645; 
744162,4139744; 744162,4139744; 744013,4140002; 744013,4140002; 
743998,4140029; 743996,4140030; 743973,4140072; 743907,4140195; 
743889,4140229; 743877,4140264; 743750,4140609; 743388,4140868; 
743091,4141131; 743053,4141165; 742997,4141268; 742771,4141692; 
742748,4141734; 742355,4142343; 742336,4142368; 742271,4142457; 
742238,4142503; 742139,4142637; 742056,4142749; 742002,4142823; 
741974,4142874; 741808,4143176; 741722,4143360; 741419,4144010; 
741385,4144081; 741316,4144328; 741297,4144395; 741245,4144456; 
741194,4144530; 741162,4144608; 741076,4144820; 740864,4144897; 
740843,4144899; 740750,4144952; 740641,4145056; 740535,4145175; 
740517,4145182; 740490,4145240; 740487,4145263; 740386,4145415; 
740321,4145847; 740320,4146066; 740303,4146114; 740276,4146159; 
740272,4146225; 740293,4146273; 740293,4146303; 740370,4146426; 
740415,4146474; 740536,4146602; 740735,4146722; 740825,4146775; 
741069,4147251; 741071,4147549; 741071,4147576; 740982,4147830; 
740955,4147883; 740914,4147967; 740822,4148059; 740772,4148182; 
740782,4148363; 740776,4148391; 740695,4148831; 740617,4149151; 
740447,4149311; 740396,4149534; 740344,4149561; 740303,4149575; 
740289,4149588; 740238,4149636; 740225,4149666; 740057,4149659; 
739993,4149678; 739917,4149678; 739791,4149621; 739705,4149597; 
739701,4149596; 739602,4149593; 739521,4149560; 739443,4149542; 
739197,4149515; 738714,4149273; 738694,4149252; 738674,4149251; 
738178,4148999; 737835,4148823; 737747,4148772; 737044,4148135; 
736672,4147809; 736430,4147669; 735929,4147379; 735716,4147219; 
735669,4147184; 735605,4147136; 735437,4147009; 735223,4146848; 
735183,4146809; 735156,4146798; 735151,4146778; 735022,4146655; 
734989,4146630; 734609,4146349; 734480,4146255; 734012,4145909; 
733808,4145758; 733765,4145739; 733763,4145732; 733370,4145442; 
732703,4144952; 732391,4144910;

[[Page 255]]

732197,4144885; 731993,4144850; 731062,4144594; 730371,4144363; 
729000,4143905; 728736,4143813; 728542,4143745; 728346,4143647; 
728018,4143482; 727340,4143194; 726795,4142958; 726607,4142867; 
726599,4142856; 726577,4142853; 725785,4142417; 725793,4142408; 
725843,4142361; 726002,4142378; 726117,4142355; 726204,4142264; 
726415,4142046; 726420,4141975; 726381,4141921; 726367,4141880; 
726261,4141732; 726182,4141648; 725935,4141477; 725916,4141451; 
725903,4141379; 725914,4141349; 725981,4141288; 726033,4141240; 
726145,4141137; 726156,4141109; 726147,4141073; 726096,4140993; 
726083,4140896; 726089,4140784; 726108,4140739; 726268,4140551; 
726269,4140436; 726283,4140368; 726313,4140308; 726412,4140209; 
726455,4140025; 726457,4140000; 726459,4139959; 726715,4139715; 
726786,4139647; 726804,4139630; 726822,4139625; 726822,4139611; 
726823,4139582; 726809,4139546; 726755,4139466; 726754,4139433; 
726931,4139179; 727174,4138842; 727220,4138823; 727261,4138819; 
727328,4138864; 727331,4138842; 727333,4138831; 727335,4138819; 
727343,4138816; 727396,4138803; 727406,4138800; 727414,4138798; 
727552,4138779; 727711,4138793; 727806,4138786; 727819,4138766; 
727845,4138644; 727858,4138617; 727881,4138590; 727700,4138500; 
727600,4138400; 727400,4138300; 727400,4137800; 727300,4137800; 
727300,4137600; 727400,4137600; 727400,4137500; 727300,4137500; 
727300,4137400; 727400,4137400; 727400,4137200; 726500,4137200; 
726500,4136500; 726400,4136400; 725800,4136400; 725800,4137200; 
725000,4137200; 724900,4138800; 725500,4138800; 725500,4138700; 
725800,4138700; 725800,4138800; 725900,4138800; 725900,4139500; 
726500,4139500; 726500,4139600; 725900,4139600; 725800,4139600; 
725800,4140200; 725900,4140200; 725900,4140900; 725400,4140900; 
725400,4140800; 725100,4140800; 725100,4141000; 724900,4141000; 
724900,4141200; 724100,4141200; 724100,4141600; 723400,4141600; 
723400,4141100; 723200,4141100; 723200,4140600; 723400,4140500; 
723400,4139500; 724000,4139500; 724000,4139400; 723900,4138900; 
723900,4138700; 723500,4138200; 723400,4138200; 723400,4138300; 
723000,4138300; 723000,4138700; 723000,4138900; 723100,4139100; 
723200,4139400; 723300,4139500; 722100,4139500; 722000,4140500; 
721900,4141100; 721900,4141900; 721900,4143400; 720800,4143400; 
720900,4141800; 721000,4141500; 721000,4141200; 721100,4141100; 
721000,4141000; 717800,4140900; 717700,4142500; 714500,4142400; 
714500,4144900; 715500,4144900; 715500,4145000; 715800,4145000; 
715900,4145000; 716000,4145000; 716100,4145100; 716100,4145200; 
716000,4145200; 715900,4145300; 715900,4145400; 716000,4145500; 
716000,4145600; 716100,4145700; 717000,4145700; 717700,4145300; 
717800,4145300; 717800,4145200; 717800,4145100; 717600,4144900; 
717600,4144800; 717600,4144700; 717800,4144500; 717900,4144600; 
718200,4144600; 718400,4144500; 718700,4144500; 718700,4144800; 
718600,4145000; 718700,4145100; 718700,4145600; 718600,4145600; 
718600,4145700; 718700,4145800; 718600,4145900; 718500,4146000; 
718500,4146100; 718600,4146200; 718600,4146500; 718300,4146500; 
718200,4146600; 718200,4146800; 718300,4146800; 718500,4146900; 
718600,4147000; 718600,4147100; 718400,4147200; 718500,4147300; 
718500,4147600; 718700,4147600; 718700,4147400; 719000,4147500; 
719100,4147700; 719300,4147600; 719600,4147900; 719700,4148000; 
719700,4148100; 719800,4148200; 720000,4148200; 720600,4148200; 
720600,4148300; 720700,4148400; 720800,4148400; 720900,4148500; 
722700,4148500; 722700,4148600; 722900,4148600; 723200,4148700; 
723400,4148700; 723200,4148600; 723100,4148500; 723000,4148400; 
723200,4148200; 723400,4148200; 723500,4148300; 723600,4148400; 
723600,4148500; 723800,4148500; 723800,4148400; 723900,4148400; 
723900,4148500; 724000,4148700; 724200,4148500; 724200,4148900; 
724300,4149000; 724300,4149100; 724500,4149000; 724500,4149300; 
724700,4149400; 724900,4149600; 725000,4149700; 725000,4150000; 
724900,4150100; 725000,4150200; 725200,4150200; 725300,4150400; 
725400,4150500; 725400,4150600; 725100,4150900; 724700,4150900; 
724700,4153400; 725000,4153500; 725400,4153900; 725600,4154100; 
725800,4154200; 726000,4154300; 726200,4154000; 726300,4153800; 
726300,4153700; 727800,4153600; 727800,4153400; 727900,4153400; 
727900,4153500; 728400,4153600; 728700,4153700; 729000,4153700; 
729000,4153600; 729100,4153500; 729300,4153400; 729400,4153400; 
729400,4153300; 729300,4153200; 729500,4153100; 729800,4153100; 
729900,4153200; 729900,4154200; 730000,4154200; 730100,4154300; 
730600,4154300; 730700,4154400; 731000,4154600; 731200,4154700; 
731500,4154700; 731800,4154900; 732200,4154900; 732600,4154800; 
733200,4154500; 733400,4154500; 733700,4154300; 734700,4154300; 
734900,4154600; 735100,4154800; 735100,4154900; 735500,4155300; 
735600,4155300; 735800,4155500; 736100,4155900; 737100,4155400; 
737157,4155367; returning to 737800,4155000;

    (28) Note: Units 21-22 (Map 8) follow:

[[Page 256]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.016

    (29) Unit 23: Merced County, California
    (i) Unit 23A: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson, Gustine, and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 
688600, 4128800; 689100, 4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 
689800, 4128500; 689900, 4128300;

[[Page 257]]

690200, 4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 4125500; 
692700, 4125500; 693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 
693300, 4123700; 693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 
694079, 4122821; 694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 
692200, 4122000; 692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 
691400, 4122800; 691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 
691267, 4123155; 691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 
691217, 4123291; 691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 
691126, 4123677; 691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 
691177, 4123739; 691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 
691195, 4123810; 691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 
691214, 4123980; 691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 
691127, 4124089; 691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 
690900, 4124400; 690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 
690582, 4124427; 690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 
690546, 4124493; 690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 
690500, 4124524; 690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 
690388, 4124590; 690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 
690083, 4124695; 690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 
689988, 4125006; 689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 
689819, 4125184; 689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 
689658, 4125595; 689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 
689630, 4125793; 689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 
689400, 4126600; 689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 
689134, 4126678; 689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 
689020, 4126961; 688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 
688913, 4127006; 689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 
688949, 4127292; 688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 
688823, 4127454; 688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 
688696, 4127650; 688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; 
returning to 688300, 4129000;
    (ii) Unit 23B: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 4125600; 695500, 4122000; 
694900, 4122400; 694700, 4122700; 694500, 4122900; 694500, 4123100; 
694100, 4123400; 693800, 4123500; 693800, 4123800; 693500, 4123900; 
693500, 4124500; 693700, 4124700; 693800, 4125000; 693600, 4125200; 
693400, 4125300; 693122, 4125670; 693100, 4125700; 693146, 4125746; 
693200, 4125800; 693700, 4125900; 693700, 4127300; 693800, 4127300; 
693900, 4127000; 694200, 4126900; 694600, 4126400; 694600, 4126200; 
694700, 4126000; 695179, 4125726; returning to 695400, 4125600;
    (iii) Unit 23C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena, Stevinson, Turner Ranch, and San Luis Ranch. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 699300, 
4126300; 699300, 4125400; 700100, 4125400; 700200, 4126000; 700600, 
4125700; 701100, 4125300; 701100, 4124300; 700300, 4124300; 700300, 
4123800; 700500, 4123800; 700600, 4123500; 701100, 4123400; 701200, 
4123200; 701400, 4123100; 701600, 4122700; 701900, 4122500; 702600, 
4122200; 702870, 4121705; 703200, 4121100; 703900, 4120500; 704600, 
4119800; 704600, 4119800; 704700, 4119700; 698900, 4119600; 698800, 
4119700; 698543, 4119957; 698558, 4119970; 698501, 4120012; 698504, 
4120069; 698626, 4120197; 698662, 4120077; 698694, 4120113; 698668, 
4121116; 698663, 4121510; 698594, 4121508; 698600, 4121600; 699900, 
4121600; 700000, 4120400; 700200, 4120400; 700200, 4122700; 697000, 
4122600; 696900, 4125100; 697700, 4125100; 697700, 4125300; 697600, 
4125400; 697700, 4125600; 698000, 4125700; 698200, 4125800; 698300, 
4126100; 698700, 4126500; 699500, 4126500; 699600, 4126300; returning to 
699300, 4126300;
    (iv) Unit 23D: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 706800, 4120900; 
706700, 4120500; 706700, 4119700; 708100, 4119700; 708100, 4119600; 
708000, 4119500; 707900, 4119200; 707900, 4119000; 708000, 4118900; 
708300, 4118900; 708300, 4118100; 707900, 4118100; 707500, 4118500; 
706500, 4118500; 706000, 4118900; 705600, 4119300; 705200, 4119700; 
704800, 4120000; 704700, 4120100; 704700, 4120400; 705100, 4120400; 
705100, 4120600; 704900, 4120700; 704900, 4120800; 705100, 4120800; 
704900, 4121000; 705000, 4121100; 705100, 4121700; 705200, 4121700; 
705300, 4122000; 705700, 4122100; 705700, 4122200; 705400, 4122300; 
705300, 4122400; 705500, 4122600; 705400, 4122600; 705300, 4122500; 
705200, 4122500; 705100, 4122500; 704900, 4122500; 704900, 4122700; 
704800, 4122800; 704500, 4122800; 704300, 4122900; 704000, 4122800; 
703900, 4122900; 703400, 4124400; 703300, 4124600; 701300, 4126500; 
700100, 4127600; 700467, 4129067; 700500, 4129200; 700500, 4130600; 
701000, 4130600; 701000, 4130100; 701100, 4129800; 701200, 4129800; 
701100, 4130100; 701100, 4130600; 701700, 4130600; 701700, 4129200; 
701800, 4129200; 702800, 4129200; 703000, 4128800; 703300, 4128800; 
703900,4128800; 703900, 4129000; 704200, 4129000; 704200, 4128500; 
703300,4128400; 703400, 4128300; 703400, 4127900; 703500,4127800; 
703800, 4127500; 703700, 4127300; 703500, 4127300; 703400,4127100; 
703400, 4126100; 703500, 4126100; 704400, 4126100; 704300, 4126000; 
704400, 4125900; 704500, 4125300; 704500, 4124800; 705000, 4124800; 
705000, 4125300; 705700, 4125300; 705700, 4124900; 706600, 4125000; 
706700, 4123700; returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (v) Unit 23E: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 711500, 4122200; 
711500, 4121700; 711500, 4121200; 709900, 4121300; 709900, 4121900; 
709800, 4121900; 709800, 4121800; 709700, 4121500; 709500, 4121500; 
709300, 4121600; 708800, 4121400; 708700, 4121300; 706800, 4121300; 
returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (vi) Unit 23F: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 711200, 4120500; 711400, 4120400; 
711500, 4120500; 711600, 4119600; 711900, 4119600; 711900,4119400; 
712100, 4119300; 712300, 4119300; 712300, 4119200; 712600, 4119200; 
712800, 4118800; 711600, 4118700; 711600, 4118500; 711400, 4118500;

[[Page 258]]

711300, 4118400; 711100, 4118100; 709900, 4118100; 709900, 4118800; 
709900, 4119000; 709700, 4119000; 709700, 4119600; 710300, 4119600; 
710300, 4119900; 710700, 4119900; 710700, 4120000; 710600, 4120000; 
710600, 4120100; 710700, 4120200; 710600, 4120300; 710700, 4120400; 
710700, 4120500; 710900, 4120400; 711100, 4120400; returning to 711200, 
4120500;
    (vii) Unit 23G: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 714600, 4115000; 713300, 4115000; 713100, 4115300; 
713300, 4115300; 713800, 4115400; 713800, 4116600; 715400, 4116600; 
715500, 4116500; 715500, 4115818; 714600, 4115800; returning to 714600, 
4115000;
    (viii) Unit 23H: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido and Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 718900, 4120900; 718900, 4120000; 
719300, 4120000; 719400, 4120200; 719600, 4120100; 720200, 4120100; 
720300, 4120200; 720700, 4120200; 720900, 4120000; 721500, 4120000; 
721600, 4120100; 722000, 4120100; 722100, 4120000; 722200, 4120200; 
722200, 4120300; 722900, 4120300; 722900, 4119600; 722100, 4119500; 
722200, 4118400; 725400, 4118500; 725400, 4118578; 726100, 4118600; 
726100, 4120100; 728600, 4120100; 728600, 4119200; 727800, 4119200; 
727700, 4118600; 727600, 4118500; 727500, 4118500; 727500, 4118400; 
727500, 4116900; 726800, 4116900; 726700, 4116900; 726800, 4115300; 
725900, 4115300; 725900, 4116900; 724300, 4116900; 724300, 4117600; 
722694, 4117506; 722600, 4117600; 721800, 4117600; 721800, 4118400; 
720200, 4118400; 720200, 4117600; 719400, 4117600; 719400, 4116700; 
718600, 4116700; 718600, 4117100; 718200, 4117100; 718200, 4117200; 
718300, 4117300; 718400, 4117400; 718600, 4117400; 718600, 4117500; 
718600, 4118291; 718900, 4118300; 718900, 4118900; 718800, 4119000; 
718700, 4119000; 718600, 4119100; 717700, 4119100; 717700, 4119900; 
718100, 4119900; 718100, 4119950; 718100, 4120000; 718500, 4120000; 
718500, 4120900; returning to 718900, 4120900;
    (ix) Unit 23I: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 721300, 4120800; 720500, 4120800; 720500, 4121600; 
721300, 4121600; 721300, 4121200; returning to 721300, 4120800;
    (x) Unit 23J: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 722900, 4121800; 721800, 4121800; 722200, 4122500; 
722900, 4122500; returning to 722900, 4121800;
    (xi) Unit 23K: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Plainsburg and El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 731700, 4117000; 730400, 4117000; 
730400, 4118600; 730200, 4118600; 730100, 4119300; 730000, 4119700; 
730000, 4119900; 730100, 4120200; 730900, 4120200; 730900, 4121400; 
731300, 4121500; 731800, 4121400; 732700, 4121300; 734000, 4121200; 
734200, 4121100; 734200, 4120300; 733400, 4120300; 733400, 4118700; 
731700, 4118700; returning to 731700, 4117000.

    (xii) Note: Unit 23 (Map 9) follows:

[[Page 259]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.017

    (30) Unit 24: Madera County, California.
    (i) Unit 24A: Madera County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Little Table Mountain, Daulton, Lanes Bridge, and Gregg. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 775948, 
4105456; 775999, 4105450; 776120, 4105477; 776212, 4105561; 776272, 
4105591; 776338, 4105583; 776404,

[[Page 260]]

4105519; 776449, 4105460; 776460, 4105422; 776461, 4105333; 776454, 
4105310; 776453, 4105259; 776440, 4105190; 776403, 4105067; 776342, 
4104912; 776338, 4104874; 776344, 4104834; 776389, 4104794; 776390, 
4104794; 776511, 4104930; 776669, 4105060; 776888, 4105057; 777034, 
4105112; 777089, 4105117; 777174, 4105104; 777227, 4105114; 777322, 
4105160; 777452, 4105307; 777505, 4105311; 777525, 4105303; 777569, 
4105287; 777611, 4105253; 777630, 4105233; 777676, 4105204; 777716, 
4105178; 777254, 4104608; 776860, 4104161; 777386, 4103739; 777417, 
4103722; 777478, 4103724; 777556, 4103747; 777592, 4103745; 777628, 
4103729; 777649, 4103704; 777655, 4103686; 777652, 4103610; 777595, 
4103484; 777574, 4103361; 777542, 4103322; 777483, 4103277; 777424, 
4103214; 777425, 4103166; 777452, 4103116; 777471, 4103096; 777503, 
4103036; 777500, 4102977; 777455, 4102796; 777458, 4102704; 777472, 
4102666; 777490, 4102639; 777701, 4102491; 777761, 4102460; 777902, 
4102427; 778037, 4102384; 778066, 4102347; 778094, 4102274; 778118, 
4102255; 778167, 4102239; 778212, 4102243; 778340, 4102295; 778379, 
4102282; 778505, 4102141; 778562, 4102125; 778633, 4102132; 778720, 
4102092; 778766, 4102096; 778798, 4102120; 778918, 4102254; 778976, 
4102268; 778997, 4102264; 779059, 4102223; 779095, 4102209; 779762, 
4102193; 779897, 4102172; 780079, 4102219; 780132, 4102236; 780185, 
4102235; 780236, 4102217; 780360, 4102089; 780617, 4101823; 780666, 
4101774; 780673, 4101764; 780682, 4101751; 780688, 4101743; 780713, 
4101714; 780759, 4101634; 780761, 4101576; 780738, 4101514; 780687, 
4101446; 780591, 4101336; 780514, 4101212; 780513, 4101163; 780527, 
4101126; 780569, 4101089; 780939, 4100827; 781071, 4100686; 781076, 
4100683; 781136, 4100645; 781561, 4100454; 781645, 4100459; 781800, 
4100538; 781863, 4100561; 781925, 4100540; 781944, 4100528; 782075, 
4100451; 782128, 4100455; 782347, 4100528; 782403, 4100533; 782429, 
4100521; 782457, 4100499; 782535, 4100382; 782587, 4100338; 782809, 
4100244; 782840, 4100222; 782884, 4100193; 782929, 4100075; 783072, 
4099907; 783203, 4099779; 783268, 4099756; 783377, 4099744; 783662, 
4099749; 783703, 4099735; 783743, 4099676; 783751, 4099641; 783755, 
4099621; 783767, 4099609; 783768, 4099584; 783781, 4099548; 783795, 
4099504; 783827, 4099471; 783858, 4099445; 783890, 4099424; 783916, 
4099399; 783946, 4099382; 784056, 4099380; 784184, 4099372; 784246, 
4099369; 784263, 4099375; 784300, 4099370; 784342, 4099377; 784378, 
4099391; 784414, 4099405; 784438, 4099417; 784462, 4099430; 784493, 
4099442; 784516, 4099445; 784536, 4099439; 784561, 4099422; 784574, 
4099398; 784593, 4099356; 784601, 4099324; 784620, 4099288; 784627, 
4099259; 784651, 4099241; 784652, 4099240; 784671, 4099217; 784701, 
4099206; 784733, 4099188; 784758, 4099176; 784776, 4099164; 784801, 
4099153; 784820, 4099143; 784845, 4099124; 784876, 4099102; 784907, 
4099085; 784944, 4099056; 784970, 4099032; 784995, 4099006; 785020, 
4098984; 785040, 4098960; 785046, 4098935; 785059, 4098917; 785060, 
4098888; 785073, 4098858; 785074, 4098834; 785068, 4098801; 785061, 
4098785; 785052, 4098764; 785041, 4098739; 785024, 4098708; 785006, 
4098676; 784995, 4098640; 784978, 4098615; 784967, 4098591; 784960, 
4098572; 784968, 4098548; 784993, 4098525; 785024, 4098508; 785062, 
4098476; 785086, 4098473; 785117, 4098442; 785130, 4098431; 785143, 
4098395; 785152, 4098345; 785159, 4098279; 785168, 4098231; 785176, 
4098163; 785184, 4098120; 785184, 4098108; 785204, 4098054; 785220, 
4097988; 785238, 4097931; 785246, 4097885; 785247, 4097853; 785237, 
4097805; 785216, 4097736; 785199, 4097682; 785188, 4097625; 785182, 
4097596; 785190, 4097576; 785209, 4097535; 785235, 4097499; 785266, 
4097451; 785286, 4097422; 785312, 4097385; 785325, 4097349; 785320, 
4097300; 785329, 4097245; 785330, 4097202; 785337, 4097165; 785350, 
4097153; 785362, 4097142; 785387, 4097137; 785386, 4097154; 785380, 
4097178; 785336, 4098764; 785334, 4098821; 785334, 4098823; 785325, 
4099157; 785658, 4099178; 785746, 4097781; 787243, 4097875; 787331, 
4096478; 786932, 4096452; 786601, 4096933; 786208, 4096807; 786246, 
4096208; 786258, 4096009; 785453, 4095958; 784661, 4095908; 784661, 
4095908; 784662, 4095507; 784662, 4094305; 784681, 4094005; 780582, 
4093847; 779783, 4093796; 776583, 4093695; 776463, 4095591; 776657, 
4095704; 778160, 4095698; 778053, 4097395; 778858, 4097346; 778857, 
4098949; 779656, 4099000; 779555, 4100597; 776348, 4100594; 776551, 
4095797; 776451, 4095791; 773656, 4095615; 771760, 4095495; 771697, 
4096493; 771652, 4098795; 773554, 4098815; 773553, 4100418; 769954, 
4100291; 769935, 4100590; 771238, 4102176; 772086, 4103031; 772447, 
4103655; 772896, 4104485; 774373, 4106482; 774835, 4107052; 774846, 
4107045; 774850, 4107042; 774860, 4107038; 774885, 4106988; 774910, 
4106826; 774924, 4106643; 774919, 4106604; 774912, 4106536; 774917, 
4106473; 774975, 4106381; 774999, 4106361; 775134, 4106205; 775285, 
4106081; 775406, 4105942; 775604, 4105742; 775620, 4105713; 775682, 
4105659; 775765, 4105623; returning to 775948, 4105456;
    (ii) Unit 24B: Fresno County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Friant. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 793782, 4099090; 793994, 4098902; 794194, 4098915; 
794306, 4098722; 794618, 4098541; 794831, 4098354; 795529, 4098398; 
795835, 4098317; 796228, 4098442; 796403, 4098854; 797089, 4099098; 
797289, 4099111; 797588, 4099129; 798930, 4098512; 798743, 4098300; 
798244, 4098269; 797832, 4098443; 797863, 4097944; 797670, 4097832; 
797577, 4097725; 797583, 4097626; 797589, 4097526; 797989, 4097551; 
798007, 4097252; 797708, 4097233; 797721, 4097033; 797920, 4097046; 
797926, 4096946; 797446, 4096615; 796479, 4096053; 796018, 4095422; 
794932, 4095153; 794203, 4094004; 794215, 4093805; 794515, 4093824; 
795494, 4094186; 796549, 4093351; 797229, 4093694; 797760, 4093226; 
797848, 4091829; 797655, 4091716; 797580, 4091310; 796372, 4090700; 
796318, 4090707; 796265, 4090961; 796301, 4090929; 796262, 4090975; 
796072, 4091876; 796159, 4092137; 796200, 4092206; 796282, 4092261; 
796330, 4092663; 796160, 4093099; 796056, 4093364; 795805, 4093706; 
795727, 4093853; 795710, 4093880; 795603, 4094060; 795291, 4093982; 
794825, 4093866; 794320, 4093746; 794171, 4093710; 794163, 4093773; 
794145, 4093931; 794183, 4094110; 794269, 4094203; 794321, 4094260; 
794475, 4094454; 794503, 4094666; 794724, 4094985; 794665, 4095138; 
794826, 4095644; 794644, 4095919; 794496, 4096144; 794468, 4096427; 
794455, 4096564; 793663, 4097789; 793626, 4098378; 793513, 4098371; 
793423, 4098551; 793475, 4098842; 793327, 4099109; 793333, 4099147; 
793270, 4099175; 793237, 4099239; 793463, 4099370; 793563, 4099377; 
793769, 4099289; returning to 793782, 4099090;

[[Page 261]]

    (31) Unit 25: Madera County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Millerton Lake East. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 804045, 4111166; 804569, 4110798; 804807, 
4110212; 804938, 4109719; 804571, 4109194; 803572, 4109131; 803260, 
4109312; 803222, 4109911; 803359, 4110922; 802579, 4110572; 802254, 
4110952; 801755, 4110921; 801473, 4112206; 801947, 4112637; 802009, 
4113242; 801391, 4113504; 801578, 4113716; 801627, 4114521; 801820, 
4114634; 803618, 4114748; 803836, 4114461; 803787, 4113656; 802720, 
4113087; 802839, 4112794; 803158, 4112513; 803788, 4112052; returning to 
804045, 4111166;

    (32) Note: Units 24-25 (Map 10) follow:

[[Page 262]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.018

    (33) Unit 26: Tulare and Kings Counties, California.
    (i) Unit 26A: Tulare and Kings Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Monson, Traver, Burris Park, and Remnoy. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 828797, 
4041134; 828810, 4040935; 829509, 4040978;

[[Page 263]]

829634, 4040585; 829709, 4039386; 830449, 4039621; 830453, 4039463; 
830420, 4039230; 829721, 4039186; 829521, 4039174; 829509, 4039374; 
828304, 4039399; 828279, 4039798; 827580, 4039755; 827605, 4039355; 
827205, 4039330; 827280, 4038132; 826381, 4038076; 826400, 4037776; 
825601, 4037726; 825582, 4038026; 824877, 4038082; 824895, 4037782; 
822892, 4037758; 822929, 4037159; 821031, 4037041; 821075, 4036342; 
820575, 4036310; 820606, 4035811; 820207, 4035786; 820157, 4034981; 
820200, 4034282; 818203, 4034157; 818222, 4033858; 817135, 4033589; 
816842, 4033471; 816667, 4033059; 816274, 4032935; 816181, 4032934; 
814570, 4032928; 813902, 4032386; 813727, 4031974; 813565, 4031362; 
813284, 4031044; 812996, 4030826; 812891, 4032523; 813790, 4032579; 
814252, 4033209; 814539, 4033428; 814851, 4034164; 814889, 4034252; 
815581, 4034395; 816256, 4034838; 817560, 4034819; 816992, 4035886; 
818490, 4035980; 819364, 4036436; 819770, 4036360; 820900, 4037534; 
821693, 4037683; 822542, 4038539; 824646, 4038569; 824846, 4038582; 
826344, 4038675; 826313, 4039175; 825507, 4039225; 825445, 4040223; 
827043, 4040323; 827100, 4041028; returning to 828797, 4041134;
    (ii) Unit 26B: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831257, 4040285; 831281, 4039895; 831228, 4039894; 
831226, 4040265; 830457, 4040256; 830452, 4040335; returning to 831257, 
4040285;
    (iii) Unit 26C: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 835309, 4039635; 834510, 4039585; 834460, 4040384; 
835259, 4040434; returning to 835309, 4039635;
    (iv) Unit 26D: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Ivanhoe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 837863, 4043705; 837178, 4043663; 837165, 4044455; 
837527, 4044471; 837510, 4044925; 837253, 4045186; 836546, 4045165; 
836550, 4044829; 836726, 4044828; 836732, 4044453; 836753, 4044453; 
836777, 4043638; 836764, 4043637; 836765, 4043628; 835983, 4043614; 
835959, 4043687; 836040, 4043993; 836433, 4044117; 836365, 4045216; 
837164, 4045266; 836733, 4045741; 838331, 4045841; 838338, 4045740; 
837838, 4045710; 837919, 4044411; 837819, 4044405; returning to 837863, 
4043705;
    (v) Unit 26E: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831258, 4037878; 830508, 4037831; 830507, 4037837; 
830510, 4037837; 830495, 4038113; 830867, 4038116; 831249, 4038123; 
returning to 831258, 4037878;
    (vi) Unit 26F: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 832081, 4039935; 832106, 4039535; 832038, 4039531; 
831991, 4039595; 831752, 4039679; 831748, 4039853; 832035, 4039864; 
832031, 4039913; 831542, 4039901; 832081, 4039935; returning to 832081, 
4039935;
    (vii) Note: Unit 26 (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 264]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.019

    (34) Unit 27: Tulare County, California.
    (i) Unit 27A: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Taylor Weir, Corcoran, and Alpaugh. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 816702, 4000178; 
816908, 4000090; 818306, 4000177; 818405, 3998578; 819903, 3998671; 
820002, 3997073; 818403, 3996974; 818502,

[[Page 265]]

3995377; 819301, 3995426; 819351, 3994627; 820149, 3994676; 820199, 
3993877; 820248, 3993078; 820297, 3992279; 819399, 3992224; 819497, 
3990626; 819996, 3990656; 820064, 3989558; 819765, 3989539; 819752, 
3989739; 819422, 3990220; 819310, 3990414; 819104, 3990501; 817899, 
3990527; 817644, 3991413; 817613, 3991913; 817214, 3991888; 816659, 
3992756; 816504, 3993649; 816691, 3993861; 816660, 3994360; 816960, 
3994379; 816910, 3995178; 816898, 3995378; 814901, 3995254; 814802, 
3996852; 815201, 3996877; 815164, 3997476; 815252, 3997682; 816051, 
3997731; 813905, 4000005; returning to 816702, 4000178.
    (ii) Unit 27B: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Pixley and Alpaugh. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 829592, 3978113; 829568, 3978513; 829967, 
3978537; 829949, 3978837; 830348, 3978862; 830293, 3979761; 826897, 
3979551; 826585, 3979733; 826454, 3980226; 826324, 3980719; 826012, 
3980901; 825999, 3981101; 824601, 3981014; 824320, 3980697; 825480, 
3979765; 825492, 3979565; 825392, 3979559; 823495, 3979442; 822391, 
3981079; 823590, 3981153; 824008, 3980878; 824201, 3980990; 824189, 
3981190; 824476, 3981408; 824470, 3981508; 824570, 3981514; 824496, 
3982713; 827793, 3982915; 827743, 3983715; 828543, 3983764; 828598, 
3982865; 828997, 3982890; 829090, 3981391; 829090, 3981391; 830388, 
3981471; 830387, 3979867; 831991, 3979865; 831897, 3979759; 831947, 
3978960; 832946, 3979021; 832939, 3979121; 833039, 3979128; 832995, 
3978222; 832895, 3978216; 832845, 3977419; 832047, 3977387; 831990, 
3978261; 829992, 3978138; returning to 829592, 3978113;
    (iii) Unit 27C: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Pixley and Alpaugh. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 829592, 3978113; 829641, 3977314; 828842, 
3977265; 828848, 3977165; 828848, 3977165; 828885, 3976566; 827487, 
3976480; 827450, 3977079; 827150, 3977060; 827144, 3977160; 826645, 
3977130; 826700, 3976231; 825601, 3976163; 824598, 3977806; returning to 
829592, 3978113;
    (iv) Unit 27D: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Delano West. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 831681, 3975979; 831682, 3975780; 832114, 3975799; 
832147, 3975004; 831304, 3974962; 831290, 3974961; 831213, 3976207; 
832099, 3976262; 832108, 3976000; returning to 831681, 3975979;

    (v) Note: Unit 27 (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 266]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.020

    (35) Unit 28: San Benito and Monterey Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Hernandez Reservoir, Rock Springs Peak, 
Topo Peak, Hepsedam Peak, Lonoak, Pinalito Canyon, Monarch Peak, and 
Nattrass Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 682300, 4039700; 681300, 4038600; 681600,

[[Page 267]]

4037000; 681700, 4035800; 680800, 4034500; 678800, 4035200; 678000, 
4036000; 677600, 4037100; 677200, 4037800; 67680, 4037900; 676100, 
4038500; 675800, 4039000; 675000, 4038500; 675100, 4038000; 674700, 
4037600; 673100, 4037000; 673800, 4036500; 674000, 4035500; 674700, 
4035000; 675500, 4034700; 676000, 4033600; 676800, 4033300; 677600, 
4032700; 678100, 4032100; 679000, 4031400; 679600, 4031200; 679900, 
4031700; 679900, 4032700; 680500, 4033000; 681000, 4032500; 681500, 
4031500; 682600, 4031200; 684400, 4028700; 685200, 4028700; 685500, 
4028200; 687400, 4029500; 688000, 4030700; 688800, 4031100; 689700, 
4031200; 691200, 4032600; 692000, 4032300; 692500, 4031600; 693200, 
4031300; 693700, 4031300; 694300, 4030900; 693800, 4029500; 692600, 
4028500; 693500, 4028500; 694300, 4027800; 694300, 4027200; 695100, 
4026100; 696600, 4024900; 696600, 4023700; 697200, 4022600; 697900, 
4022600; 698300, 4021500; 699200, 4020500; 699100, 4019400; 698500, 
4019300; 698000, 4018700; 697100, 4018800; 695700, 4017900; 695400, 
4016900; 695100, 4016500; 694900, 4015900; 694900, 4015000; 694857, 
4014888; 694400, 4013700; 693800, 4013100; 693600, 4012100; 692400, 
4010900; 692000, 4009100; 691600, 4008600; 690800, 4008600; 689500, 
4009400; 689000, 4010100; 688900, 4010700; 687800, 4011000; 687100, 
4011000; 685400, 4012100; 684900, 4013300; 683600, 4014100; 683400, 
4014900; 682700, 4015200; 682500, 4016200; 683100, 4016600; 683100, 
4017044; 683100, 4017700; 684200, 4019500; 684200, 4020500; 683400, 
4022200; 681700, 4023500; 681100, 4023600; 680700, 4024400; 680600, 
4025500; 679800, 4025700; 679300, 4026900; 678700, 4027300; 678100, 
4026600; 677400, 4026400; 676000, 4025600; 676000, 4025000; 676600, 
4024500; 676800, 4023700; 675800, 4022500; 675702, 4021862; 675600, 
4021200; 675000, 4020200; 674200, 4019900; 672200, 4016700; 670800, 
4015700; 670000, 4015700; 669500, 4016000; 669100, 4016700; 669600, 
4017400; 669500, 4018600; 670100, 4019300; 670300, 4022200; 671000, 
4023000; 672700, 4024100; 673205, 4024226; 673500, 4024300; 674800, 
4026200; 674500, 4026500; 674600, 4027000; 674100, 4027300; 673000, 
4026800; 672400, 4027000; 671600, 4028700; 670700, 4028700; 669700, 
4028900; 669700, 4030100; 669800, 4030700; 670300, 4032100; 670700, 
4035100; 671300, 4037100; 669100, 4037700; 669200, 4038600; 668700, 
4040300; 669800, 4042700; 671900, 4043300; 674100, 4043500; 676000, 
4045600; 677300, 4046700; 683000, 4043300; 683800, 4042200; 683700, 
4040600; returning to 682300, 4039700.

    (36) Note: Unit 28 (Map 13) follows:

[[Page 268]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.021

    (37) Unit 29: Monterey County, California.
    (i) Unit 29A: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Williams Hill and Jolon. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 668500, 3981900; 668700, 3981600; 
668500, 3981100; 668700, 3980600; 669400, 3980100; 669800, 3980500; 
670600, 3980700; 671400, 3980600; 671400,

[[Page 269]]

3979500; 671900, 3979500; 672700, 3978600; 674700, 3978600; 675400, 
3978200; 674600, 3976900; 674800, 3975700; 674900, 3975567; 674900, 
3975500; 674700, 3975500; 674640, 3975981; 674639, 3976224; 674609, 
3976226; 674600, 3976300; 673444, 3976300; 673418, 3976654; 673400, 
3976654; 673400, 3976700; 673032, 3976700; 673029, 3977031; 673830, 
3977043; 673838, 3977861; 673000, 3977858; 673000, 3977900; 672261, 
3977869; 672201, 3978658; 670585, 3978648; 670610, 3977800; 670600, 
3977800; 670600, 3977628; 670210, 3977909; 669793, 3978209; 669403, 
3978493; 669204, 3978638; 669009, 3978794; 668691, 3979047; 668676, 
3979059; 668631, 3979094; 668575, 3979139; 668542, 3979154; 668427, 
3979205; 668355, 3979245; 668300, 3979300; 667137, 3980172; 668155, 
3980187; 668138, 3980992; 667738, 3980995; 667723, 3981807; 667320, 
3981800; 667314, 3982100; 668000, 3982100; returning to 668500, 3981900;
    (ii) Unit 29B: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Valleton, Wunpost, San Miguel. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706300, 3975100; 706500, 3974400; 
706400, 3971900; 706600, 3970800; 707000, 3970100; 707000, 3969400; 
706800, 3969200; 706800, 3968200; 706600, 3967499; 705500, 3965500; 
705400, 3965500; 705290, 3970469; 706068, 3970480; 706043, 3972930; 
705235, 3972918; 705200, 3974500; 705155, 3974500; 705155, 3974504; 
704931, 3974500; 704000, 3974500; 703700, 3973800; 703700, 3973400; 
703229, 3972552; 703170, 3972480; 702900, 3972300; 702600, 3972000; 
702500, 3971900; 701931, 3971236; 701923, 3971236; 701885, 3971200; 
701600, 3971200; 701300, 3971000; 700800, 3971000; 700000, 3971000; 
700000, 3970400; 699000, 3970410; 699000, 3970500; 699200, 3970700; 
699800, 3972200; 700200, 3972800; 700400, 3973600; 700800, 3974300; 
701300, 3974700; 701700, 3975500; 702900, 3976300; 703200, 3976900; 
704200, 3977800; 704800, 3977900; 705400, 3977900; 706100, 3978300; 
706700, 3978700; 706700, 3978300; 706200, 3976700; 706100, 3975500; 
returning to 706300, 3975100;
    (iii) Unit 29C: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Estrella, Paso Robles, Cholame Hills, Ranchito 
Canyon, and Creston. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 725000, 3962100; 725600, 3961700; 726100, 3961700; 
726100, 3961300; 725200, 3960400; 725100, 3959200; 724700, 3958300; 
724300, 3956700; 724700, 3956500; 725200, 3955000; 724100, 3953600; 
723800, 3952700; 723400, 3952000; 723100, 3950600; 723500, 3949700; 
723500, 3949000; 724100, 3948500; 723500, 3948400; 722300, 3948900; 
719200, 3948900; 719200, 3949700; 718300, 3949700; 718300, 3948900; 
718900, 3948900; 719000, 3948700; 719200, 3948700; 719200, 3948100; 
720000, 3948100; 720000, 3946500; 720200, 3946400; 720800, 3945700; 
721000, 3945200; 721100, 3944900; 721100, 3943400; 720100, 3943400; 
718700, 3942200; 717700, 3941700; 717400, 3941700; 717000, 3941900; 
717200, 3942500; 715100, 3944900; 715300, 3945200; 714500, 3945900; 
714800, 3946200; 714600, 3946400; 714000, 3946400; 713200, 3947000; 
713200, 3947200; 713600, 3947800; 713500, 3948400; 713200, 3948700; 
712800, 3947900; 712600, 3947900; 712500, 3948000; 712500, 3948800; 
711600, 3949100; 711300, 3949300; 711200, 3949800; 710600, 3949900; 
710500, 3950000; 710500, 3950200; 710900, 3950400; 710900, 3950600; 
710600, 3950700; 709400, 3950500; 709300, 3952100; 709800, 3952800; 
709800, 3954800; 709500, 3955200; 709500, 3955600; 710200, 3955600; 
710400, 3955500; 711000, 3955300; 711500, 3954600; 711600, 3953600; 
713900, 3953600; 714200, 3954000; 714500, 3953800; 715000, 3953700; 
715300, 3953500; 715500, 3953400; 715700, 3953400; 716000, 3953700; 
716500, 3953700; 716800, 3953600; 717600, 3953700; 717900, 3954200; 
718500, 3954600; 718900, 3954800; 719300, 3954900; 720400, 3955600; 
721400, 3956700; 722200, 3958400; 722500, 3960400; 723300, 3962100; 
724200, 3962500; 724400, 3963300; 724657, 3963557; 725100, 3964000; 
725100, 3963563; 725100, 3963300; returning to 725000, 3962100;
    (iv) Unit 29D: San Luis Obispo and Monterey Counties, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Bradley. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 3963500; 
695700, 3963400; 695755, 3963400; 695761, 3963087; 695592, 3963031; 
695500, 3963000; 695500, 3962966; 695470, 3962965; 695500, 3961632; 
695500, 3961400; 694300, 3961400; 694300, 3961200; 694200, 3961400; 
694800, 3961800; 694900, 3962400; 694700, 3962800; 694730, 3963011; 
694800, 3963500; 695400, 3963500;
    (v) Unit 29E: Monterey and San Luis Obispo County, NIT--NUM = 20D 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Miguel. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 707500, 3961300; 
706900, 3961300; 706900, 3961400; 706793, 3961480; 706792, 3961534; 
706809, 3962857; 706650, 3962895; 706543, 3962948; 706490, 3963003; 
706410, 3963007; 706288, 3963052; 706477, 3963218; 706800, 3963500; 
707600, 3963500; 707563, 3963241; 707500, 3962800; 707900, 3962500; 
708100, 3962000; returning to 707500, 3961300;
    (vi) Unit 29F: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Miguel. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 705600, 3959800; 705900, 3959400; 
705949, 3959103; 705635, 3959098; 705626, 3959502; 705300, 3959498; 
705300, 3961100; 705464, 3961118; 706200, 3961125; 706200, 3961100; 
706000, 3961000; 705600, 3959800;
    (vii) Unit 29G: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Miguel and Paso Robles. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 705700, 3957100; 
705311, 3957100; 705300, 3957657; 705300, 3958689; 706287, 3958704; 
706600, 3958600; 706900, 3958000; 706900, 3957600; 706400, 3957200; 
returning to 705700, 3957100;
    (viii) Unit 29H: San Luis Obispo, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paso Robles and Adelaida. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 705800, 3956500; 706300, 3956000; 
707900, 3956100; 707900, 3955400; 708100, 3955100; 707600, 3954000; 
707300, 3953600; 705700, 3952600; 705000, 3952800; 703200, 3952200; 
703000, 3952200; 703000, 3953500; 702200, 3953500; 702113, 3954196; 
703041, 3955028; 705352, 3955079; 705351, 3955100; 705400,

[[Page 270]]

3955100; 705328, 3956248; 705319, 3956700; 705400, 3956700; returning to 
705800, 3956500;

    (ix) Note: Unit 29 (Map 14) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.022
    

[[Page 271]]


    (38) Unit 30: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Simmler. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 774375, 3914002; 777312, 3913479; 778710, 3913564; 
779726, 3913325; 780573, 3912575; 780827, 3911688; 779496, 3910506; 
779321, 3910094; 780960, 3909492; 781390, 3909017; 782948, 3908110; 
783520, 3906942; 783765, 3906725; 783760, 3906724; 782946, 3906690; 
782936, 3906690; 782156, 3906654; 782132, 3906653; 782082, 3908301; 
780768, 3908263; 780485, 3908255; 780490, 3908031; 780522, 3906619; 
779393, 3906593; 777627, 3906558; 777613, 3906978; 777456, 3906974; 
777388, 3907272; 777578, 3909087; 777442, 3909680; 774998, 3910333; 
772742, 3911198; 772708, 3913400; 773483, 3913848; returning to 774375, 
3914002;

    (39) Note: Unit 30 (Map 15) follows:

[[Page 272]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.023

    (40) Unit 31: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Figueroa Mtn., Los Olivos, Lake Cachuma, and Santa 
Ynez. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 775060, 3831898; 774653, 3831857; 774200, 3831800; 773600, 
3831900; 772500, 3831800; 772100, 3831400; 771400, 3831500; 770400, 
3831000; 769800,

[[Page 273]]

3830900; 769300, 3831100; 769100, 3831300; 768500, 3832600; 768500, 
3833300; 768700, 3833700; 769900, 3834700; 770200, 3834700; 771157, 
3834982; 772300, 3835300; 772800, 3835000; 773100, 3835000; 773100, 
3835300; 773700, 3835300; 773700, 3835700; 773600, 3836100; 773200, 
3836900; 773800, 3837100; 774300, 3836500; 774928, 3836289; 774935, 
3836124; 775060, 3831898; UTM NAD83 Zone 11N: 225515, 3836830; 226600, 
3838500; 228200, 3839300; 229800, 3839000; 232200, 3840500; 232400, 
3841700; 232300, 3842700; 231600, 3843100; 230300, 3844900; 230000, 
3846200; 230800, 3846400; 231200, 3846200; 231700, 3846200; 232000, 
3846500; 232800, 3847000; 233800, 3847000; 234500, 3846400; 234700, 
3845600; 235200, 3845600; 235900, 3844500; 236400, 3844200; 236400, 
3843800; 235900, 3843600; 235500, 3843000; 235200, 3842900; 235100, 
3842800; 235100, 3842000; 235300, 3841300; 235200, 3840700; 234700, 
3840000; 234900, 3839700; 234600, 3839500; 234600, 3839300; 233800, 
3839300; 233100, 3838200; 232900, 3838000; 232300, 3837900; 232100, 
3838200; 231800, 3838400; 231400, 3838500; 230700, 3837700; 230800, 
3837200; 230300, 3836600; 230100, 3836100; 230000, 3835700; 229100, 
3835300; 228900, 3834900; 228800, 3833800; 228000, 3833300; 227400, 
3833200; 227000, 3832800; 226700, 3832400; 226100, 3832400; 225800, 
3832500; 225200, 3832000; 225000, 3831900; 224752, 3831904; 224835, 
3834499; 224871, 3835728; 224904, 3836287; 225100, 3836200; 225372, 
3836544; 225515, 3836830;

    (41) Note: Unit 31 (Map 16) follows:

[[Page 274]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.024

    (42) Unit 32: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Alamo Mountain, Lockwood Valley, San Guillermo, Topatopa 
Mountains, Lion Canyon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 864689, 3849170; 865272, 3847801; 866149, 3846550; 
867028, 3843593; 867093, 3842494; 867037, 3842150; 866579, 3839353; 
865815,

[[Page 275]]

3838706; 865267, 3839476; 864068, 3839404; 863282, 3837452; 861766, 
3835957; 860385, 3835574; 859656, 3836032; 858662, 3835872; 857481, 
3835501; 856246, 3836030; 854941, 3836052; 853594, 3836774; 852265, 
3837196; 851706, 3838166; 850507, 3838094; 849284, 3838422; 848261, 
3838762; 847708, 3839632; 847788, 3841642; 849375, 3841937; 851020, 
3842938; 851266, 3843856; 853063, 3845668; 853362, 3847390; 854407, 
3848355; 855307, 3848409; 857217, 3848323; 859016, 3848430; 859968, 
3849289; 861343, 3849773; 862794, 3850662; 863971, 3849428; returning to 
864689, 3849170;

    (43) Note: Unit 32 (Map 17) follows:

[[Page 276]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.025

               Kentucky Cave Shrimp (Palaemonias ganteri)

    Kentucky, Edmonson County: The Roaring River passage of the Flint-
Mammoth Cave System in Mammoth Cave National Park.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 277]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.146

    Known constituent elements include a stream in a base level cave 
passage with abundant organic material and sediments consisting of 
coarse silt and very coarse to very fine sand.

             Vernal Pool Tadpole Shrimp (Lepidurus packardi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Amador, Butte, 
Colusa, Fresno, Kings, Madera, Mariposa, Merced, Sacramento, Shasta, 
Solano, Stanislaus, Tehama, Tulare, Yolo, and Yuba counties, California, 
on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for vernal 
pool tadpole shrimp (Lepidurus packardi) are the habitat components that 
provide:
    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 41 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(2)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1: Shasta County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Palo Cedro, Enterprise, Balls Ferry, and Cottonwood. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 562500, 
4487400; 562700, 4487100; 562900, 4487200; 563200, 4487200; 563300, 
4487000; 563300, 4486700; 563800, 4486400; 564300, 4484700; 564300, 
4484400; 564500, 4484100; 564500, 4483800; 564600, 4483700; 564600, 
4483400; 564400, 4483100; 564100, 4482800; 564100, 4482600; 564300, 
4482600; 564300, 4482400; 564300, 4482300; 564200, 4482200; 564100, 
4482100; 564000, 4482100; 564200, 4481800; 564200, 4480900; 563600, 
4480900; 563300, 4481000; 563100, 4480900; 562900, 4480900; 562500, 
4481200; 562400, 4481500; 562400, 4481700; 562300, 4482400; 562000, 
4482500; 561900, 4482800; 561800, 4483300; 561500, 4483700; 561000, 
4484000; 560700, 4485400; 560700, 4486500; 560800, 4486700; 561000, 
4486900; 561200, 4487000; 561300, 4487600; 561600, 4487900; 562000, 
4487900; returning to 562500, 4487400;
    (5) Unit 2: Shasta County, California.
    (i) Unit 2A: Shasta County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Balls Ferry. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 570448, 4472017; 570459, 4471725; 570459, 4471725; 
570459, 4471724; 570408, 4471708; 570382, 4471714; 570356, 4471741; 
570335, 4471767; 570304, 4471767; 570298, 4471772; 570279, 4471768; 
570240, 4471758; 570210, 4471761; 570196, 4471743; 570183, 4471738; 
570173, 4471734; 570160, 4471705; 570156, 4471680; 570156, 4471678; 
570150, 4471671; 570139, 4471657; 570139, 4471654; 570139, 4471645; 
570118, 4471628; 570092, 4471624; 570089, 4471624; 570071, 4471623; 
570054, 4471623; 570006, 4471624; 569975, 4471641; 569952, 4471639; 
569913, 4471639; 569893, 4471626; 569866, 4471623; 569852, 4471624; 
569821, 4471597; 569810, 4471574; 569789, 4471573; 569761, 4471574; 
569757, 4471575; 569735, 4471544; 569722, 4471574; 569676, 4471581; 
569658, 4471581; 569644, 4471584; 569625, 4471584; 569605, 4471585; 
569557, 4471585; 569534, 4471593; 569517, 4471599; 569494, 4471607; 
569465, 4471615; 569438, 4471622; 569415, 4471629; 569400, 4471629; 
569400, 4471687; 569400, 4471800; 569600,

[[Page 278]]

4471900; 569600, 4472000; 569900, 4472200; 570200, 4472100; returning to 
570448, 4472017;
    (ii) Unit 2B: Shasta and Tehama Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Shingletown, Tuscan Buttes NE, Balls Ferry, 
Dales, Bend, and Red Bluff East. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 583610, 4475072; 583700, 4475000; 584200, 
4475200; 584600, 4475200; 585400, 4474500; 586000, 4473600; 586100, 
4473400; 585800, 4472600; 585500, 4472100; 584800, 4471900; 584500, 
4471600; 584500, 4471400; 584700, 4471100; 584700, 4470800; 584500, 
4470500; 583400, 4469700; 583100, 4469400; 582600, 4468500; 582600, 
4467600; 582700, 4466900; 582700, 4466700; 581900, 4465800; 581000, 
4465500; 580600, 4465200; 580400, 4464000; 580200, 4463300; 578900, 
4462700; 578500, 4462300; 578100, 4462000; 577800, 4460900; 577700, 
4460000; 576700, 4459300; 576600, 4458800; 576800, 4458300; 576800, 
4457100; 576400, 4456700; 575500, 4456800; 574900, 4456800; 574100, 
4455900; 573500, 4455600; 572300, 4455300; 572000, 4455300; 571600, 
4455600; 571400, 4455400; 571100, 4454900; 570600, 4454900; 570200, 
4454800; 570200, 4455000; 570600, 4455900; 570000, 4456100; 569500, 
4456300; 569300, 4456500; 568900, 4456500; 568600, 4456500; 568000, 
4456800; 567900, 4457100; 567900, 4458000; 568400, 4458800; 569100, 
4459800; 569600, 4460500; 569500, 4460800; 569000, 4460600; 568300, 
4460700; 567500, 4460700; 566800, 4460000; 566400, 4460000; 565900, 
4461100; 565800, 4461400; 565800, 4461700; 566000, 4462000; 565800, 
4462300; 565900, 4462400; 565800, 4462500; 565900, 4462600; 565800, 
4462800; 565900, 4462900; 565900, 4463000; 566000, 4463100; 566300, 
4463100; 566500, 4463300; 566500, 4463600; 566700, 4463700; 566800, 
4463700; 566900, 4463600; 567100, 4463500; 567200, 4463600; 567600, 
4463400; 568300, 4463200; 569800, 4463200; 570600, 4463900; 570800, 
4464300; 572000, 4465200; 572000, 4466300; 572100, 4466600; 572800, 
4467300; 573500, 4468600; 573400, 4469000; 573100, 4469400; 572900, 
4469600; 572600, 4469600; 571800, 4468800; 571400, 4468100; 571000, 
4467900; 571000, 4468700; 571200, 4468700; 571100, 4469200; 571200, 
4469500; 571200, 4470500; 570500, 4470900; 570460, 4470920; 570460, 
4470932; 570466, 4470931; 570461, 4471354; 570786, 4471349; 571229, 
4471353; 571235, 4471908; 571236, 4471912; 571238, 4471962; 571244, 
4471992; 571237, 4472042; 571244, 4472069; 571247, 4472123; 571249, 
4472164; 571271, 4472165; 571363, 4472165; 571405, 4472139; 571460, 
4472143; 571460, 4472143; 571467, 4472144; 571524, 4472166; 571541, 
4472166; 571635, 4472166; 571647, 4472171; 571714, 4472199; 571723, 
4472200; 571739, 4472200; 571900, 4472200; 572154, 4472285; 572154, 
4472284; 572156, 4472284; 572159, 4472227; 572162, 4472225; 572168, 
4472227; 572181, 4472226; 572208, 4472225; 572219, 4472223; 572231, 
4472219; 572241, 4472217; 572282, 4472215; 572307, 4472215; 572325, 
4472213; 572332, 4472212; 572500, 4472100; 573900, 4472100; 574151, 
4472791; 574207, 4472814; 574212, 4472816; 574219, 4472814; 574238, 
4472808; 574256, 4472804; 574271, 4472800; 574293, 4472798; 574321, 
4472797; 574342, 4472798; 574360, 4472803; 574369, 4472807; 574384, 
4472811; 574403, 4472815; 574428, 4472823; 574450, 4472828; 574469, 
4472831; 574483, 4472832; 574489, 4472834; 574488, 4472924; 574488, 
4472933; 574488, 4472941; 574487, 4472952; 574487, 4472951; 574459, 
4472946; 574443, 4472942; 574425, 4472940; 574411, 4472938; 574397, 
4472937; 574391, 4472934; 574379, 4472930; 574373, 4472928; 574365, 
4472924; 574356, 4472921; 574353, 4472920; 574342, 4472919; 574346, 
4472925; 574358, 4472955; 574465, 4473021; 574448, 4473020; 574445, 
4473038; 574336, 4472971; 574326, 4472947; 574297, 4472920; 574278, 
4472922; 574261, 4472941; 574253, 4472951; 574231, 4472975; 574223, 
4472987; 574300, 4473200; 574754, 4473200; 574939, 4473200; 575100, 
4473200; 575456, 4473413; 575600, 4473500; 575624, 4473524; 576000, 
4473900; 576107, 4473900; 576460, 4473900; 576600, 4473900; 576883, 
4473900; 577069, 4473900; 577300, 4473900; 577344, 4473933; 577351, 
4473938; 577700, 4474200; 578600, 4474200; 578685, 4474224; 578803, 
4474258; 579300, 4474400; 579637, 4474400; 580000, 4474400; 580600, 
4474700; 580991, 4474700; 581447, 4474700; 581900, 4474700; 581931, 
4474738; 582400, 4475300; 583000, 4475400; 583200, 4475400; returning to 
583610, 4475072;

    (iii) Note: Units 1 and 2 (Map 1) follow:

[[Page 279]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.026

    (6) Unit 3: Tehama County, California.
    (i) Unit 3A: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Acorn Hollow and Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 588739, 4429822; 
588900, 4429500; 589500, 4429500; 589500, 4428600; 589500, 4428000; 
589800, 4427100; 590500, 4426400; 590500,

[[Page 280]]

4425300; 591200, 4424400; 591500, 4423300; 591562, 4422558; 590526, 
4423686; 589986, 4424273; 589816, 4424458; 589129, 4425207; 588454, 
4426221; 588425, 4426265; 588279, 4426485; 588213, 4426583; 588213, 
4426584; 588600, 4429100; 588733, 4429833; returning to 588739, 4429822;
    (ii) Unit 3B: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richard Springs NW. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 593700, 4420900; 593164, 4420815; 592329, 
4421723; 592258, 4421800; 593000, 4421800; 593100, 4421500; 593500, 
4421400; returning to 593700, 4420900;
    (iii) Unit 3C: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richard Springs NW. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594500, 4420300; 593881, 4420035; 593371, 
4420590; 594000, 4420800; 594400, 4420600; returning to 594500, 4420300;
    (iv) Unit 3D: Tehama and Butte Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Campbell Mound, Richardson Springs NW, and 
Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 597100, 4416400; 597100, 4415600; 597044, 4415525; 
596800, 4415200; 597100, 4415000; 597800, 4415500; 598100, 4415200; 
597600, 4414600; 597600, 4414400; 597300, 4413800; 597300, 4413300; 
598200, 4413900; 598400, 4413900; 598400, 4413600; 597422, 4411938; 
597281, 4412382; 596959, 4413403; 596640, 4414416; 596620, 4414481; 
596305, 4415484; 596303, 4415489; 596130, 4416040; 596091, 4416160; 
596028, 4416358; 596011, 4416411; 595993, 4416465; 595982, 4416500; 
596000, 4416500; 596100, 4416400; 596200, 4416500; 596300, 4416600; 
596400, 4416700; 596500, 4416700; 596500, 4416800; 596600, 4416800; 
597100, 4416400;
    (v) Unit 3E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 598900, 4411800; 599400, 4411700; 599800, 
4411700; 599800, 4411000; 599300, 4410700; 599100, 4410800; 599000, 
4410800; 598800, 4410600; 598500, 4410400; 598300, 4410100; 598100, 
4410000; 598070, 4409970; 598051, 4409993; 598038, 4410010; 598014, 
4410083; 597806, 4410737; 597725, 4410990; 597461, 4411816; 597434, 
4411900; 597600, 4411900; 598300, 4412700; 598500, 4413300; 598900, 
4413300; returning to 598900, 4411800;
    (vi) Unit 3F: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 599500, 4406200; 600300, 4406000; 601200, 
4405600; 601800, 4405600; 602000, 4405500; 602200, 4405200; 602500, 
4405200; 602700, 4404900; 603300, 4404700; 604500, 4404200; 605200, 
4404200; 605600, 4404000; 605600, 4403600; 605100, 4403300; 604700, 
4403400; 604500, 4403300; 604475, 4403175; 604400, 4403100; 604300, 
4403100; 604200, 4403000; 604100, 4402900; 604000, 4402900; 603800, 
4402800; 603800, 4402600; 603600, 4402400; 603400, 4402400; 603200, 
4402500; 603100, 4402400; 602900, 4402400; 602900, 4402100; 602700, 
4402100; 602300, 4402600; 602300, 4402700; 601800, 4403300; 601714, 
4403300; 601553, 4403500; 601501, 4403499; 601465, 4403621; 601319, 
4403663; 601226, 4403595; 601089, 4403571; 600979, 4403503; 600901, 
4403569; 600860, 4403446; 600704, 4403566; 600542, 4403475; 600507, 
4403530; 600473, 4403563; 600453, 4403580; 600369, 4403651; 600344, 
4403642; 600232, 4403605; 599983, 4403679; 599973, 4403678; 599801, 
4403662; 599725, 4403718; 599651, 4403697; 599493, 4403839; 599328, 
4403862; 599302, 4403865; 599269, 4403870; 599084, 4403634; 599024, 
4403611; 598987, 4404400; 598980, 4404543; 598971, 4404723; 598955, 
4405388; 598953, 4405458; 598951, 4405529; 598947, 4405677; 598934, 
4405719; 598919, 4405750; 599000, 4405800; 598900, 4406100; 598700, 
4406000; 598694, 4406000; 598635, 4406058; 598598, 4406103; 598583, 
4406127; 598567, 4406159; 598549, 4406210; 598544, 4406234; 598540, 
4406255; 598533, 4406421; 598522, 4406815; 598516, 4407133; 598511, 
4407496; 598513, 4407515; 598525, 4407568; 598527, 4407571; 598527, 
4407589; 598580, 4407812; 598800, 4407900; 598900, 4408100; 599200, 
4408400; 600200, 4408900; 600300, 4408800; 600300, 4408400; 600000, 
4408100; 600400, 4407600; 599500, 4406700; returning to 599500, 4406200.

    (vii) Note: Unit 3 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 281]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.027

    (7) Unit 4: Butte County, California.
    (i) Unit 4A: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Chico. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 605100, 4399600; 606500, 4399500; 606797, 4399330; 
606777, 4399300; 606724, 4399252; 606568, 4399265; 606528, 4399272; 
606479, 4399279; 606478, 4399279; 606394, 4399264; 606362,

[[Page 282]]

4399238; 606329, 4399210; 606274, 4399169; 606209, 4399135; 606125, 
4399122; 606060, 4399122; 605967, 4399131; 605899, 4399134; 605857, 
4399134; 605822, 4399130; 605789, 4399116; 605781, 4399138; 605775, 
4399149; 605764, 4399152; 605763, 4399152; 605701, 4399142; 605589, 
4399116; 605504, 4399107; 605432, 4399110; 605319, 4399064; 605233, 
4399045; 605173, 4399034; 605135, 4399023; 605134, 4399023; 605127, 
4399023; 605109, 4399023; 605080, 4399025; 605063, 4399025; 605002, 
4399051; 604957, 4399069; 604907, 4399092; 604029, 4399508; 603896, 
4399435; 603886, 4399435; 603879, 4399436; 603300, 4399523; 603300, 
4399600; 602900, 4399600; 603500, 4399800; 604700, 4400200; returning to 
605100, 4399600;
    (ii) Unit 4B: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Hamlin Canyon and Chico. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 606028, 4393143; 606288, 4392851; 
606346, 4392785; 606490, 4392637; 606537, 4392593; 607117, 4392045; 
607644, 4391539; 607748, 4391438; 607826, 4391363; 608227, 4390978; 
608537, 4390636; 608852, 4390288; 609145, 4389965; 609391, 4389694; 
609721, 4389330; 609736, 4389313; 609890, 4389143; 610122, 4388889; 
610187, 4388819; 610239, 4388754; 610321, 4388664; 610359, 4388624; 
610400, 4388500; 609300, 4388100; 609300, 4387900; 608800, 4387800; 
608800, 4389300; 607600, 4389300; 607600, 4389500; 607500, 4389600; 
607400, 4389600; 607400, 4389900; 607300, 4390000; 607400, 4390000; 
607500, 4390100; 607400, 4390300; 607400, 4390500; 607300, 4390600; 
607300, 4390800; 607100, 4391000; 605700, 4392300; 605800, 4392300; 
606000, 4392500; 606100, 4392700; 605900, 4392900; 605800, 4392900; 
605600, 4392800; returning to 606028, 4393143;
    (iii) Unit 4C: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Hamlin Canyon and Shippee. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 610300, 4383000; 610400, 4382900; 
610500, 4382900; 610500, 4382800; 610500, 4382700; 610500, 4382600; 
610200, 4382300; 610100, 4382400; 610200, 4382500; 610200, 4382600; 
610200, 4382700; 610100, 4382600; 609900, 4382400; 609814, 4382314; 
608500, 4383300; 608800, 4383800; 609500, 4384200; 609500, 4384500; 
609300, 4385000; 609600, 4385300; 609300, 4385800; 609500, 4386000; 
609900, 4386100; 610100, 4386100; 610100, 4386400; 610200, 4386500; 
610500, 4386700; 611100, 4387100; 611400, 4387400; 611364, 4387515; 
611887, 4386936; 612214, 4386572; 612293, 4386410; 612300, 4386300; 
612000, 4386100; 611300, 4384500; 611000, 4384500; 611000, 4383600; 
610400, 4383600; 610400, 4383200; 610300, 4383200; 610300, 4383100; 
610200, 4383000; returning to 610300, 4383000;
    (iv) Unit 4D: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Cherokee and Hamlin Canyon. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 617200, 4387700; 616864, 4387566; 
616852, 4387659; 616841, 4388048; 616843, 4388082; 616851, 4388261; 
616929, 4388656; 616982, 4388850; 617175, 4389518; 617195, 4389572; 
617301, 4390087; 617309, 4390125; 617361, 4390354; 617380, 4390409; 
617409, 4390495; 617442, 4390589; 617469, 4390681; 618600, 4390600; 
618800, 4390200; 618800, 4389700; 617800, 4388300; returning to 617200, 
4387700;
    (v) Unit 4E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Cherokee, Shippee, and Oroville. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 620700, 4388400; 
620700, 4387200; 621300, 4387200; 621600, 4386500; 621400, 4385600; 
620900, 4385500; 620600, 4384900; 620400, 4384800; 619600, 4385100; 
618600, 4384500; 618592, 4384506; 618592, 4384506; 618560, 4384544; 
618512, 4384601; 618377, 4384762; 618358, 4384795; 618286, 4384915; 
618226, 4385148; 618207, 4385219; 618185, 4385338; 618017, 4386021; 
617998, 4386107; 617951, 4386211; 617930, 4386256; 617902, 4386281; 
617839, 4386361; 617731, 4386441; 617685, 4386463; 617667, 4386465; 
617664, 4386478; 617425, 4386625; 617700, 4386900; 618000, 4386700; 
618200, 4386700; 618700, 4386900; 619000, 4387000; 619200, 4387200; 
619300, 4387200; 619500, 4387400; 619500, 4387600; 619700, 4387600; 
619800, 4387700; 619900, 4388000; 620200, 4388000; 620600, 4388400; 
returning to 620700, 4388400;
    (vi) Unit 4F: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Oroville and Shippe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 618368, 4382306; 618445, 4382277; 618444, 
4382301; 618457, 4382372; 618463, 4382408; 618500, 4382501; 618500, 
4382500; 619300, 4381300; 619500, 4381000; 619500, 4380500; 620800, 
4378900; 620900, 4378400; 620300, 4377700; 618800, 4377000; 617800, 
4376400; 617100, 4376200; 616900, 4376000; 617500, 4374800; 617500, 
4374500; 617300, 4374200; 615415, 4374121; 615404, 4374354; 615319, 
4374453; 614883, 4374120; 614665, 4374382; 614570, 4374749; 614300, 
4374727; 614300, 4375700; 614600, 4375700; 614600, 4376600; 614800, 
4376600; 614900, 4376700; 615100, 4376800; 615100, 4377000; 615900, 
4377000; 616300, 4377000; 616300, 4378100; 614900, 4378100; 614900, 
4378300; 614700, 4378300; 614700, 4378500; 614500, 4378500; 614500, 
4378800; 614600, 4378900; 614600, 4379700; 614200, 4379700; 614200, 
4381300; 612600, 4381300; 612600, 4382900; 613500, 4383000; 613700, 
4383100; 613800, 4383200; 614000, 4383500; 614200, 4384000; 614200, 
4384200; 614800, 4384200; 615073, 4384200; 615806, 4383804; 616704, 
4383304; 617266, 4382991; 617327, 4382957; 617563, 4382829; 617589, 
4382812; 617987, 4382563; 618347, 4382330; returning to 618368, 4382306.

    (vii) Note: Unit 4 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 283]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.028

    (8) Unit 6: Colusa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Meridian and Colusa. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 585800, 4337200; 585900, 4337200; 585900, 
4337200; 585900, 4338200; 586100, 4338200; 586100, 4338400; 586800, 
4338900; 587000, 4338500; 587000, 4338400; 586800, 4338200; 587000, 
4338100; 587500, 4337600; 587700,

[[Page 284]]

4337800; 588800, 4336700; 588900, 4336700; 589100, 4336500; 589100, 
4336900; 589200, 4336900; 589200, 4335900; 587900, 4335900; 587900, 
4336000; 587400, 4336600; 587300, 4336800; 586900, 4337800; 586700, 
4337800; 586700, 4337700; 586400, 4337700; 586400, 4336800; 586300, 
4336600; 586000, 4336600; 585800, 4336900; returning to 585800, 4337200;
    (9) Unit 7: Yuba County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Browns Valley and Wheatland. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 635000, 4332200; 635000, 4329900; 
634600, 4329900; 633800, 4329900; 633600, 4330100; 633500, 4330100; 
633300, 4330100; 633300, 4330300; 632700, 4330100; 632400, 4329900; 
632400, 4329000; 631300, 4329000; 631300, 4329200; 631600, 4329200; 
631600, 4329800; 631900, 4329800; 631900, 4330600; 632800, 4330600; 
633000, 4330900; 633000, 4331300; 633100, 4331500; 633500, 4331700; 
633800, 4331500; 633800, 4332200; returning to 635000, 4332200;

    (10) Note: Units 6 and 7 (Map 4) follow:

[[Page 285]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.029

    (11) Unit 8: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Carmichael. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 649800, 4269600; 649800, 4268700; 650400, 4268900; 
650800, 4268800; 651000, 4268800; 651000, 4269400; 651800, 4269300; 
651500, 4268800; 651600, 4267900; 651600, 4266500; 651500, 4266400; 
651500, 4266300;

[[Page 286]]

651100, 4266300; 651100, 4266000; 651570, 4265812; 651589, 4265075; 
651600, 4264400; 651400, 4264400; 651400, 4264200; 650500, 4264200; 
650500, 4264300; 650400, 4264300; 650400, 4264600; 650000, 4264700; 
649900, 4265100; 649400, 4265100; 649100, 4265000; 648900, 4265100; 
648700, 4265100; 648700, 4265300; 648700, 4265500; 649900, 4265500; 
649900, 4266000; 648300, 4266000; 648300, 4266200; 648500, 4266400; 
648700, 4266200; 649000, 4266200; 649300, 4266400; 649400, 4266600; 
649635, 4266678; 649700, 4266700; 649794, 4266693; 650200, 4267100; 
650400, 4267000; 650600, 4267000; 650800, 4267200; 650900, 4267500; 
650800, 4267900; 650500, 4267800; 650300, 4268100; 649900, 4268400; 
649400, 4268100; 649100, 4267800; 649100, 4267500; 649400, 4267400; 
649200, 4267100; 648400, 4267100; 648300, 4267700; 648000, 4268000; 
648600, 4268500; 649400, 4268900; 649400, 4269200; 649600, 4269600; 
returning to 649800, 4269600;
    (12) Unit 9: Sacramento County, California.
    (i) Unit 9A: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sloughhouse. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 660660, 4256508; 660681, 4256119; 660600, 4256200; 
660300, 4256100; 660000, 4256200; 659800, 4256300; 659850, 4256450; 
659900, 4256600; 660200, 4256500; 660300, 4256800; 660515, 4256728; 
660633, 4256644; 660645, 4256626; returning to 660660, 4256508;
    (ii) Unit 9B: Sacramento and Amador Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Carbondale, Sloughhouse, Goose Creek, and 
Clay. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 673200, 4256400; 672800, 4255100; 672800, 4254800; 673100, 
4254900; 673800, 4254900; 674000, 4254600; 674000, 4254400; 674500, 
4254000; 674500, 4253700; 674100, 4253500; 674100, 4252900; 674300, 
4252300; 674500, 4251900; 674500, 4251600; 673400, 4251500; 673300, 
4251400; 673300, 4251200; 673900, 4251000; 674000, 4250500; 674300, 
4250000; 674300, 4249800; 674200, 4249700; 673900, 4249700; 673600, 
4249900; 672500, 4249900; 672315, 4249992; 671900, 4250200; 671300, 
4250200; 671100, 4250500; 671000, 4250500; 671000, 4249800; 670700, 
4249800; 670700, 4249500; 670800, 4249300; 670800, 4249000; 670900, 
4248900; 670900, 4248500; 670500, 4248300; 670500, 4248125; 670400, 
4248100; 670400, 4248000; 670100, 4248000; 670100, 4247800; 670500, 
4247500; 671100, 4247500; 671600, 4247700; 671800, 4247600; 671900, 
4247300; 671900, 4247100; 671500, 4246800; 671600, 4246600; 671800, 
4246000; 671800, 4246000; 671255, 4245364; 670800, 4245000; 670000, 
4244200; 670000, 4244100; 670500, 4243800; 670200, 4243400; 670200, 
4243300; 670300, 4243200; 670400, 4243100; 670600, 4242600; 671200, 
4242900; 671600, 4243000; 671600, 4242700; 670700, 4242100; 669800, 
4242100; 669300, 4241900; 668900, 4241900; 668700, 4241800; 668500, 
4241600; 668400, 4241600; 668200, 4241700; 668000, 4242000; 667900, 
4242000; 667400, 4241600; 667400, 4241800; 666400, 4241700; 665400, 
4241700; 665400, 4242700; 665000, 4242700; 665000, 4242300; 664800, 
4242300; 664800, 4242200; 664700, 4242200; 664600, 4242100; 664500, 
4242100; 664500, 4241300; 664000, 4241300; 664000, 4241000; 663500, 
4241000; 663500, 4240900; 663400, 4240800; 663300, 4240800; 663300, 
4240600; 663100, 4240600; 663100, 4240900; 662800, 4240900; 662800, 
4240500; 662700, 4240400; 662700, 4240000; 662500, 4240000; 662500, 
4239600; 662100, 4239600; 662100, 4239400; 662000, 4239300; 661700, 
4239300; 661700, 4239200; 661400, 4239000; 661400, 4239900; 661500, 
4239900; 661500, 4241600; 661500, 4241900; 661700, 4242000; 662200, 
4242000; 662200, 4241600; 662900, 4241600; 662800, 4242300; 662500, 
4242300; 662600, 4243000; 662900, 4243100; 663400, 4243100; 663400, 
4243800; 663050, 4243800; 663029, 4243841; 663000, 4243900; 662500, 
4243900; 662700, 4244700; 662850, 4244800; 663000, 4244900; 663100, 
4245300; 663800, 4245300; 663900, 4245500; 664400, 4245600; 664500, 
4245200; 664600, 4245200; 664750, 4245238; 664900, 4245275; 665000, 
4245300; 664900, 4245700; 664900, 4246500; 664400, 4246500; 663900, 
4246700; 662500, 4246300; 662233, 4246300; 662100, 4246400; 661700, 
4246400; 661900, 4247000; 662000, 4247300; 661800, 4247500; 660900, 
4247500; 660900, 4247140; 660850, 4247100; 659700, 4247100; 659500, 
4247300; 659500, 4248300; 660000, 4248300; 659900, 4249600; 660000, 
4249900; 659900, 4250200; 659400, 4249700; 659400, 4249500; 659300, 
4249200; 659100, 4249000; 659100, 4248900; 659200, 4248800; 659100, 
4248700; 658900, 4248700; 658800, 4248600; 658600, 4248600; 658500, 
4248800; 658400, 4248900; 658200, 4249000; 658200, 4248900; 658300, 
4248700; 658500, 4248500; 658500, 4248400; 658400, 4248300; 658400, 
4247900; 658100, 4247900; 658000, 4248500; 656700, 4248500; 656300, 
4248900; 655900, 4248200; 656100, 4248100; 656100, 4248000; 656000, 
4247800; 655200, 4247800; 655200, 4247200; 654700, 4247200; 654700, 
4248750; 654800, 4248900; 654700, 4249000; 655100, 4249000; 655800, 
4249000; 656300, 4249700; 656600, 4249500; 657200, 4250200; 656700, 
4251100; 657700, 4251100; 657700, 4251500; 656700, 4251400; 656700, 
4252100; 656500, 4252300; 656500, 4252600; 657000, 4253700; 657400, 
4254600; 657800, 4254300; 657800, 4254200; 657800, 4254200; 658100, 
4254000; 658900, 4253500; 659000, 4253500; 659300, 4253300; 660000, 
4254500; 660100, 4254800; 660200, 4254900; 660300, 4255200; 660600, 
4255300; 660700, 4255400; 660800, 4256000; 660754, 4256046; 660777, 
4256046; 661541, 4256060; 661554, 4255796; 661731, 4252263; 661736, 
4252142; 662180, 4252172; 662313, 4252175; 662583, 4252191; 663009, 
4252217; 663119, 4252198; 663221, 4252234; 663275, 4252290; 663311, 
4252341; 663324, 4252391; 663344, 4252446; 663378, 4252511; 663390, 
4252591; 663409, 4252710; 663437, 4252770; 663510, 4252890; 663546, 
4252914; 663590, 4252922; 663630, 4252907; 663726, 4252900; 663761, 
4252901; 663800, 4252916; 663817, 4252959; 663824, 4252991; 663760, 
4253075; 663650, 4253199; 663651, 4253232; 663667, 4253286; 663741, 
4253408; 663807, 4253488; 663832, 4253490; 663904, 4253486; 663962, 
4253498; 664039, 4253560; 664088, 4253602; 664125, 4253617; 664219, 
4253695; 664248, 4253699; 664313, 4253672; 664369, 4253606; 664471, 
4253613; 664566, 4253675; 664591, 4253700; 664647, 4253753; 664752, 
4253850; 664854, 4253953; 664868, 4254000; 664877, 4254124; 664856, 
4254193; 664883, 4254238; 664977, 4254334; 665118, 4254420; 665174, 
4254468; 665227, 4254492; 665313, 4254463; 665390, 4254424; 665514, 
4254389; 665619, 4254438; 665656, 4254494; 665723, 4254546; 665757, 
4254558; 665800, 4254553; 665853, 4254513; 665880, 4254493; 665956, 
4254434; 665960, 4254402; 666029, 4254364; 666067, 4254367; 666114, 
4254379; 666168, 4254392; 666236, 4254440; 666273, 4254448; 666310, 
4254440; 666339, 4254435; 666417, 4254404; 666451,

[[Page 287]]

4254362; 666491, 4254319; 666523, 4254309; 666581, 4254312; 666652, 
4254306; 666705, 4254261; 666722, 4254230; 666740, 4254164; 666742, 
4254084; 666763, 4253987; 666791, 4253947; 666826, 4253919; 666849, 
4253913; 666914, 4253917; 666977, 4253951; 667057, 4253975; 667142, 
4253997; 667253, 4253980; 667277, 4253964; 667302, 4253968; 667313, 
4253981; 667315, 4254007; 667377, 4254034; 667482, 4254039; 667618, 
4254026; 667801, 4253975; 667959, 4253881; 668167, 4253821; 668360, 
4253834; 668422, 4253849; 668525, 4253837; 668643, 4253804; 668700, 
4253743; 668799, 4253665; 668877, 4253610; 668998, 4253531; 669098, 
4253487; 669171, 4253483; 669251, 4253471; 669328, 4253465; 669399, 
4253396; 669461, 4253324; 669558, 4253276; 669619, 4253256; 669665, 
4253257; 669859, 4253247; 670012, 4253179; 670143, 4253173; 670241, 
4253188; 670278, 4253185; 670320, 4253159; 670371, 4253105; 670419, 
4253074; 670499, 4253007; 670537, 4252992; 670594, 4252927; 670626, 
4252873; 670642, 4252848; 670663, 4252843; 670712, 4252851; 670732, 
4252875; 670716, 4252907; 670727, 4252921; 670756, 4252934; 670807, 
4252923; 670850, 4252924; 670883, 4252896; 670912, 4252829; 670949, 
4252789; 670975, 4252773; 671041, 4252762; 671109, 4252759; 671191, 
4252663; 671270, 4252568; 671315, 4252537; 671376, 4252519; 671438, 
4252504; 671509, 4252465; 671531, 4252448; 671559, 4252450; 671603, 
4252490; 671631, 4252509; 671674, 4252515; 671716, 4252510; 671773, 
4252503; 671827, 4252497; 671848, 4252476; 671934, 4252419; 671943, 
4252426; 671963, 4252453; 671990, 4252458; 672004, 4252435; 672042, 
4252400; 672107, 4252306; 672117, 4252284; 672129, 4252256; 672134, 
4252244; 672152, 4252230; 672159, 4252200; 672153, 4252190; 672148, 
4252180; 672110, 4252165; 672104, 4252149; 672109, 4252101; 672114, 
4252080; 672113, 4252055; 672107, 4251980; 672120, 4251908; 672151, 
4251893; 672177, 4251906; 672185, 4251900; 672199, 4251865; 672213, 
4251830; 672245, 4251802; 672263, 4251784; 672271, 4251775; 672271, 
4251787; 672265, 4252117; 672263, 4252199; 672247, 4252916; 672246, 
4252941; 672231, 4253670; 672225, 4253953; 672223, 4254006; 672220, 
4254157; 672219, 4254229; 672217, 4254287; 672192, 4255610; 672200, 
4255600; 672400, 4255600; 672700, 4256400; returning to 673200, 4256400;

    (iii) Note: Units 8 and 9 (Map 5) follow:

[[Page 288]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.030

    (13) Unit 10: Yolo County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Davis. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 615400, 4262300; 615400, 4260700; 614500, 4260700; 
614500, 4261500; 614200, 4261500; 614200, 4261800; 614000, 4261800; 
614000, 4262300; returning to 615400, 4262300;
    (14) Unit 11: Solano County, California

[[Page 289]]

    (i) Unit 11A: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Dozier. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 600400, 4243000; 600400, 4242200; 601300, 4242200; 
601300, 4241416; 601002, 4241415; 600878, 4241415; 600446, 4241414; 
600021, 4241414; 599000, 4241412; 599000, 4242300; 599600, 4242300; 
599600, 4243000; returning to 600400, 4243000;
    (ii) Unit 11B: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 593200, 4242200; 593200, 4240600; 593211, 4240600; 
593255, 4239807; 592030, 4239793; 592062, 4240126; 592044, 4240137; 
592026, 4240170; 592026, 4240181; 592030, 4240261; 592300, 4240800; 
592100, 4240800; 591800, 4241000; 591700, 4241100; 591600, 4241200; 
591600, 4241300; 591600, 4241700; 591700, 4241700; 591800, 4241600; 
591900, 4241600; 592000, 4241500; 592200, 4241300; 592300, 4240900; 
returning to 593200, 4242200;
    (iii) Unit 11C: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira and Denverton. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 589698, 4236560; 589600, 4234900; 589700, 
4234900; 589700, 4234500; 590100, 4234500; 590100, 4234064; 589400, 
4234000; 589000, 4234400; 588500, 4234400; 588500, 4236400; 588549, 
4236449; 588944, 4236551; 589524, 4236558; 589670, 4236559; returning to 
589698, 4236560;
    (iv) Unit 11D: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira, Denverton, and Fairfield South. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594915, 4234098; 
594916, 4233314; 595044, 4233310; 595068, 4233296; 595131, 4233266; 
595174, 4233226; 595189, 4233210; 595239, 4233151; 595322, 4232978; 
595423, 4232778; 595483, 4232667; 595553, 4232524; 595699, 4232243; 
595966, 4231717; 594927, 4231710; 594445, 4231707; 594409, 4231673; 
594410, 4231616; 594434, 4231540; 594474, 4231494; 594495, 4231457; 
594497, 4231414; 594510, 4231370; 594543, 4231356; 594575, 4231342; 
594603, 4231341; 594614, 4231338; 594616, 4231325; 594618, 4231311; 
594614, 4231290; 594605, 4231284; 594583, 4231275; 594573, 4231268; 
594557, 4231245; 594550, 4231209; 594543, 4231179; 594500, 4231200; 
593800, 4231200; 593600, 4230500; 593291, 4230515; 593291, 4230514; 
593700, 4229900; 594000, 4229700; 593900, 4229600; 593900, 4229500; 
594000, 4229400; 593900, 4229300; 593900, 4229100; 594300, 4229000; 
594300, 4228500; 593700, 4228400; 593500, 4228100; 592800, 4228100; 
592700, 4228000; 592600, 4228000; 592500, 4227900; 592200, 4227800; 
592000, 4227500; 591700, 4227400; 591500, 4227200; 591200, 4227100; 
590900, 4227000; 590700, 4227100; 590400, 4227100; 589400, 4227400; 
589265, 4227400; 589026, 4227463; 588707, 4227579; 587979, 4227869; 
587973, 4227872; 587467, 4228036; 587339, 4228077; 587009, 4228197; 
586933, 4228334; 586900, 4228400; 586700, 4228500; 586600, 4229000; 
586400, 4229100; 586200, 4229100; 586100, 4229300; 585400, 4229900; 
585400, 4230100; 585500, 4230200; 585000, 4230300; 585100, 4230400; 
585000, 4230500; 585111, 4230567; 585124, 4230550; 585327, 4230585; 
585319, 4230629; 585295, 4230649; 585270, 4230662; 585500, 4230800; 
585600, 4231100; 585903, 4231100; 585908, 4231071; 585926, 4231064; 
585956, 4231058; 586038, 4231061; 586045, 4231073; 586045, 4231088; 
586027, 4231096; 586022, 4231100; 586267, 4231100; 586273, 4231084; 
586323, 4231038; 586340, 4230994; 587435, 4231016; 587882, 4231052; 
587967, 4231111; 587991, 4231124; 588015, 4231126; 588034, 4231123; 
588075, 4231099; 588085, 4231097; 588116, 4231095; 588700, 4230900; 
588842, 4230900; 588842, 4230900; 588925, 4230897; 588989, 4230899; 
589090, 4230913; 589179, 4230901; 589179, 4230901; 589240, 4230894; 
589274, 4230890; 589315, 4230894; 589321, 4230909; 589313, 4231179; 
589015, 4231215; 589100, 4231300; 589100, 4231700; 588600, 4231600; 
588440, 4231680; 588417, 4232400; 588500, 4232400; 588500, 4232500; 
588600, 4232500; 588600, 4232800; 588400, 4233000; 588600, 4233300; 
588700, 4233500; 589300, 4233500; 589983, 4233500; 590000, 4233500; 
590100, 4233500; 590100, 4233300; 590600, 4233300; 591100, 4232800; 
591138, 4232825; 591143, 4232820; 591184, 4232856; 591700, 4233200; 
592513, 4233290; 592594, 4233291; 592594, 4233299; 592600, 4233300; 
592600, 4233800; 592900, 4233700; 592900, 4233751; 592901, 4233751; 
592900, 4233754; 592900, 4233800; 593400, 4234100; 594200, 4234100; 
594300, 4234900; 594500, 4234900; 594890, 4235396; returning to 594915, 
4234098;

    (v) Note: Units 10 and 11 (Map 6) follow:

[[Page 290]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.031

    (15) Unit 13: Stanislaus County, California.
    (i) Unit 13A: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 703100, 4177500; 703000, 4177300; 702911, 
4177359; 702906, 4177503; 703100, 4177507; returning to 703100, 4177500;

[[Page 291]]

    (ii) Unit 13B: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell and Waterford. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 701282, 4176830; 701345, 4176765; 
701756, 4176778; 701600, 4176700; 701600, 4176500; 701600, 4176200; 
701700, 4175900; 701800, 4175800; 702000, 4175800; 702000, 4175100; 
701600, 4175100; 701600, 4174200; 701900, 4173700; 701800, 4173600; 
701700, 4173500; 701700, 4173300; 701700, 4173200; 701600, 4173200; 
701500, 4173100; 701500, 4173000; 701600, 4173000; 701600, 4172800; 
701500, 4172600; 701300, 4172500; 701100, 4172600; 700700, 4172600; 
700600, 4172600; 700500, 4172700; 700500, 4172900; 700400, 4172900; 
700400, 4172800; 700100, 4172700; 699600, 4172700; 699500, 4172800; 
699300, 4172800; 699100, 4172500; 698800, 4172500; 698700, 4172600; 
698400, 4172400; 698100, 4172800; 698200, 4173000; 697400, 4174300; 
697300, 4174300; 697300, 4174500; 697800, 4174500; 697800, 4176300; 
697700, 4176300; 697700, 4176437; 698090, 4176397; 698085, 4176613; 
698084, 4176642; 699300, 4176684; 700500, 4176726; 701204, 4176750; 
returning to 701282, 4176830;
    (iii) Unit 13C: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 702000, 4171800; 702000, 4169800; 702000, 
4169700; 701000, 4169700; 700700, 4169700; 700700, 4170400; 700700, 
4170500; 700550, 4170500; 700500, 4170500; 700500, 4170533; 700500, 
4170900; 700300, 4170900; 700300, 4171100; 700300, 4171800; 701200, 
4171800; returning to 702000, 4171800.

    (iv) Note: Unit 13 (Map 7) follows:

[[Page 292]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.032

    (16) Unit 14: Alameda County, California.
    (i) Unit 14A: Alameda County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Milpitas. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 590100, 4150400; 590481, 4150210; 590452, 4150159; 
590383, 4150201; 590320, 4150230; 590312, 4150216; 590309, 4150216; 
590306, 4150215; 590303, 4150215;

[[Page 293]]

590300, 4150214; 590297, 4150213; 590294, 4150212; 590291, 4150212; 
590202, 4150262; 590201, 4150263; 590199, 4150264; 590197, 4150265; 
590195, 4150266; 590193, 4150267; 590191, 4150267; 590189, 4150268; 
590187, 4150269; 590185, 4150269; 590183, 4150269; 590180, 4150270; 
590178, 4150270; 590176, 4150270; 590174, 4150270; 590172, 4150270; 
590170, 4150270; 590168, 4150270; 590165, 4150270; 590163, 4150270; 
590161, 4150269; 590159, 4150269; 590157, 4150269; 590155, 4150268; 
590153, 4150267; 590151, 4150266; 590149, 4150266; 590147, 4150265; 
590145, 4150264; 590143, 4150263; 590141, 4150262; 590140, 4150261; 
590138, 4150260; 590136, 4150258; 590134, 4150257; 590133, 4150256; 
589930, 4150084; 589926, 4150080; 589921, 4150076; 589916, 4150073; 
589911, 4150070; 589906, 4150066; 589901, 4150064; 589896, 4150061; 
589891, 4150059; 589885, 4150056; 589880, 4150054; 589874, 4150052; 
589869, 4150050; 589863, 4150049; 589857, 4150048; 589852, 4150046; 
589846, 4150045; 589840, 4150045; 589834, 4150044; 589829, 4150044; 
589823, 4150044; 589817, 4150044; 589811, 4150044; 589805, 4150045; 
589799, 4150045; 589794, 4150046; 589788, 4150047; 589782, 4150048; 
589776, 4150050; 589771, 4150052; 589765, 4150053; 589760, 4150055; 
589754, 4150058; 589749, 4150060; 589744, 4150063; 589739, 4150066; 
589734, 4150068; 589729, 4150072; 589724, 4150075; 589719, 4150078; 
589715, 4150082; 589710, 4150086; 589706, 4150090; 589702, 4150094; 
589698, 4150098; 589694, 4150103; 589641, 4150165; 589900, 4150100; 
returning to 590100, 4150400;
    (ii) Unit 14B: Alameda County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Milpitas. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 592000, 4150900; 592300, 4150600; 592300, 4150582; 
592274, 4150603; 592276, 4150615; 592213, 4150675; 592195, 4150689; 
592081, 4150769; 592026, 4150768; 591957, 4150835; 591831, 4150703; 
591824, 4150696; 591604, 4150449; 591601, 4150449; 591598, 4150449; 
591595, 4150449; 591592, 4150449; 591589, 4150448; 591586, 4150448; 
591583, 4150448; 591581, 4150447; 591578, 4150446; 591575, 4150446; 
591572, 4150445; 591569, 4150444; 591567, 4150443; 591564, 4150441; 
591561, 4150440; 591559, 4150439; 591556, 4150437; 591554, 4150436; 
591552, 4150434; 591549, 4150433; 591547, 4150431; 591545, 4150429; 
591542, 4150427; 591540, 4150425; 591538, 4150423; 591536, 4150421; 
591534, 4150419; 591533, 4150416; 591531, 4150414; 591529, 4150412; 
591528, 4150409; 591526, 4150407; 591525, 4150404; 591523, 4150401; 
591522, 4150399; 591521, 4150396; 591520, 4150393; 591519, 4150391; 
591518, 4150388; 591518, 4150385; 591517, 4150382; 591516, 4150379; 
591516, 4150376; 591516, 4150374; 591515, 4150371; 591515, 4150368; 
591515, 4150365; 591515, 4150362; 591515, 4150359; 591516, 4150356; 
591516, 4150354; 591442, 4150273; 591396, 4150319; 591243, 4150156; 
591255, 4150145; 591269, 4150133; 591300, 4150104; 591331, 4150075; 
591473, 4149942; 591550, 4149873; 591589, 4149840; 591620, 4149817; 
591665, 4149787; 591688, 4149775; 591721, 4149761; 591777, 4149738; 
591825, 4149720; 591872, 4149707; 591913, 4149697; 591958, 4149690; 
592001, 4149686; 592064, 4149684; 592119, 4149689; 592237, 4150383; 
592245, 4150384; 592244, 4150388; 592251, 4150389; 592252, 4150385; 
592298, 4150392; 592200, 4150000; 592100, 4149600; 592000, 4149500; 
591984, 4149500; 592103, 4149649; 592088, 4149647; 592058, 4149645; 
592030, 4149647; 591994, 4149650; 591954, 4149655; 591886, 4149666; 
591844, 4149677; 591783, 4149697; 591717, 4149723; 591651, 4149757; 
591594, 4149794; 591557, 4149824; 591530, 4149850; 591453, 4149920; 
591310, 4150053; 591279, 4150082; 591248, 4150110; 591235, 4150123; 
591222, 4150134; 591220, 4150131; 591045, 4149947; 590916, 4150021; 
591500, 4150800; 591600, 4150700; 591800, 4150700; returning to 592000, 
4150900;

    (iii) Note: Unit 14 (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 294]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.033

    (17) Unit 15: Merced, Madera, and Mariposa Counties, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Raynor Creek, Le Grand, and 
Plainsburg. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 747003, 4125902; 747142, 4125971; 747303, 4125987; 
747358, 4126000; 747200, 4126000; 747142, 4125971; 747123, 4125969; 
747070, 4125950; 747003,

[[Page 295]]

4125902; 747000, 4125900; 746900, 4125900; 746600, 4125800; 746300, 
4125700; 746200, 4125600; 746200, 4125500; 745700, 4125500; 745700, 
4125100; 744500, 4125100; 744500, 4125300; 744400, 4125300; 744400, 
4125200; 743700, 4125200; 743700, 4125800; 744500, 4125800; 744500, 
4126200; 743700, 4126200; 743700, 4127000; 743600, 4127000; 742700, 
4127000; 742400, 4127000; 742000, 4127200; 742000, 4128600; 742800, 
4128600; 742800, 4129100; 742900, 4129100; 743000, 4129100; 743000, 
4129200; 743400, 4129300; 743600, 4129500; 743600, 4130284; 743605, 
4130284; 743600, 4130493; 743600, 4130700; 743595, 4130700; 743561, 
4132097; 743560, 4132170; 743556, 4132335; 743549, 4132692; 743537, 
4133202; 743529, 4133301; 743531, 4133352; 743530, 4133400; 743523, 
4133729; 743518, 4134016; 743515, 4134159; 743509, 4134382; 743500, 
4134708; 743504, 4134743; 743565, 4134782; 744447, 4135329; 746234, 
4136439; 746230, 4136445; 745985, 4136865; 745952, 4136931; 745915, 
4136978; 745914, 4136987; 745902, 4137008; 745748, 4137298; 745669, 
4137403; 745620, 4137437; 745503, 4137487; 745203, 4138201; 744984, 
4138471; 744895, 4138606; 744893, 4138653; 744892, 4138670; 744854, 
4138756; 744852, 4138807; 744873, 4138873; 744890, 4138973; 744922, 
4139007; 745038, 4139064; 745171, 4139174; 745299, 4139239; 745334, 
4139300; 745338, 4139306; 745339, 4139307; 745400, 4139400; 745432, 
4139432; 745432, 4139432; 745368, 4139567; 745324, 4139603; 745219, 
4139621; 745269, 4139653; 745281, 4139676; 745422, 4139619; 745490, 
4139575; 745500, 4139576; 745500, 4139600; 745500, 4140300; 746100, 
4139500; 746800, 4138500; 747700, 4137700; 748500, 4135800; 748700, 
4135100; 749500, 4134000; 749501, 4133999; 750173, 4132710; 750700, 
4131700; 751600, 4130500; 752000, 4130200; 752094, 4130188; 752157, 
4130180; 752800, 4130100; 753300, 4130400; 753500, 4130400; 753900, 
4130200; 754000, 4129300; 753400, 4128400; 753900, 4127700; 754400, 
4127700; 754600, 4127400; 755300, 4128400; 755400, 4128400; 755600, 
4127700; 756900, 4126400; 757800, 4125800; 758400, 4126300; 758500, 
4126300; 758600, 4126000; 757900, 4125100; 757400, 4125100; 757800, 
4124400; 757800, 4124000; 758200, 4124000; 758500, 4123600; 758800, 
4123600; 759000, 4123900; 759300, 4123900; 759700, 4123500; 759700, 
4123400; 759200, 4122900; 760300, 4121300; 761000, 4121000; 761300, 
4120300; 761955, 4119563; 761968, 4119549; 761718, 4119265; 761701, 
4119258; 761698, 4119256; 761644, 4119235; 761519, 4119174; 761497, 
4119158; 761476, 4119142; 761412, 4119094; 761355, 4119052; 761244, 
4118969; 761107, 4118894; 760858, 4118839; 760750, 4118755; 760594, 
4118634; 760278, 4118609; 760228, 4118605; 760119, 4118597; 760084, 
4118594; 760084, 4118594; 760008, 4118588; 759742, 4118512; 759529, 
4118452; 759375, 4118358; 759330, 4118326; 759173, 4118214; 758783, 
4118084; 758541, 4118070; 758036, 4117982; 757933, 4117964; 757910, 
4117955; 757910, 4117955; 757811, 4117918; 757808, 4117917; 757797, 
4117914; 757694, 4117865; 757622, 4117811; 757620, 4117809; 757616, 
4117808; 757591, 4117800; 757532, 4117781; 757485, 4117741; 757476, 
4117726; 757475, 4117726; 757450, 4117700; 757411, 4117661; 757378, 
4117627; 757377, 4117626; 757352, 4117600; 757350, 4117598; 757221, 
4117467; 757182, 4117433; 757117, 4117417; 757086, 4117410; 757047, 
4117400; 756985, 4117385; 756917, 4117369; 756872, 4117341; 756823, 
4117300; 756785, 4117267; 756759, 4117243; 756745, 4117231; 756634, 
4117128; 756624, 4117124; 756592, 4117112; 756590, 4117110; 756590, 
4117110; 756500, 4117200; 756223, 4117292; 756200, 4117300; 755800, 
4117200; 755700, 4117200; 755700, 4117160; 755700, 4116700; 755700, 
4116600; 755500, 4116500; 755400, 4116500; 754900, 4116300; 754800, 
4116300; 754800, 4116600; 753700, 4116600; 753700, 4116400; 753300, 
4116400; 753300, 4115600; 753100, 4115500; 752700, 4115400; 752400, 
4115300; 752200, 4115200; 752200, 4115600; 751800, 4115600; 752000, 
4115800; 751900, 4116000; 751400, 4116100; 751100, 4116300; 751300, 
4116300; 751300, 4116900; 751100, 4116900; 750815, 4116900; 750800, 
4116900; 750700, 4117000; 750000, 4116800; 749300, 4116800; 749300, 
4116611; 749300, 4116500; 746800, 4116500; 746000, 4116500; 746000, 
4116520; 746000, 4116600; 745200, 4116600; 745200, 4117800; 744600, 
4117800; 744600, 4118600; 743600, 4118600; 743600, 4119000; 745400, 
4119000; 745400, 4119700; 744700, 4119700; 744700, 4120500; 745300, 
4120500; 745500, 4120600; 745600, 4120700; 746000, 4120700; 746000, 
4121400; 746200, 4121500; 746200, 4121600; 746400, 4121700; 746400, 
4121800; 747600, 4120700; 746500, 4120700; 746500, 4119700; 747000, 
4119700; 747000, 4120300; 747800, 4120300; 747800, 4120000; 748400, 
4120000; 747800, 4120500; 747800, 4121400; 748600, 4121400; 748600, 
4121900; 747800, 4121900; 747800, 4123300; 748300, 4123300; 748300, 
4123500; 748500, 4123500; 748600, 4123500; 748600, 4123900; 747800, 
4123900; 747800, 4124600; 747400, 4125100; 747400, 4125500; 746900, 
4125500; 746900, 4125763; 746902, 4125767; 746921, 4125818; 746971, 
4125871; 746997, 4125897; returning to 747003, 4125902; excluding 
757175, 4117475; 757117, 4117435; 757138, 4117438; 757146, 4117439; 
757245, 4117516; 757255, 4117530; returning to 757175, 4117475.

    (18) Note: Unit 15 (Map 9) follows:

[[Page 296]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.034

    (19) Unit 16: Merced County, California.
    (i) Unit 16A: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson, Gustine, and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 
688600, 4128800; 689100, 4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 
689800, 4128500; 689900, 4128300;

[[Page 297]]

690200, 4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 4125500; 
692700, 4125500; 693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 
693300, 4123700; 693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 
694079, 4122821; 694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 
692200, 4122000; 692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 
691400, 4122800; 691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 
691267, 4123155; 691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 
691217, 4123291; 691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 
691126, 4123677; 691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 
691177, 4123739; 691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 
691195, 4123810; 691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 
691214, 4123980; 691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 
691127, 4124089; 691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 
690900, 4124400; 690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 
690582, 4124427; 690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 
690546, 4124493; 690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 
690500, 4124524; 690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 
690388, 4124590; 690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 
690083, 4124695; 690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 
689988, 4125006; 689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 
689819, 4125184; 689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 
689658, 4125595; 689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 
689630, 4125793; 689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 
689400, 4126600; 689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 
689134, 4126678; 689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 
689020, 4126961; 688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 
688913, 4127006; 689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 
688949, 4127292; 688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 
688823, 4127454; 688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 
688696, 4127650; 688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; 
returning to 688300, 4129000;
    (ii) Unit 16B: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 4125600; 695500, 4122000; 
694900, 4122400; 694700, 4122700; 694500, 4122900; 694500, 4123100; 
694100, 4123400; 693800, 4123500; 693800, 4123800; 693500, 4123900; 
693500, 4124500; 693700, 4124700; 693800, 4125000; 693600, 4125200; 
693400, 4125300; 693122, 4125670; 693100, 4125700; 693146, 4125746; 
693200, 4125800; 693700, 4125900; 693700, 4127300; 693800, 4127300; 
693900, 4127000; 694200, 4126900; 694600, 4126400; 694600, 4126200; 
694700, 4126000; 695179, 4125726; returning to 695400, 4125600;
    (iii) Unit 16C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena, Stevinson, Turner Ranch, and San Luis Ranch. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 699300, 
4126300; 699300, 4125400; 700100, 4125400; 700200, 4126000; 700600, 
4125700; 701100, 4125300; 701100, 4124300; 700300, 4124300; 700300, 
4123800; 700500, 4123800; 700600, 4123500; 701100, 4123400; 701200, 
4123200; 701400, 4123100; 701600, 4122700; 701900, 4122500; 702600, 
4122200; 702870, 4121705; 703200, 4121100; 703900, 4120500; 704600, 
4119800; 704600, 4119800; 704700, 4119700; 698900, 4119600; 698800, 
4119700; 698543, 4119957; 698558, 4119970; 698501, 4120012; 698504, 
4120069; 698626, 4120197; 698662, 4120077; 698694, 4120113; 698668, 
4121116; 698663, 4121510; 698594, 4121508; 698600, 4121600; 699900, 
4121600; 700000, 4120400; 700200, 4120400; 700200, 4122700; 697000, 
4122600; 696900, 4125100; 697700, 4125100; 697700, 4125300; 697600, 
4125400; 697700, 4125600; 698000, 4125700; 698200, 4125800; 698300, 
4126100; 698700, 4126500; 699500, 4126500; 699600, 4126300; returning to 
699300, 4126300;
    (iv) Unit 16D: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 706800, 4120900; 
706700, 4120500; 706700, 4119700; 708100, 4119700; 708100, 4119600; 
708000, 4119500; 707900, 4119200; 707900, 4119000; 708000, 4118900; 
708300, 4118900; 708300, 4118100; 707900, 4118100; 707500, 4118500; 
706500, 4118500; 706000, 4118900; 705600, 4119300; 705200, 4119700; 
704800, 4120000; 704700, 4120100; 704700, 4120400; 705100, 4120400; 
705100, 4120600; 704900, 4120700; 704900, 4120800; 705100, 4120800; 
704900, 4121000; 705000, 4121100; 705100, 4121700; 705200, 4121700; 
705300, 4122000; 705700, 4122100; 705700, 4122200; 705400, 4122300; 
705300, 4122400; 705500, 4122600; 705400, 4122600; 705300, 4122500; 
705200, 4122500; 705100, 4122500; 704900, 4122500; 704900, 4122700; 
704800, 4122800; 704500, 4122800; 704300, 4122900; 704000, 4122800; 
703900, 4122900; 703400, 4124400; 703300, 4124600; 701300, 4126500; 
700100, 4127600; 700467, 4129067; 700500, 4129200; 700500, 4130600; 
701000, 4130600; 701000, 4130100; 701100, 4129800; 701200, 4129800; 
701100, 4130100; 701100, 4130600; 701700, 4130600; 701700, 4129200; 
701800, 4129200; 702800, 4129200; 703000, 4128800; 703300, 4128800; 
703900, 4128800; 703900, 4129000; 704200, 4129000; 704200, 4128500; 
703300, 4128400; 703400, 4128300; 703400, 4127900; 703500, 4127800; 
703800, 4127500; 703700, 4127300; 703500, 4127300; 703400, 4127100; 
703400, 4126100; 703500, 4126100; 704400, 4126100; 704300, 4126000; 
704400, 4125900; 704500, 4125300; 704500, 4124800; 705000, 4124800; 
705000, 4125300; 705700, 4125300; 705700, 4124900; 706600, 4125000; 
706700, 4123700; returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (v) Unit 16E: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 711500, 4122200; 
711500, 4121700; 711500, 4121200; 709900, 4121300; 709900, 4121900; 
709800, 4121900; 709800, 4121800; 709700, 4121500; 709500, 4121500; 
709300, 4121600; 708800, 4121400; 708700, 4121300; 706800, 4121300; 
returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (vi) Unit 16F: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 711200, 4120500; 711400, 4120400; 
711500, 4120500; 711600, 4119600; 711900, 4119600; 711900, 4119400; 
712100, 4119300; 712300, 4119300; 712300, 4119200; 712600, 4119200; 
712800, 4118800; 711600, 4118700; 711600, 4118500; 711400, 4118500;

[[Page 298]]

711300, 4118400; 711100, 4118100; 709900, 4118100; 709900, 4118800; 
709900, 4119000; 709700, 4119000; 709700, 4119600; 710300, 4119600; 
710300, 4119900; 710700, 4119900; 710700, 4120000; 710600, 4120000; 
710600, 4120100; 710700, 4120200; 710600, 4120300; 710700, 4120400; 
710700, 4120500; 710900, 4120400; 711100, 4120400; returning to 711200, 
4120500;
    (vii) Unit 16G: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 714600, 4115000; 713300, 4115000; 713100, 4115300; 
713300, 4115300; 713800, 4115400; 713800, 4116600; 715400, 4116600; 
715500, 4116500; 715500, 4115818; 714600, 4115800; returning to 714600, 
4115000;
    (viii) Unit 16H: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido and Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 718900, 4120900; 718900, 4120000; 
719300, 4120000; 719400, 4120200; 719600, 4120100; 720200, 4120100; 
720300, 4120200; 720700, 4120200; 720900, 4120000; 721500, 4120000; 
721600, 4120100; 722000, 4120100; 722100, 4120000; 722200, 4120200; 
722200, 4120300; 722900, 4120300; 722900, 4119600; 722100, 4119500; 
722200, 4118400; 725400, 4118500; 725400, 4118578; 726100, 4118600; 
726100, 4120100; 728600, 4120100; 728600, 4119200; 727800, 4119200; 
727700, 4118600; 727600, 4118500; 727500, 4118500; 727500, 4118400; 
727500, 4116900; 726800, 4116900; 726700, 4116900; 726800, 4115300; 
725900, 4115300; 725900, 4116900; 724300, 4116900; 724300, 4117600; 
722694, 4117506; 722600, 4117600; 721800, 4117600; 721800, 4118400; 
720200, 4118400; 720200, 4117600; 719400, 4117600; 719400, 4116700; 
718600, 4116700; 718600, 4117100; 718200, 4117100; 718200, 4117200; 
718300, 4117300; 718400, 4117400; 718600, 4117400; 718600, 4117500; 
718600, 4118291; 718900, 4118300; 718900, 4118900; 718800, 4119000; 
718700, 4119000; 718600, 4119100; 717700, 4119100; 717700, 4119900; 
718100, 4119900; 718100, 4119950; 718100, 4120000; 718500, 4120000; 
718500, 4120900; returning to 718900, 4120900;
    (ix) Unit 16I: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 721300, 4120800; 720500, 4120800; 720500, 4121600; 
721300, 4121600; 721300, 4121200; returning to 721300, 4120800;
    (x) Unit 16J: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 722900, 4121800; 721800, 4121800; 722200, 4122500; 
722900, 4122500; returning to 722900, 4121800;
    (xi) Unit 16K: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Plainsburg and El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 731700, 4117000; 730400, 4117000; 
730400, 4118600; 730200, 4118600; 730100, 4119300; 730000, 4119700; 
730000, 4119900; 730100, 4120200; 730900, 4120200; 730900, 4121400; 
731300, 4121500; 731800, 4121400; 732700, 4121300; 734000, 4121200; 
734200, 4121100; 734200, 4120300; 733400, 4120300; 733400, 4118700; 
731700, 4118700; returning to 731700, 4117000;

    (xii) Note: Unit 16 (Map 10) follows:

[[Page 299]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.035

    (20) Unit 17, Fresno County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Millerton Lake East and Academy. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 802663, 4106066; 
803207, 4105399; 803781, 4105836; 803880, 4105842; 804343, 4104869; 
804150, 4104757; 803962, 4104544; 803981, 4104245; 804206, 4103858; 
804331, 4103465; 804238,

[[Page 300]]

4103359; 803957, 4103040; 803171, 4102790; 802073, 4102721; 801886, 
4102509; 801898, 4102309; 802217, 4102028; 802435, 4101741; 802554, 
4101448; 802573, 4101149; 802511, 4100543; 802424, 4100337; 802343, 
4100031; 802056, 4099812; 801769, 4099594; 801276, 4099463; 800877, 
4099437; 800958, 4099743; 801712, 4100492; 801987, 4100911; 801974, 
4101110; 801862, 4101304; 801218, 4101965; 801187, 4102464; 801455, 
4102983; 801816, 4103607; 802316, 4103638; 802834, 4103370; 803333, 
4103402; 803520, 4103614; 803607, 4103820; 803264, 4104500; 802852, 
4104675; 802227, 4105036; 802264, 4106041; 802663, 4106066.

    (21) Note: Unit 17 (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 301]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.036

    (22) Unit 18: Tulare and Kings Counties, California.
    (i) Unit 18A: Tulare and Kings Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Monson, Traver, Burris Park, and Remnoy. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 828797, 
4041134; 828810, 4040935; 829509, 4040978;

[[Page 302]]

829634, 4040585; 829709, 4039386; 830449, 4039621; 830453, 4039463; 
830420, 4039230; 829721, 4039186; 829521, 4039174; 829509, 4039374; 
828304, 4039399; 828279, 4039798; 827580, 4039755; 827605, 4039355; 
827205, 4039330; 827280, 4038132; 826381, 4038076; 826400, 4037776; 
825601, 4037726; 825582, 4038026; 824877, 4038082; 824895, 4037782; 
822892, 4037758; 822929, 4037159; 821031, 4037041; 821075, 4036342; 
820575, 4036310; 820606, 4035811; 820207, 4035786; 820157, 4034981; 
820200, 4034282; 818203, 4034157; 818222, 4033858; 817135, 4033589; 
816842, 4033471; 816667, 4033059; 816274, 4032935; 816181, 4032934; 
814570, 4032928; 813902, 4032386; 813727, 4031974; 813565, 4031362; 
813284, 4031044; 812996, 4030826; 812891, 4032523; 813790, 4032579; 
814252, 4033209; 814539, 4033428; 814851, 4034164; 814889, 4034252; 
815581, 4034395; 816256, 4034838; 817560, 4034819; 816992, 4035886; 
818490, 4035980; 819364, 4036436; 819770, 4036360; 820900, 4037534; 
821693, 4037683; 822542, 4038539; 824646, 4038569; 824846, 4038582; 
826344, 4038675; 826313, 4039175; 825507, 4039225; 825445, 4040223; 
827043, 4040323; 827100, 4041028; returning to 828797, 4041134;
    (ii) Unit 18B: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831257, 4040285; 831281, 4039895; 831228, 4039894; 
831226, 4040265; 830457, 4040256; 830452, 4040335; returning to 831257, 
4040285;
    (iii) Unit 18C: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 832081, 4039935; 832106, 4039535; 832038, 4039531; 
831991, 4039595; 831752, 4039679; 831748, 4039853; 832035, 4039864; 
832031, 4039913; 831542, 4039901; 832081, 4039935; returning to 832081, 
4039935;
    (iv) Unit 18D: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831258, 4037878; 830508, 4037831; 830507, 4037837; 
830510, 4037837; 830495, 4038113; 830867, 4038116; 831249, 4038123; 
returning to 831258, 4037878;
    (v) Unit 18E: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N): 835309, 4039635; 834510, 4039585; 834460, 4040384; 
835259, 4040434; returning to 835309, 4039635;
    (vi) Unit 18F: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Ivanhoe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 837863, 4043705; 837178, 4043663; 837165, 4044455; 
837527, 4044471; 837510, 4044925; 837253, 4045186; 836546, 4045165; 
836550, 4044829; 836726, 4044828; 836732, 4044453; 836753, 4044453; 
836777, 4043638; 836764, 4043637; 836765, 4043628; 835983, 4043614; 
835959, 4043687; 836040, 4043993; 836433, 4044117; 836365, 4045216; 
837164, 4045266; 836733, 4045741; 838331, 4045841; 838338, 4045740; 
837838, 4045710; 837919, 4044411; 837819, 4044405; returning to 837863, 
4043705;

    (vii) Note: Unit 18 (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 303]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.037


    (i) Insects.

                  Casey's June Beetle (Dinacoma caseyi)

    (1) The critical habitat unit is depicted for Riverside County in 
California on the map below.

[[Page 304]]

    (2) Within this area, the primary constituent elements of critical 
habitat for Casey's June beetle are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Soils of the Carsitas (CdC) gravelly sand and Riverwash (RA) 
series, or inclusions of Carsitas cobbly sand (ChC) series soils, or 
inclusions of Myoma fine sands (MaB) or Coachella fine sands (CpA) 
within CdC soils, at or below 620 ft (189 m) in elevation, associated 
with washes and alluvial fans deposited on 0 to 9 percent slopes to 
provide space for population growth and reproduction, moisture, and food 
sources; and
    (ii) Predominantly native desert vegetation, to provide shelter from 
traffic-related mortality and food for the species.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include lands covered by manmade 
structures, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads, existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Data layers defining the map unit 
were created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and the critical 
habitat unit was then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates zone 11, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 coordinates.
    (5) Note: Map of critical habitat for Casey's June beetle follows:

[[Page 305]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22SE11.006

    (6) Palm Springs: Palm Canyon Wash, Riverside County, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Palm Springs and Cathedral City, land 
bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): (E, N): 546545, 
3740363; 546556, 3740362; 546566, 3740362; 546577, 3740362; 546587, 
3740362; 546595, 3740361; 546603, 3740360; 546608, 3740360; 546614, 
3740359; 546625, 3740360; 546637, 3740361; 546650, 3740363; 546657, 
3740362; 546667, 3740364; 546668, 3740364; 546674, 3740364; 546680, 
3740362;

[[Page 306]]

546700, 3740357; 546722, 3740353; 546734, 3740350; 546746, 3740348; 
546756, 3740350; 546764, 3740355; 546767, 3740358; 546768, 3740359; 
546789, 3740351; 546791, 3740349; 546791, 3740343; 546795, 3740334; 
546799, 3740329; 546805, 3740325; 546810, 3740322; 546821, 3740320; 
546823, 3740320; 546833, 3740314; 546865, 3740301; 546941, 3740289; 
546971, 3740284; 546980, 3740284; 547001, 3740284; 547022, 3740282; 
547038, 3740280; 547058, 3740277; 547075, 3740275; 547086, 3740279; 
547092, 3740281; 547093, 3740281; 547104, 3740290; 547115, 3740290; 
547133, 3740287; 547158, 3740281; 547169, 3740278; 547170, 3740278; 
547175, 3740272; 547183, 3740257; 547192, 3740251; 547199, 3740249; 
547199, 3740249; 547241, 3740242; 547291, 3740233; 547343, 3740225; 
547345, 3740225; 547360, 3740231; 547371, 3740237; 547382, 3740231; 
547395, 3740224; 547408, 3740219; 547425, 3740213; 547442, 3740210; 
547449, 3740209; 547464, 3740209; 547473, 3740207; 547482, 3740202; 
547488, 3740193; 547488, 3740183; 547480, 3740159; 547474, 3740137; 
547473, 3740133; 547468, 3740120; 547455, 3740117; 547446, 3740116; 
547436, 3740123; 547418, 3740129; 547397, 3740136; 547380, 3740141; 
547354, 3740148; 547344, 3740151; 547323, 3740159; 547285, 3740167; 
547274, 3740168; 547267, 3740170; 547212, 3740182; 547147, 3740193; 
547092, 3740199; 547017, 3740206; 546951, 3740207; 546942, 3740207; 
546890, 3740206; 546840, 3740206; 546782, 3740206; 546740, 3740205; 
546722, 3740205; 546721, 3740204; 546717, 3740204; 546693, 3740203; 
546650, 3740201; 546584, 3740199; 546513, 3740197; 546387, 3740193; 
546325, 3740191; 546220, 3740191; 546158, 3740190; 546119, 3740188; 
546081, 3740185; 546024, 3740181; 546000, 3740177; 545991, 3740176; 
545976, 3740173; 545955, 3740169; 545938, 3740168; 545908, 3740158; 
545884, 3740153; 545855, 3740146; 545821, 3740135; 545781, 3740122; 
545754, 3740111; 545748, 3740109; 545743, 3740106; 545742, 3740106; 
545717, 3740096; 545699, 3740088; 545681, 3740081; 545664, 3740073; 
545646, 3740064; 545629, 3740055; 545612, 3740046; 545595, 3740037; 
545578, 3740028; 545550, 3740010; 545533, 3740000; 545516, 3739989; 
545499, 3739977; 545483, 3739965; 545467, 3739953; 545450, 3739941; 
545435, 3739929; 545431, 3739926; 545427, 3739923; 545425, 3739921; 
545419, 3739916; 545404, 3739903; 545388, 3739889; 545373, 3739876; 
545359, 3739862; 545344, 3739848; 545330, 3739833; 545330, 3739833; 
545330, 3739833; 545330, 3739833; 545330, 3739833; 545329, 3739833; 
545329, 3739833; 545329, 3739833; 545329, 3739832; 545329, 3739832; 
545329, 3739832; 545329, 3739832; 545329, 3739832; 545329, 3739832; 
545329, 3739832; 545328, 3739832; 545326, 3739830; 545306, 3739812; 
545305, 3739811; 545305, 3739808; 545303, 3739801; 545297, 3739796; 
545297, 3739796; 545285, 3739787; 545276, 3739771; 545272, 3739754; 
545271, 3739750; 545269, 3739731; 545260, 3739722; 545250, 3739712; 
545248, 3739704; 545243, 3739689; 545232, 3739657; 545229, 3739650; 
545229, 3739649; 545223, 3739639; 545201, 3739601; 545201, 3739601; 
545180, 3739575; 545179, 3739573; 545178, 3739572; 545171, 3739562; 
545155, 3739540; 545149, 3739536; 545146, 3739535; 545142, 3739533; 
545139, 3739528; 545138, 3739523; 545137, 3739517; 545137, 3739509; 
545138, 3739501; 545145, 3739496; 545152, 3739491; 545152, 3739491; 
545153, 3739490; 545155, 3739477; 545155, 3739477; 545151, 3739474; 
545145, 3739470; 545135, 3739465; 545129, 3739462; 545126, 3739460; 
545122, 3739454; 545121, 3739453; 545121, 3739453; 545120, 3739449; 
545120, 3739444; 545120, 3739437; 545120, 3739430; 545117, 3739423; 
545117, 3739423; 545116, 3739416; 545115, 3739409; 545114, 3739408; 
545108, 3739398; 545106, 3739396; 545094, 3739353; 545055, 3739334; 
545046, 3739330; 545045, 3739330; 545045, 3739334; 545023, 3739334; 
545023, 3739331; 545023, 3739330; 545002, 3739330; 544997, 3739330; 
544995, 3739331; 544990, 3739330; 544978, 3739327; 544965, 3739325; 
544941, 3739321; 544929, 3739319; 544924, 3739318; 544921, 3739317; 
544921, 3739320; 544915, 3739326; 544911, 3739332; 544909, 3739334; 
544895, 3739331; 544878, 3739327; 544868, 3739321; 544864, 3739309; 
544860, 3739295; 544821, 3739281; 544792, 3739270; 544775, 3739264; 
544767, 3739261; 544754, 3739256; 544751, 3739253; 544748, 3739249; 
544726, 3739226; 544725, 3739226; 544722, 3739226; 544718, 3739224; 
544709, 3739219; 544709, 3739218; 544703, 3739211; 544701, 3739200; 
544699, 3739186; 544697, 3739181; 544691, 3739169; 544669, 3739152; 
544642, 3739130; 544576, 3739067; 544533, 3739029; 544487, 3739002; 
544487, 3739002; 544485, 3739001; 544435, 3738976; 544434, 3738976; 
544433, 3738975; 544405, 3738943; 544388, 3738897; 544388, 3738896; 
544375, 3738851; 544345, 3738778; 544317, 3738731; 544302, 3738717; 
544285, 3738701; 544273, 3738690; 544272, 3738689; 544249, 3738644; 
544248, 3738643; 544246, 3738638; 544239, 3738620; 544230, 3738596; 
544216, 3738578; 544186, 3738560; 544155, 3738551; 544154, 3738550; 
544128, 3738526; 544127, 3738525; 544118, 3738499; 544109, 3738474; 
544107, 3738468; 544087, 3738437; 544057, 3738388; 544010, 3738316; 
543957, 3738246; 543954, 3738243; 543942, 3738229; 543906, 3738190; 
543901, 3738185; 543900, 3738184; 543881, 3738154; 543860, 3738120; 
543858, 3738117; 543844, 3738075; 543830, 3738015; 543819, 3737992; 
543800, 3737955; 543799, 3737953; 543775, 3737922; 543774, 3737920; 
543731, 3737863; 543688, 3737825; 543687, 3737825; 543685, 3737821; 
543678, 3737810; 543671, 3737798; 543667, 3737791; 543667, 3737785; 
543667, 3737752; 543667, 3737739; 543667, 3737739; 543659, 3737692; 
543643, 3737662; 543597, 3737610; 543568, 3737578; 543549, 3737550; 
543517, 3737511; 543469, 3737470; 543468, 3737469; 543451, 3737446; 
543451, 3737446; 543451, 3737446; 543452, 3737443; 543457, 3737423; 
543455, 3737425; 543452, 3737426; 543447, 3737427; 543440, 3737427; 
543427, 3737426; 543412, 3737422; 543411, 3737423; 543411, 3737424; 
543411, 3737424; 543411, 3737425; 543411, 3737426; 543411, 3737426; 
543411, 3737427; 543410, 3737427; 543410, 3737428; 543410, 3737429; 
543410, 3737429; 543410, 3737430; 543410, 3737430; 543410, 3737431; 
543410, 3737432; 543410, 3737432; 543409, 3737433; 543409, 3737433; 
543409, 3737434; 543409, 3737435; 543409, 3737435; 543409, 3737436; 
543409, 3737436; 543409, 3737437; 543409, 3737438; 543408, 3737438; 
543408, 3737439; 543408, 3737439; 543408, 3737440; 543408, 3737441; 
543408, 3737441; 543408, 3737442; 543408, 3737442; 543408, 3737443; 
543408, 3737444; 543408, 3737444; 543408, 3737445; 543408, 3737445; 
543408, 3737446; 543407, 3737447; 543407, 3737447; 543407, 3737448; 
543397, 3737458; 543394, 3737467; 543390, 3737463; 543383, 3737459; 
543380, 3737458; 543369, 3737450; 543342, 3737385; 543340, 3737378; 
543338, 3737373; 543333, 3737365; 543333, 3737365; 543333, 3737365; 
543330, 3737362; 543309, 3737335; 543301, 3737267; 543279, 3737068; 
543272, 3737011; 543272, 3737009;

[[Page 307]]

543251, 3736822; 543241, 3736729; 543227, 3736600; 543203, 3736387; 
543200, 3736359; 543198, 3736326; 543198, 3736324; 543194, 3736290; 
543190, 3736255; 543183, 3736201; 543190, 3736202; 543191, 3736202; 
543212, 3736202; 543221, 3736202; 543257, 3736202; 543284, 3736202; 
543274, 3736190; 543264, 3736177; 543262, 3736168; 543258, 3736159; 
543254, 3736142; 543251, 3736128; 543248, 3736115; 543245, 3736105; 
543243, 3736097; 543239, 3736090; 543223, 3736070; 543221, 3736069; 
543220, 3736069; 543217, 3736072; 543213, 3736078; 543209, 3736085; 
543204, 3736095; 543199, 3736108; 543195, 3736126; 543193, 3736134; 
543186, 3736125; 543137, 3736125; 543126, 3736126; 543073, 3736129; 
543050, 3736140; 543052, 3736162; 543043, 3736213; 543039, 3736233; 
543043, 3736266; 543051, 3736290; 543051, 3736303; 543047, 3736305; 
543035, 3736300; 543004, 3736278; 542996, 3736272; 542960, 3736231; 
542952, 3736217; 542938, 3736200; 542928, 3736188; 542914, 3736182; 
542905, 3736178; 542887, 3736166; 542865, 3736139; 542835, 3736084; 
542831, 3736070; 542825, 3736060; 542816, 3736052; 542782, 3736031; 
542740, 3735997; 542721, 3735985; 542720, 3736121; 542720, 3736145; 
542720, 3736145; 542720, 3736145; 542720, 3736145; 542720, 3736148; 
542720, 3736149; 542720, 3736156; 542720, 3736156; 542720, 3736157; 
542720, 3736157; 542720, 3736159; 542720, 3736159; 542720, 3736159; 
542720, 3736159; 542720, 3736160; 542720, 3736160; 542720, 3736160; 
542720, 3736160; 542720, 3736160; 542720, 3736160; 542720, 3736160; 
542720, 3736161; 542720, 3736161; 542720, 3736161; 542720, 3736161; 
542720, 3736161; 542720, 3736161; 542720, 3736162; 542720, 3736162; 
542720, 3736162; 542720, 3736162; 542720, 3736162; 542720, 3736162; 
542720, 3736162; 542720, 3736163; 542720, 3736163; 542720, 3736163; 
542720, 3736163; 542720, 3736163; 542720, 3736163; 542720, 3736164; 
542720, 3736164; 542720, 3736164; 542720, 3736164; 542720, 3736164; 
542720, 3736164; 542720, 3736165; 542720, 3736165; 542720, 3736165; 
542720, 3736165; 542720, 3736165; 542720, 3736165; 542720, 3736165; 
542720, 3736166; 542720, 3736166; 542720, 3736166; 542720, 3736166; 
542720, 3736166; 542720, 3736200; 542720, 3736200; 542708, 3736200; 
542528, 3736200; 542527, 3736200; 542521, 3736221; 542520, 3736225; 
542519, 3736226; 542521, 3736246; 542521, 3736246; 542523, 3736250; 
542523, 3736250; 542521, 3736276; 542519, 3736289; 542520, 3736345; 
542520, 3736398; 542520, 3736452; 542520, 3736495; 542520, 3736519; 
542520, 3736556; 542522, 3736552; 542539, 3736520; 542551, 3736502; 
542564, 3736487; 542571, 3736481; 542585, 3736499; 542613, 3736567; 
542720, 3736563; 542724, 3736563; 542726, 3736484; 542753, 3736484; 
542760, 3736478; 542778, 3736473; 542796, 3736471; 542817, 3736468; 
542830, 3736464; 542840, 3736455; 542854, 3736456; 542858, 3736461; 
542859, 3736471; 542857, 3736477; 542853, 3736482; 542839, 3736545; 
542829, 3736586; 542853, 3736572; 542869, 3736559; 542867, 3736545; 
542907, 3736518; 542915, 3736504; 542923, 3736484; 542923, 3736604; 
542879, 3736605; 542879, 3736647; 542879, 3736656; 542881, 3736805; 
543095, 3736807; 543121, 3736807; 543121, 3736839; 543120, 3736951; 
543119, 3737008; 543119, 3737008; 543119, 3737008; 543119, 3737008; 
542903, 3737006; 542893, 3737009; 542876, 3737008; 542876, 3737108; 
542876, 3737108; 542776, 3737108; 542776, 3737182; 542784, 3737185; 
542796, 3737201; 542797, 3737207; 542875, 3737208; 543116, 3737210; 
543116, 3737210; 543144, 3737219; 543159, 3737223; 543180, 3737239; 
543185, 3737243; 543195, 3737251; 543203, 3737257; 543210, 3737263; 
543221, 3737293; 543230, 3737318; 543248, 3737381; 543248, 3737382; 
543249, 3737388; 543254, 3737405; 543257, 3737413; 543261, 3737426; 
543277, 3737463; 543283, 3737475; 543287, 3737481; 543289, 3737484; 
543306, 3737511; 543317, 3737526; 543339, 3737555; 543351, 3737575; 
543370, 3737602; 543384, 3737619; 543404, 3737637; 543417, 3737649; 
543433, 3737662; 543445, 3737672; 543465, 3737689; 543483, 3737709; 
543504, 3737733; 543514, 3737743; 543526, 3737760; 543535, 3737773; 
543538, 3737782; 543541, 3737820; 543534, 3737820; 543538, 3737828; 
543541, 3737837; 543591, 3737900; 543601, 3737906; 543607, 3737914; 
543614, 3737917; 543618, 3737924; 543619, 3737931; 543625, 3737936; 
543634, 3737949; 543646, 3737960; 543657, 3737971; 543666, 3737979; 
543672, 3737989; 543676, 3738002; 543677, 3738009; 543678, 3738011; 
543678, 3738049; 543678, 3738056; 543678, 3738093; 543678, 3738157; 
543677, 3738225; 543677, 3738425; 543677, 3738448; 543722, 3738487; 
543773, 3738532; 543894, 3738634; 543901, 3738634; 543904, 3738634; 
543904, 3738672; 543904, 3738674; 543904, 3738701; 543903, 3738701; 
543902, 3738718; 543880, 3738718; 543838, 3738717; 543818, 3738717; 
543675, 3738715; 543675, 3738722; 543675, 3738752; 543674, 3738772; 
543672, 3738999; 543672, 3739066; 543669, 3739139; 543669, 3739148; 
543668, 3739178; 543668, 3739208; 543666, 3739643; 543665, 3739807; 
543665, 3739844; 543665, 3739922; 543670, 3739922; 543701, 3739922; 
543710, 3739923; 543714, 3739923; 543716, 3739923; 543727, 3739935; 
543733, 3739942; 543738, 3739947; 543736, 3739948; 543712, 3739948; 
543711, 3739973; 543726, 3739973; 543730, 3739983; 543731, 3739986; 
543734, 3739995; 543742, 3739995; 543769, 3739994; 544024, 3739989; 
544059, 3739988; 544075, 3739987; 544170, 3739985; 544186, 3739985; 
544185, 3739987; 544194, 3739985; 544278, 3739984; 544415, 3739983; 
544469, 3739983; 544469, 3739929; 544469, 3739893; 544470, 3739837; 
544470, 3739828; 544472, 3739646; 544473, 3739430; 544473, 3739324; 
544473, 3739183; 544473, 3739148; 544759, 3739426; 544762, 3739429; 
544763, 3739430; 544807, 3739471; 544816, 3739479; 544873, 3739533; 
544882, 3739542; 544892, 3739550; 544892, 3739544; 544901, 3739559; 
544911, 3739570; 544917, 3739576; 544924, 3739583; 544932, 3739591; 
544953, 3739613; 544977, 3739637; 544994, 3739655; 545180, 3739837; 
545213, 3739869; 545217, 3739872; 545241, 3739901; 545248, 3739907; 
545260, 3739917; 545287, 3739941; 545296, 3739954; 545388, 3740038; 
545533, 3740135; 545536, 3740136; 545536, 3740137; 545537, 3740148; 
545535, 3740184; 545535, 3740207; 545539, 3740233; 545566, 3740232; 
545590, 3740233; 545605, 3740233; 545616, 3740232; 545651, 3740233; 
545681, 3740233; 545716, 3740233; 545727, 3740233; 545731, 3740233; 
545740, 3740233; 545742, 3740233; 545757, 3740236; 545771, 3740240; 
545782, 3740241; 545785, 3740241; 545785, 3740242; 545785, 3740242; 
545794, 3740245; 545799, 3740246; 545809, 3740249; 545840, 3740256; 
545849, 3740256; 545861, 3740259; 545892, 3740266; 545912, 3740270; 
545914, 3740271; 545925, 3740273; 545965, 3740281; 545990, 3740285; 
546011, 3740288; 546052, 3740294; 546077, 3740299; 546094, 3740309; 
546108, 3740317; 546117, 3740321; 546139, 3740332; 546156, 3740335; 
546170, 3740337; 546170, 3740337; 546179, 3740338; 546186, 3740337; 
546188, 3740340; 546188, 3740340;

[[Page 308]]

546195, 3740343; 546203, 3740344; 546210, 3740346; 546217, 3740347; 
546225, 3740348; 546231, 3740347; 546240, 3740349; 546249, 3740352; 
546256, 3740354; 546263, 3740355; 546270, 3740356; 546275, 3740359; 
546281, 3740357; 546289, 3740359; 546295, 3740357; 546297, 3740355; 
546304, 3740352; 546323, 3740353; 546328, 3740353; 546328, 3740353; 
546332, 3740353; 546474, 3740353; 546476, 3740354; 546484, 3740353; 
546492, 3740354; 546500, 3740359; 546505, 3740367; 546510, 3740372; 
546515, 3740374; 546528, 3740370; 546528, 3740368; 546534, 3740366; 
thence returning to 546545, 3740363; continuing to land bounded by 
542904, 3737623; 542904, 3737612; 542941, 3737612; 543061, 3737613; 
543075, 3737613; 543075, 3737581; 543075, 3737544; 543075, 3737508; 
543075, 3737469; 543076, 3737429; 543076, 3737420; 542976, 3737420; 
542975, 3737438; 542975, 3737485; 542975, 3737511; 542975, 3737511; 
542875, 3737511; 542875, 3737511; 542875, 3737545; 542875, 3737584; 
542875, 3737600; 542875, 3737600; 542875, 3737622; 542875, 3737623; 
thence returning to 542904, 3737623; continuing to land bounded by 
546332, 3739429; 546332, 3739418; 546331, 3739399; 546328, 3739390; 
546324, 3739383; 546313, 3739372; 546302, 3739363; 546286, 3739353; 
546272, 3739349; 546263, 3739347; 546247, 3739346; 546210, 3739346; 
546162, 3739346; 546161, 3739346; 546160, 3739346; 546155, 3739348; 
546155, 3739349; 546154, 3739405; 546154, 3739424; 546157, 3739424; 
546164, 3739425; 546173, 3739424; 546190, 3739420; 546205, 3739417; 
546219, 3739417; 546231, 3739418; 546236, 3739419; 546244, 3739420; 
546255, 3739419; 546263, 3739419; 546269, 3739421; 546274, 3739424; 
546277, 3739428; 546277, 3739433; 546277, 3739440; 546277, 3739447; 
546277, 3739450; 546278, 3739454; 546280, 3739457; 546319, 3739447; 
546324, 3739444; 546329, 3739439; thence returning to 546332, 3739429; 
continuing to land bounded by 546405, 3739025; 546401, 3739010; 546395, 
3739013; 546374, 3739026; 546356, 3739042; 546356, 3739042; 546341, 
3739060; 546342, 3739090; 546335, 3739100; 546326, 3739112; 546325, 
3739152; 546324, 3739225; 546335, 3739225; 546365, 3739227; 546365, 
3739227; 546364, 3739240; 546362, 3739241; 546359, 3739242; 546347, 
3739246; 546347, 3739260; 546347, 3739437; 546347, 3739450; 546359, 
3739447; 546392, 3739437; 546562, 3739387; 546651, 3739361; 546703, 
3739346; 546707, 3739344; 546699, 3739300; 546685, 3739275; 546682, 
3739269; 546658, 3739254; 546620, 3739239; 546606, 3739238; 546605, 
3739238; 546557, 3739237; 546553, 3739228; 546551, 3739225; 546546, 
3739218; 546536, 3739203; 546536, 3739203; 546508, 3739181; 546493, 
3739161; 546489, 3739157; 546469, 3739132; 546447, 3739096; 546437, 
3739083; 546415, 3739053; 546411, 3739042; thence returning to 546405, 
3739025.

         Comal Springs dryopid beetle (Stygoparnus comalensis).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Comal and Hays Counties, 
Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Comal Springs dryopid beetle are:
    (i) High-quality water with no or minimal levels of pollutants, such 
as soaps and detergents (Brown 1987, p. 261) and other compounds 
containing surfactants, heavy metals, pesticides, fertilizer nutrients, 
petroleum hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals and veterinary medicines, and 
semi-volatile compounds, such as industrial cleaning agents, and 
including:
    (A) Low salinity with total dissolved solids that generally range 
from 307 to 368 mg/L; and
    (B) Low turbidity that generally is less than 5 nephelometric 
turbidity units;
    (ii) Aquifer water temperatures that range from approximately 68 to 
75 [deg]F (20 to 24 [deg]C);
    (iii) A hydrologic regime that allows for adequate spring flows that 
provide levels of dissolved oxygen in the approximate range of 4.0 to 
10.0 mg/L for respiration of the Comal Springs dryopid beetle; and
    (iv) Food supply that includes detritus (decomposed materials), leaf 
litter, living plant material, algae, fungi, bacteria and other 
microorganisms, and decaying roots.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, roads, and other paved areas) and the land on 
which they are located existing with the legal boundaries on the 
effective date of this rule. Where lakes are designated, critical 
habitat is only designated for areas where springs occur and does not 
include areas of the lake bottom beyond a radius of 50 ft (15.2 m) from 
the spring outlet.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created by using ArcGIS. All coordinates are UTM zone 14 coordinate 
pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates 
were derived from 2004 digital orthophotographs. All acreage and mileage 
calculations were performed using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for Comal Springs 
dryopid beetle (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 309]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.003

    (6) Comal Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583387, 3287251; 583392, 3287264; 
583405, 3287280; 583404, 3287290; 583407, 3287301; 583414, 3287307; 
583425, 3287308; 583425, 3287320; 583433, 3287328; 583444, 3287330; 
583454, 3287325;

[[Page 310]]

583463, 3287301; 583482, 3287272; 583486, 3287286; 583501, 3287296; 
583520, 3287314; 583547, 3287326; 583557, 3287333; 583572, 3287335; 
583586, 3287342; 583567, 3287387; 583560, 3287408; 583559, 3287423; 
583534, 3287403; 583499, 3287359; 583491, 3287347; 583484, 3287340; 
583471, 3287334; 583461, 3287334; 583452, 3287340; 583450, 3287350; 
583454, 3287364; 583465, 3287374; 583494, 3287415; 583521, 3287443; 
583526, 3287453; 583563, 3287477; 583589, 3287503; 583613, 3287519; 
583643, 3287547; 583662, 3287561; 583719, 3287617; 583759, 3287669; 
583780, 3287701; 583811, 3287743; 583833, 3287764; 583848, 3287784; 
583892, 3287826; 583911, 3287850; 583970, 3287907; 584008, 3287938; 
584047, 3287963; 584055, 3287964; 584065, 3287960; 584073, 3287948; 
584074, 3287941; 584081, 3287952; 584131, 3288011; 584164, 3288044; 
584183, 3288062; 584197, 3288071; 584216, 3288093; 584236, 3288110; 
584258, 3288138; 584284, 3288161; 584325, 3288209; 584343, 3288223; 
584364, 3288233; 584375, 3288243; 584386, 3288244; 584401, 3288234; 
584403, 3288218; 584433, 3288201; 584437, 3288193; 584436, 3288184; 
584416, 3288167; 584405, 3288167; 584375, 3288184; 584365, 3288180; 
584344, 3288156; 584329, 3288131; 584320, 3288125; 584298, 3288103; 
584273, 3288067; 584204, 3287997; 584187, 3287985; 584176, 3287973; 
584152, 3287943; 584147, 3287933; 584105, 3287880; 584080, 3287862; 
584049, 3287844; 584026, 3287815; 584021, 3287805; 584013, 3287798; 
584009, 3287787; 583999, 3287775; 583971, 3287751; 583947, 3287735; 
583927, 3287725; 583920, 3287718; 583890, 3287704; 583850, 3287673; 
583845, 3287665; 583851, 3287662; 583860, 3287650; 583865, 3287640; 
583865, 3287629; 583863, 3287622; 583854, 3287609; 583840, 3287600; 
583836, 3287584; 583829, 3287576; 583838, 3287552; 583841, 3287535; 
583841, 3287520; 583835, 3287501; 583804, 3287452; 583790, 3287435; 
583766, 3287416; 583727, 3287406; 583706, 3287406; 583695, 3287398; 
583686, 3287370; 583699, 3287298; 583698, 3287288; 583694, 3287282; 
583617, 3287257; 583610, 3287258; 583605, 3287262; 583597, 3287280; 
583584, 3287277; 583565, 3287270; 583541, 3287255; 583534, 3287244; 
583518, 3287233; 583510, 3287211; 583496, 3287192; 583480, 3287183; 
583459, 3287177; 583436, 3287178; 583419, 3287184; 583400, 3287198; 
583396, 3287205; 583387, 3287251.
    (ii) Note: Comal Springs Unit (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 311]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.004

    (7) Fern Bank Springs Unit, Hays County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 595131, 3317374; 595131, 3317375; 
595132, 3317376; 595132, 3317377; 595132, 3317378; 595132, 3317379; 
595133, 3317380; 595133, 3317381; 595133, 3317382; 595134, 3317383; 
595135, 3317383; 595135, 3317384; 595136, 3317385; 595137, 3317386; 
595137, 3317386; 595138, 3317387; 595139, 3317387; 595140, 3317388; 
595141, 3317388; 595141, 3317388; 595168, 3317398; 595181, 3317411; 
595198, 3317428; 595198, 3317428; 595199, 3317429; 595199, 3317430; 
595200, 3317430; 595201, 3317431; 595202, 3317431; 595203, 3317432; 
595204, 3317432; 595205, 3317432; 595206, 3317432; 595207, 3317433; 
595208, 3317433;

[[Page 312]]

595209, 3317433; 595210, 3317433; 595211, 3317433; 595212, 3317433; 
595213, 3317432; 595214, 3317432; 595214, 3317432; 595215, 3317431; 
595216, 3317431; 595217, 3317430; 595218, 3317430; 595219, 3317429; 
595219, 3317428; 595220, 3317428; 595221, 3317427; 595237, 3317406; 
595237, 3317406; 595238, 3317405; 595238, 3317404; 595239, 3317404; 
595239, 3317403; 595239, 3317402; 595240, 3317401; 595240, 3317400; 
595240, 3317400; 595240, 3317399; 595240, 3317398; 595240, 3317397; 
595240, 3317396; 595240, 3317395; 595240, 3317394; 595240, 3317394; 
595240, 3317393; 595239, 3317392; 595239, 3317391; 595239, 3317390; 
595238, 3317389; 595238, 3317388; 595237, 3317388; 595237, 3317388; 
595223, 3317369; 595223, 3317369; 595222, 3317368; 595221, 3317367; 
595221, 3317366; 595220, 3317366; 595219, 3317365; 595218, 3317365; 
595217, 3317364; 595217, 3317364; 595173, 3317343; 595173, 3317343; 
595172, 3317343; 595171, 3317342; 595170, 3317342; 595169, 3317342; 
595168, 3317342; 595167, 3317342; 595166, 3317342; 595165, 3317342; 
595164, 3317342; 595163, 3317342; 595162, 3317343; 595146, 3317347; 
595146, 3317348; 595145, 3317348; 595144, 3317348; 595143, 3317349; 
595142, 3317349; 595141, 3317350; 595141, 3317350; 595141, 3317350; 
595140, 3317351; 595139, 3317352; 595139, 3317352; 595139, 3317353; 
595138, 3317353; 595138, 3317354; 595137, 3317355; 595137, 3317356; 
595136, 3317357; 595136, 3317357; 595132, 3317369; 595132, 3317370; 
595132, 3317370; 595132, 3317371; 595132, 3317372; 595131, 3317373; 
595131, 3317374.
    (ii) Note: Fern Bank Springs Unit (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 313]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.005

          Comal Springs riffle beetle (Heterelmis comalensis).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Comal and Hays Counties, 
Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for Comal 
Springs riffle beetle are:

[[Page 314]]

    (i) High-quality water with no or minimal levels of pollutants, such 
as soaps and detergents (Brown 1987, p. 261) and other compounds 
containing surfactants, heavy metals, pesticides, fertilizer nutrients, 
petroleum hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals and veterinary medicines, and 
semi-volatile compounds, such as industrial cleaning agents, and 
including:
    (A) Low salinity with total dissolved solids that generally range 
from 307 to 368 mg/L; and
    (B) Low turbidity that generally is less than 5 nephelometric 
turbidity units;
    (ii) Aquifer water temperatures that range from approximately 68 to 
75 [deg]F (20 to 24 [deg]C);
    (iii) A hydrologic regime that allows for adequate spring flows that 
provide levels of dissolved oxygen in the approximate range of 4.0 to 
10.0 mg/L for respiration of the Comal Springs riffle beetle;
    (iv) Food supply that includes detritus (decomposed materials), leaf 
litter, living plant material, algae, fungi, bacteria and other 
microorganisms, and decaying roots; and
    (v) Bottom substrate in surface water habitat of the Comal Springs 
riffle beetle that is free of sand and silt, and is composed of gravel 
and cobble ranging in size from 0.3 to 5.0 inches (8 to 128 
millimeters).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, roads, and other paved areas) and the land on 
which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on the 
effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created by using ArcGIS. All coordinates are UTM zone 14 coordinate 
pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates 
were derived from 2004 digital orthophotographs. All acreage and mileage 
calculations were performed using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for Comal Springs 
riffle beetle (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 315]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.006

    (6) Comal Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583420, 3287293; 583423, 3287293; 
583426, 3287293; 583428, 3287290; 583429, 3287285; 583428, 3287280; 
583426, 3287273; 583422, 3287268; 583416, 3287259; 583415, 3287255; 
583415, 3287249;

[[Page 316]]

583417, 3287238; 583418, 3287233; 583419, 3287228; 583418, 3287222; 
583421, 3287221; 583427, 3287216; 583429, 3287207; 583435, 3287204; 
583442, 3287203; 583455, 3287203; 583464, 3287203; 583468, 3287205; 
583475, 3287209; 583479, 3287213; 583479, 3287217; 583483, 3287224; 
583486, 3287232; 583490, 3287246; 583491, 3287248; 583485, 3287247; 
583481, 3287245; 583476, 3287243; 583471, 3287241; 583461, 3287239; 
583460, 3287242; 583460, 3287248; 583459, 3287255; 583459, 3287261; 
583458, 3287266; 583455, 3287272; 583455, 3287277; 583452, 3287282; 
583449, 3287284; 583446, 3287288; 583445, 3287295; 583441, 3287307; 
583439, 3287314; 583443, 3287315; 583444, 3287309; 583446, 3287303; 
583449, 3287293; 583450, 3287291; 583453, 3287288; 583457, 3287284; 
583461, 3287278; 583466, 3287271; 583468, 3287263; 583469, 3287255; 
583470, 3287251; 583480, 3287257; 583484, 3287256; 583488, 3287254; 
583492, 3287253; 583493, 3287254; 583496, 3287255; 583500, 3287257; 
583503, 3287258; 583507, 3287260; 583509, 3287261; 583509, 3287262; 
583509, 3287265; 583508, 3287266; 583504, 3287270; 583502, 3287270; 
583499, 3287270; 583497, 3287271; 583497, 3287273; 583498, 3287276; 
583500, 3287277; 583502, 3287279; 583505, 3287281; 583508, 3287282; 
583512, 3287285; 583516, 3287291; 583521, 3287294; 583525, 3287298; 
583528, 3287301; 583531, 3287303; 583535, 3287305; 583540, 3287306; 
583544, 3287309; 583551, 3287311; 583556, 3287313; 583560, 3287317; 
583563, 3287319; 583567, 3287320; 583571, 3287320; 583575, 3287320; 
583578, 3287321; 583580, 3287322; 583583, 3287324; 583587, 3287326; 
583592, 3287328; 583595, 3287329; 583597, 3287330; 583600, 3287331; 
583603, 3287332; 583604, 3287333; 583605, 3287337; 583605, 3287340; 
583604, 3287344; 583601, 3287346; 583598, 3287353; 583593, 3287363; 
583589, 3287371; 583587, 3287378; 583581, 3287392; 583580, 3287400; 
583575, 3287411; 583574, 3287420; 583575, 3287430; 583575, 3287435; 
583575, 3287438; 583575, 3287441; 583574, 3287442; 583573, 3287442; 
583572, 3287442; 583569, 3287441; 583567, 3287442; 583563, 3287442; 
583558, 3287441; 583553, 3287437; 583549, 3287435; 583542, 3287429; 
583539, 3287428; 583536, 3287425; 583533, 3287420; 583524, 3287415; 
583516, 3287405; 583510, 3287398; 583505, 3287392; 583499, 3287383; 
583494, 3287378; 583486, 3287368; 583482, 3287361; 583479, 3287356; 
583475, 3287353; 583467, 3287349; 583465, 3287349; 583466, 3287355; 
583468, 3287356; 583470, 3287357; 583471, 3287359; 583473, 3287361; 
583475, 3287362; 583479, 3287367; 583485, 3287377; 583491, 3287386; 
583498, 3287395; 583506, 3287406; 583509, 3287407; 583511, 3287412; 
583523, 3287423; 583533, 3287434; 583535, 3287437; 583537, 3287442; 
583549, 3287449; 583558, 3287455; 583565, 3287461; 583571, 3287464; 
583576, 3287468; 583584, 3287478; 583598, 3287491; 583610, 3287498; 
583623, 3287507; 583635, 3287519; 583653, 3287536; 583672, 3287549; 
583685, 3287562; 583697, 3287574; 583731, 3287607; 583739, 3287618; 
583753, 3287634; 583761, 3287645; 583772, 3287660; 583784, 3287679; 
583792, 3287692; 583809, 3287716; 583823, 3287733; 583844, 3287754; 
583859, 3287773; 583870, 3287784; 583883, 3287797; 583903, 3287816; 
583913, 3287829; 583922, 3287839; 583933, 3287849; 583941, 3287857; 
583951, 3287867; 583961, 3287878; 583971, 3287886; 583980, 3287896; 
583991, 3287905; 584005, 3287917; 584017, 3287926; 584024, 3287931; 
584038, 3287941; 584049, 3287948; 584052, 3287949; 584055, 3287948; 
584056, 3287945; 584059, 3287941; 584059, 3287937; 584055, 3287935; 
584054, 3287932; 584055, 3287929; 584060, 3287926; 584067, 3287926; 
584071, 3287924; 584078, 3287920; 584081, 3287921; 584085, 3287929; 
584093, 3287942; 584108, 3287958; 584116, 3287970; 584128, 3287984; 
584142, 3288000; 584150, 3288007; 584157, 3288014; 584163, 3288021; 
584169, 3288027; 584174, 3288033; 584181, 3288039; 584187, 3288044; 
584192, 3288050; 584207, 3288060; 584216, 3288071; 584227, 3288082; 
584239, 3288093; 584247, 3288099; 584251, 3288104; 584255, 3288109; 
584261, 3288116; 584265, 3288121; 584270, 3288128; 584277, 3288132; 
584282, 3288138; 584289, 3288144; 584296, 3288151; 584303, 3288161; 
584313, 3288171; 584318, 3288178; 584328, 3288188; 584336, 3288198; 
584342, 3288201; 584347, 3288204; 584349, 3288207; 584352, 3288210; 
584357, 3288212; 584360, 3288215; 584366, 3288217; 584371, 3288219; 
584374, 3288221; 584378, 3288225; 584382, 3288229; 584388, 3288225; 
584388, 3288224; 584388, 3288220; 584388, 3288216; 584388, 3288214; 
584389, 3288211; 584389, 3288209; 584395, 3288205; 584401, 3288203; 
584422, 3288191; 584411, 3288181; 584393, 3288192; 584382, 3288198; 
584376, 3288200; 584371, 3288199; 584363, 3288197; 584355, 3288191; 
584348, 3288183; 584340, 3288175; 584332, 3288165; 584326, 3288157; 
584319, 3288147; 584316, 3288143; 584317, 3288141; 584316, 3288140; 
584314, 3288141; 584309, 3288136; 584303, 3288129; 584286, 3288113; 
584277, 3288100; 584269, 3288089; 584261, 3288077; 584253, 3288071; 
584240, 3288057; 584236, 3288052; 584228, 3288045; 584219, 3288035; 
584210, 3288026; 584203, 3288019; 584193, 3288008; 584183, 3288002; 
584176, 3287996; 584169, 3287987; 584165, 3287984; 584158, 3287974; 
584150, 3287966; 584139, 3287951; 584135, 3287942; 584127, 3287933; 
584114, 3287915; 584105, 3287905; 584094, 3287891; 584082, 3287884; 
584072, 3287875; 584059, 3287867; 584047, 3287862; 584038, 3287855; 
584033, 3287848; 584025, 3287840; 584019, 3287830; 584016, 3287827; 
584016, 3287827; 584013, 3287824; 584011, 3287820; 584009, 3287814; 
584005, 3287811; 584000, 3287806; 583996, 3287795; 583988, 3287786; 
583982, 3287780; 583972, 3287771; 583962, 3287764; 583950, 3287757; 
583939, 3287748; 583928, 3287743; 583917, 3287737; 583917, 3287737; 
583912, 3287731; 583895, 3287724; 583881, 3287717; 583872, 3287708; 
583860, 3287701; 583847, 3287692; 583838, 3287683; 583829, 3287669; 
583828, 3287663; 583830, 3287659; 583835, 3287653; 583840, 3287651; 
583843, 3287647; 583847, 3287642; 583850, 3287636; 583850, 3287630; 
583847, 3287625; 583842, 3287619; 583836, 3287616; 583829, 3287611; 
583824, 3287603; 583823, 3287597; 583822, 3287591; 583820, 3287588; 
583814, 3287587; 583813, 3287583; 583812, 3287580; 583814, 3287575; 
583815, 3287570; 583817, 3287565; 583820, 3287558; 583824, 3287548; 
583826, 3287541; 583826, 3287534; 583826, 3287522; 583823, 3287515; 
583821, 3287507; 583813, 3287493; 583807, 3287485; 583803, 3287481; 
583803, 3287478; 583799, 3287472; 583792, 3287462; 583779, 3287446; 
583769, 3287437; 583757, 3287428; 583753, 3287427; 583746, 3287426; 
583734, 3287423; 583725, 3287421; 583715, 3287420; 583709, 3287421; 
583702, 3287421; 583696, 3287418; 583689, 3287413; 583683, 3287407; 
583679, 3287400; 583677, 3287393; 583674, 3287383; 583671, 3287371; 
583672, 3287360; 583675, 3287341; 583678, 3287324; 583680, 3287312; 
583684, 3287297; 583684, 3287293; 583616, 3287272; 583615, 3287275; 
583610, 3287289; 583606, 3287294;

[[Page 317]]

583601, 3287295; 583595, 3287296; 583592, 3287294; 583580, 3287292; 
583569, 3287288; 583557, 3287283; 583548, 3287276; 583539, 3287271; 
583531, 3287267; 583525, 3287260; 583523, 3287255; 583517, 3287253; 
583513, 3287248; 583507, 3287243; 583502, 3287236; 583500, 3287228; 
583497, 3287219; 583493, 3287213; 583486, 3287203; 583474, 3287197; 
583458, 3287192; 583447, 3287192; 583439, 3287193; 583434, 3287196; 
583430, 3287198; 583428, 3287197; 583424, 3287198; 583422, 3287201; 
583419, 3287203; 583415, 3287205; 583411, 3287209; 583409, 3287221; 
583406, 3287230; 583404, 3287240; 583402, 3287251; 583405, 3287256; 
583408, 3287259; 583412, 3287263; 583417, 3287270; 583420, 3287276; 
583422, 3287279; 583421, 3287282; 583419, 3287285; 583419, 3287288; 
583420, 3287293.
    (ii) Note: Comal Springs Unit (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 318]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.007

    (7) San Marcos Springs Unit, Hays County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 602869, 3307092; 602870, 3307100; 
602877, 3307131; 602892, 3307172; 602926, 3307215; 602936, 3307229; 
602942, 3307237; 602945, 3307243; 602957, 3307286; 603007, 3307329; 
603072, 3307386; 603154, 3307462; 603158, 3307463; 603166, 3307466; 
603175, 3307465; 603186, 3307473; 603219, 3307486; 603258, 3307508; 
603288, 3307526; 603307, 3307541; 603317, 3307544; 603326, 3307539; 
603329, 3307527; 603319, 3307512; 603251, 3307456; 603234, 3307439; 
603224, 3307433; 603218, 3307419; 603206, 3307412;

[[Page 319]]

603192, 3307406; 603175, 3307418; 603170, 3307419; 603153, 3307414; 
603144, 3307404; 603141, 3307389; 603145, 3307379; 603147, 3307369; 
603152, 3307352; 603141, 3307339; 603135, 3307339; 603124, 3307337; 
603120, 3307336; 603116, 3307335; 603114, 3307325; 603109, 3307318; 
603105, 3307315; 603104, 3307314; 603100, 3307310; 603024, 3307239; 
603023, 3307240; 603019, 3307237; 603017, 3307233; 603026, 3307203; 
603035, 3307187; 603038, 3307178; 603038, 3307166; 603033, 3307148; 
603027, 3307138; 603018, 3307123; 603002, 3307117; 602983, 3307109; 
602968, 3307097; 602962, 3307105; 602962, 3307105; 602965, 3307112; 
602963, 3307116; 602958, 3307119; 602954, 3307123; 602946, 3307126; 
602938, 3307129; 602928, 3307129; 602921, 3307129; 602913, 3307128; 
602896, 3307105; 602894, 3307101; 602887, 3307097; 602881, 3307091; 
602883, 3307087; 602877, 3307082; 602875, 3307084; 602872, 3307087; 
602869, 3307092.
    (ii) Note: San Marcos Springs Unit (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 320]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.008

              Delta Green Ground Beetle (Elaphrus viridis)

    California. Solano County. T.5N. R.1E. West \1/2\ Sec. 12, southwest 
\1/4\ Sec. 13, southeast \1/4\ Sec. 14, northeast \1/4\ Sec. 23, 
northwest \1/4\ Sec. 24.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 321]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.147

                Helotes Mold Beetle (Batrisodes venyivi)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Helotes mold beetle in Bexar County, 
Texas, occurs in Units 1e, 3, and 5 as described in this entry and 
depicted on Maps 1 (index map), 2, 4, and 5 of this entry.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Batrisodes venyivi are:
    (i) Karst-forming rock containing subterranean spaces (caves and 
connected mesocaverns) with stable temperatures, high humidities (near 
saturation), and suitable substrates (for example, spaces between and 
underneath rocks for foraging and sheltering) that are free of 
contaminants; and
    (ii) Surface and subsurface sources (such as plants and their roots, 
fruits, and leaves, and animal (e.g., cave cricket) eggs, feces, and 
carcasses) that provide nutrient input into the karst ecosystem.
    (3) Developed lands that do not contain the subsurface primary 
constituent elements (see paragraph (2)(i) of this entry) and that 
existed on the effective date of this rule are not considered to be 
critical habitat.
    (4) Data layers defining this map unit were created using a 
geographic information system (GIS), which included cave locations, 
karst zone maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, 
and USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (5) Index map of Bexar County invertebrates critical habitat units, 
Bexar County, Texas, follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.012


[[Page 322]]


    (6) Unit 1e: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 526403, 3273634; 526465, 3273472; 
526487, 3273282; 526506, 3273157; 526879, 3273092; 527025, 3273129; 
527180, 3273102; 527297, 3273019; 527383, 3272873; 527398, 3272719; 
527346, 3272571; 527228, 3272449; 527075, 3272402; 526905, 3272426; 
526783, 3272497; 526472, 3272434; 526435, 3272318; 526460, 3272223; 
526443, 3272077; 526356, 3271945; 526158, 3271842; 525997, 3271842; 
525854, 3271930; 525762, 3272044; 525703, 3272205; 525729, 3272352; 
525802, 3272494; 525890, 3272776; 525876, 3272894; 525858, 3272918; 
525912, 3272925; 525904, 3272945; 525903, 3272947; 525903, 3272949; 
525902, 3272950; 525902, 3272952; 525901, 3272954; 525901, 3272956; 
525900, 3272957; 525900, 3272959; 525899, 3272961; 525899, 3272963; 
525898, 3272965; 525898, 3272966; 525898, 3272968; 525898, 3272970; 
525897, 3272972; 525897, 3272974; 525897, 3272975; 525897, 3272977; 
525897, 3272979; 525897, 3272981; 525897, 3272983; 525897, 3272985; 
525897, 3272986; 525897, 3272988; 525897, 3272990; 525897, 3272992; 
525897, 3272994; 525897, 3272996; 525897, 3272997; 525898, 3272999; 
525898, 3273001; 525898, 3273003; 525899, 3273005; 525899, 3273007; 
525899, 3273008; 525900, 3273010; 525900, 3273012; 525901, 3273014; 
525901, 3273015; 525902, 3273017; 525902, 3273019; 525903, 3273021; 
525904, 3273022; 525904, 3273024; 525905, 3273026; 525906, 3273027; 
525906, 3273029; 525907, 3273031; 525908, 3273032; 525909, 3273034; 
525910, 3273036; 525911, 3273037; 525912, 3273039; 525913, 3273040; 
525914, 3273042; 525915, 3273044; 525916, 3273045; 525917, 3273047; 
525918, 3273048; 525919, 3273049; 525920, 3273051; 525921, 3273052; 
525923, 3273054; 525924, 3273055; 525925, 3273056; 525926, 3273058; 
525928, 3273059; 525929, 3273060; 525930, 3273062; 525932, 3273063; 
525933, 3273064; 525934, 3273065; 525936, 3273066; 525937, 3273068; 
525939, 3273069; 525940, 3273070; 525942, 3273071; 525943, 3273072; 
525945, 3273073; 525946, 3273074; 525948, 3273075; 525949, 3273076; 
525951, 3273077; 525953, 3273078; 525954, 3273078; 525956, 3273079; 
525958, 3273080; 526305, 3273293; 526303, 3273302; 526276, 3273412; 
526276, 3273412; 526254, 3273499; 526202, 3273564; 526023, 3273523; 
525917, 3273448; 525824, 3273382; 525786, 3273440; 525587, 3273259; 
525586, 3273260; 525572, 3273363; 525594, 3273505; 525693, 3273659; 
525876, 3273765; 526048, 3273798; 526253, 3273754; 526403, 3273634.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Units 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d, 1e, and 1f follows:

[[Page 323]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.013

    (7) Unit 3: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529906, 3272892; 529975, 3272934; 
529993, 3272946; 529996, 3272945; 529998, 3272943; 530001, 3272942; 
530004, 3272940; 530006, 3272938; 530007, 3272938; 530020, 3272926; 
530026, 3272920; 530030, 3272917; 530032, 3272915;

[[Page 324]]

530043, 3272905; 530045, 3272903; 530045, 3272902; 530046, 3272901; 
530047, 3272900; 530049, 3272897; 530050, 3272895; 530050, 3272895; 
530120, 3272932; 530134, 3272895; 530165, 3272898; 530159, 3272895; 
530124, 3272875; 530112, 3272843; 530083, 3272805; 530081, 3272805; 
530049, 3272774; 530020, 3272734; 529995, 3272714; 529909, 3272671; 
529790, 3272649; 529688, 3272658; 529646, 3272723; 529589, 3272792; 
529584, 3272798; 529600, 3272911; 529558, 3272947; 529514, 3272978; 
529473, 3272968; 529445, 3273019; 529423, 3273086; 529449, 3273173; 
529482, 3273196; 529507, 3273216; 529496, 3273253; 529504, 3273344; 
529564, 3273416; 529676, 3273477; 529771, 3273499; 529870, 3273496; 
529918, 3273447; 529970, 3273351; 530058, 3273320; 530110, 3273233; 
530105, 3273183; 530099, 3273138; 530128, 3273120; 530096, 3273123; 
530057, 3273126; 530055, 3273143; 530048, 3273180; 530057, 3273190; 
530057, 3273190; 530049, 3273191; 530038, 3273192; 530002, 3273195; 
529946, 3273200; 529916, 3273202; 529898, 3273204; 529897, 3273204; 
529680, 3273221; 529753, 3273117; 529764, 3273100; 529836, 3272993; 
529845, 3272981; 529906, 3272892.
    (ii) Note: Map 4 of Units 3 and 4 follows:

[[Page 325]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.014

    (8) Unit 5: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529536, 3275753; 529533, 3275931; 
529585, 3276056; 529741, 3276191; 529927, 3276249; 530112, 3276208; 
530275, 3276093; 530350, 3275987; 530318, 3275927; 530238, 3275838; 
530169, 3275776; 530109, 3275735; 529970, 3275629;

[[Page 326]]

529950, 3275603; 529936, 3275565; 529781, 3275523; 529719, 3275529; 
529621, 3275548; 529566, 3275611; 529536, 3275753.
    (ii) Note: Map 5 of Units 5, 6, and 17 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.015
    

[[Page 327]]



                Beetle (No Common Name) (Rhadine exilis)

    (1) Critical habitat for the beetle (Rhadine exilis) in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Units 1b, 1d, 1e, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11e, 
12, 13, and 21, and is depicted on Maps 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, and 18 
in this entry, and on Maps 2, 4, and 5, provided at paragraphs (6), (7), 
and (8) of the entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i). 
The units are also depicted on Map 1 (index map) provided in paragraph 
(5) of the entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (2) Eight caves and their associated karst management areas 
established under the La Cantera Habitat Conservation Plan section 
10(a)(1)(B) permit are adjacent to or within the boundaries of Units 1e, 
3, 6, 8, and 17, but are not designated as critical habitat. These caves 
are Canyon Ranch Pit, Fat Man's Nightmare Cave, Scenic Overlook Cave and 
the surrounding approximately 75 ac (30 ha) adjacent to Unit 1e; Helotes 
Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop Caves and the surrounding approximately 25 
ac (10 ha) adjacent to Unit 3; John Wagner Cave No. 3 and the 
surrounding approximately 4 ac (1.6 ha) adjacent to Unit 6; Hills and 
Dales Pit and the surrounding approximately 70 ac (28 ha) adjacent to 
Unit 8; and Madla's Cave and the surrounding approximately 5 ac (2 ha) 
within Unit 17.
    (3) The primary constituent elements of, and the statements 
regarding developed lands in, critical habitat for Rhadine exilis are 
identical to those set forth at paragraphs (2) and (3) of the entry for 
the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (4) Data layers defining map units were created using a geographic 
information system (GIS), which included cave locations, karst zone 
maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, and USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (5) Unit 1b: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522172, 3270656; 522202, 3270794; 
522259, 3270889; 522375, 3270977; 522521, 3271014; 522677, 3270988; 
522793, 3270905; 522880, 3270758; 522894, 3270605; 522843, 3270457; 
522724, 3270335; 522571, 3270287; 522401, 3270312; 522280, 3270382; 
522186, 3270538; 522172, 3270656.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1b is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (6) Unit 1d: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 524739, 3270323; 524739, 3270454; 
524798, 3270590; 524917, 3270699; 525091, 3270744; 525462, 3270937; 
525613, 3271016; 525757, 3271026; 525893, 3270977; 526000, 3270883; 
526059, 3270741; 526062, 3270603; 525980, 3270370; 525836, 3270243; 
525700, 3270206; 525289, 3270072; 525153, 3270020; 525016, 3270023; 
524883, 3270092; 524788, 3270191; 524739, 3270323.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1d is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (7) Unit 1e: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 526403, 3273634; 526465, 3273472; 
526487, 3273282; 526506, 3273157; 526879, 3273092; 527025, 3273129; 
527180, 3273102; 527297, 3273019; 527383, 3272873; 527398, 3272719; 
527346, 3272571; 527228, 3272449; 527075, 3272402; 526905, 3272426; 
526783, 3272497; 526472, 3272434; 526435, 3272318; 526460, 3272223; 
526443, 3272077; 526356, 3271945; 526158, 3271842; 525997, 3271842; 
525854, 3271930; 525762, 3272044; 525703, 3272205; 525729, 3272352; 
525802, 3272494; 525890, 3272776; 525876, 3272894; 525858, 3272918; 
525912, 3272925; 525904, 3272945; 525903, 3272947; 525903, 3272949; 
525902, 3272950; 525902, 3272952; 525901, 3272954; 525901, 3272956; 
525900, 3272957; 525900, 3272959; 525899, 3272961; 525899, 3272963; 
525898, 3272965; 525898, 3272966; 525898, 3272968; 525898, 3272970; 
525897, 3272972; 525897, 3272974; 525897, 3272975; 525897, 3272977; 
525897, 3272979; 525897, 3272981; 525897, 3272983; 525897, 3272985; 
525897, 3272986; 525897, 3272988; 525897, 3272990; 525897, 3272992; 
525897, 3272994; 525897, 3272996; 525897, 3272997; 525898, 3272999; 
525898, 3273001; 525898, 3273003; 525899, 3273005; 525899, 3273007; 
525899, 3273008; 525900, 3273010; 525900, 3273012; 525901, 3273014; 
525901, 3273015; 525902, 3273017; 525902, 3273019; 525903, 3273021; 
525904, 3273022; 525904, 3273024; 525905, 3273026; 525906, 3273027; 
525906, 3273029; 525907, 3273031; 525908, 3273032; 525909, 3273034; 
525910, 3273036; 525911, 3273037; 525912, 3273039; 525913, 3273040; 
525914, 3273042; 525915, 3273044; 525916, 3273045; 525917, 3273047; 
525918, 3273048; 525919, 3273049; 525920, 3273051; 525921, 3273052; 
525923, 3273054; 525924, 3273055; 525925, 3273056; 525926, 3273058; 
525928, 3273059; 525929, 3273060; 525930, 3273062; 525932, 3273063; 
525933, 3273064; 525934, 3273065; 525936, 3273066; 525937, 3273068; 
525939, 3273069; 525940, 3273070; 525942, 3273071; 525943, 3273072; 
525945, 3273073; 525946, 3273074; 525948, 3273075; 525949, 3273076; 
525951, 3273077; 525953, 3273078; 525954, 3273078; 525956, 3273079; 
525958, 3273080; 526305, 3273293; 526303, 3273302; 526276, 3273412; 
526276, 3273412; 526254, 3273499; 526202, 3273564; 526023, 3273523; 
525917, 3273448; 525824, 3273382; 525786, 3273440; 525587, 3273259; 
525586, 3273260; 525572, 3273363; 525594, 3273505; 525693, 3273659; 
525876, 3273765; 526048, 3273798; 526253, 3273754; 526403, 3273634.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1e is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (8) Unit 2: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 527508, 3276359; 527444, 3276287; 
527343, 3276226; 527229, 3276204; 527117, 3276216; 527116, 3276253; 
527085, 3276279; 527003, 3276270; 526933, 3276334; 526905, 3276386; 
526783, 3276386; 526851, 3276555; 526850, 3276556; 526864, 3276662; 
526908, 3276736; 526960, 3276801; 527010, 3276865; 527213, 3277098; 
527281, 3277166; 527392, 3277230; 527536, 3277252; 527711, 3277190;

[[Page 328]]

527805, 3277102; 527857, 3277003; 527869, 3276903; 527861, 3276787; 
527803, 3276674; 527699, 3276578; 527644, 3276515; 527643, 3276397; 
527630, 3276386; 527530, 3276384; 527508, 3276359.
    (ii) Note: Map 3 of Unit 2 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.016
    

[[Page 329]]


    (9) Unit 3: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529583, 3272798; 529599, 3272911; 
529557, 3272947; 529513, 3272978; 529473, 3272967; 529445, 3273019; 
529422, 3273086; 529448, 3273172; 529481, 3273196; 529507, 3273216; 
529496, 3273252; 529503, 3273343; 529563, 3273415; 529676, 3273477; 
529771, 3273498; 529870, 3273496; 529917, 3273446; 529970, 3273350; 
530057, 3273319; 530110, 3273232; 530104, 3273182; 530099, 3273138; 
530147, 3273107; 530178, 3273102; 530182, 3273047; 530190, 3273009; 
530208, 3272933; 530211, 3272920; 530159, 3272895; 530123, 3272875; 
530112, 3272843; 530083, 3272804; 530081, 3272804; 530049, 3272773; 
530020, 3272733; 529995, 3272713; 529909, 3272670; 529790, 3272648; 
529687, 3272657; 529646, 3272722; 529588, 3272791; 529583, 3272798.
    (ii) Note: Units 3 and 4 are depicted on Map 4, which is provided at 
paragraph (7)(ii) of the entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this 
paragraph (i).
    (10) Unit 4: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 530856, 3272567; 530829, 3272537; 
530779, 3272510; 530734, 3272516; 530717, 3272422; 530676, 3272341; 
530620, 3272272; 530531, 3272213; 530417, 3272180; 530271, 3272194; 
530240, 3272264; 530185, 3272283; 530180, 3272385; 530234, 3272501; 
530209, 3272542; 530206, 3272578; 530217, 3272624; 530247, 3272658; 
530294, 3272681; 530349, 3272685; 530367, 3272699; 530396, 3272702; 
530448, 3272698; 530442, 3272851; 530447, 3272909; 530473, 3272992; 
530595, 3273076; 530685, 3273138; 530683, 3273167; 530640, 3273210; 
530578, 3273224; 530471, 3273226; 530441, 3273259; 530396, 3273326; 
530369, 3273344; 530362, 3273412; 530385, 3273503; 530436, 3273540; 
530493, 3273576; 530498, 3273608; 530591, 3273684; 530668, 3273720; 
530738, 3273733; 530903, 3273657; 530959, 3273526; 530967, 3273452; 
530973, 3273424; 531003, 3273401; 531069, 3273343; 531081, 3273277; 
531099, 3273245; 531134, 3273194; 531222, 3273176; 531252, 3273111; 
531282, 3273015; 531205, 3272961; 531135, 3272916; 531056, 3272822; 
530975, 3272780; 530909, 3272689; 530855, 3272599; 530856, 3272567.
    (ii) Note: Units 3 and 4 are depicted on Map 4, which is provided at 
paragraph (7)(ii) of the entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this 
paragraph (i).
    (11) Unit 5: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529536, 3275753; 529533, 3275931; 
529585, 3276056; 529741, 3276191; 529927, 3276249; 530112, 3276208; 
530275, 3276093; 530350, 3275987; 530318, 3275927; 530238, 3275838; 
530169, 3275776; 530109, 3275735; 529970, 3275629; 529950, 3275603; 
529936, 3275565; 529781, 3275523; 529719, 3275529; 529621, 3275548; 
529566, 3275611; 529536, 3275753.
    (ii) Note: Units 5, 6, and 17 are depicted on Map 5, which is 
provided at paragraph (8)(ii) of the entry for the Helotes mold beetle 
in this paragraph (i).
    (12) Unit 6: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 531676, 3275515; 531639, 3275342; 
531576, 3275302; 531483, 3275283; 531331, 3275337; 531242, 3275350; 
531189, 3275346; 531193, 3275501; 531094, 3275501; 531094, 3275378; 
531072, 3275398; 530953, 3275478; 530909, 3275521; 530851, 3275661; 
530871, 3275702; 530981, 3275903; 531119, 3275970; 531335, 3275950; 
531512, 3275851; 531615, 3275701; 531676, 3275515.
    (ii) Note: Units 5 and 6 are depicted on Map 5, which is provided at 
paragraph (8)(ii) of the entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this 
paragraph (i).
    (13) Unit 7: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 531798, 3277694; 531828, 3277832; 
531885, 3277927; 532001, 3278016; 532148, 3278053; 532303, 3278026; 
532420, 3277943; 532506, 3277797; 532520, 3277643; 532469, 3277495; 
532351, 3277373; 532197, 3277326; 532028, 3277350; 531906, 3277421; 
531812, 3277576; 531798, 3277694.
    (ii) Note: Map 6 of Unit 7 follows:

[[Page 330]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.017

    (14) Unit 8: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 535007, 3274657; 535063, 3274624; 
535096, 3274626; 535133, 3274610; 535173, 3274570; 535222, 3274516; 
535282, 3274478; 535302, 3274450; 535290, 3274359; 535238, 3274250; 
535215, 3274045; 535226, 3273947; 535209, 3273836; 535160, 3273741; 
535056, 3273640; 535027, 3273631; 535026, 3273654; 535022, 3273714; 
535018, 3273721;

[[Page 331]]

535013, 3273730; 534992, 3273775; 534988, 3273784; 534962, 3273838; 
534962, 3273838; 534936, 3273892; 534909, 3273947; 534909, 3273947; 
534883, 3274002; 534856, 3274057; 534856, 3274057; 534813, 3274142; 
534708, 3274141; 534625, 3274140; 534519, 3274140; 534389, 3274145; 
534389, 3274132; 534168, 3274322; 534058, 3274551; 533966, 3274645; 
533893, 3274683; 533848, 3274736; 533839, 3274809; 533853, 3274895; 
533905, 3274965; 534037, 3275030; 534156, 3275037; 534290, 3274997; 
534292, 3274995; 534881, 3274809; 534894, 3274782; 534931, 3274737; 
534962, 3274695; 535007, 3274657.
    (ii) Note: Map 7 of Unit 8 follows:

[[Page 332]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.018

    (15) Unit 9: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 536971, 3273194; 537058, 3273204; 
537958, 3273349; 538025, 3273049; 538011, 3273033; 537743, 3272819; 
537663, 3272828; 537645, 3272742; 537602, 3272707; 537551, 3272712; 
537500, 3272684; 537412, 3272713; 537309, 3272793; 537213, 3272912; 
537167, 3273017; 537121, 3273038; 537084, 3273013; 537008, 3273129; 
536943, 3273082;

[[Page 333]]

536897, 3273099; 536879, 3273117; 536871, 3273154; 536887, 3273183; 
536971, 3273194.
    (ii) Note: Map 8 of Unit 9 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.019
    

[[Page 334]]


    (16) Unit 11e: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 546476, 3280267; 546413, 3280397; 
546339, 3280604; 546323, 3280672; 546318, 3280792; 546318, 3280907; 
546549, 3280944; 546741, 3280974; 546842, 3280841; 546822, 3280811; 
546712, 3280817; 546741, 3280776; 546771, 3280674; 546768, 3280534; 
546737, 3280452; 546810, 3280337; 547036, 3280060; 546957, 3280008; 
546861, 3280061; 546745, 3280087; 546590, 3280148; 546541, 3280150; 
546515, 3280201; 546476, 3280267.
    (ii) Note: Map 10 of Unit 11e follows:

[[Page 335]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.020

    (17) Unit 12: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 552033, 3278053; 551928, 3278141; 
551834, 3278139; 551807, 3278130; 551766, 3278160; 551687, 3278290; 
551673, 3278422; 551692, 3278521; 551714, 3278718; 551702, 3278837; 
551730, 3278937; 551771, 3279018; 551835, 3279091; 551959, 3279147; 
552097, 3279168; 552239, 3279127; 552334, 3279050; 552409, 3278920; 
552425, 3278785;

[[Page 336]]

552399, 3278671; 552385, 3278483; 552385, 3278343; 552354, 3278249; 
552300, 3278162; 552188, 3278085; 552105, 3278057; 552033, 3278053.
    (ii) Note: Map 11 of Unit 12 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.021
    

[[Page 337]]


    (18) Unit 13: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 555466, 3278873; 555441, 3278986; 
555451, 3279067; 555662, 3279064; 555683, 3279069; 555689, 3279087; 
556071, 3279116; 556194, 3278972; 556178, 3278730; 556012, 3278573; 
555860, 3278513; 555655, 3278520; 555463, 3278576; 555318, 3278702; 
555289, 3278762; 555466, 3278873.
    (ii) Note: Map 12 of Unit 13 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.022
    

[[Page 338]]


    (19) Unit 21: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 533735, 3278278; 533765, 3278416; 
533821, 3278511; 533938, 3278599; 534084, 3278636; 534240, 3278610; 
534356, 3278527; 534443, 3278380; 534457, 3278227; 534406, 3278079; 
534287, 3277957; 534134, 3277909; 533964, 3277934; 533843, 3278004; 
533749, 3278160; 533735, 3278278.
    (ii) Note: Map 18 of Unit 21 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.023
    

[[Page 339]]



              Beetle (No Common Name) (Rhadine infernalis)

    (1) Critical habitat for the beetle (Rhadine infernalis) in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Units 1a, 1b, 1d, 1e, 1f, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 
10a, 10b, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 23, and 26. These units are depicted on 
Maps 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, and 22 in this entry; on Maps 2, 4, and 5 
provided at paragraphs (6)(ii), (7)(ii), and (8)(ii) of the entry for 
the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i); and on Maps 3 and 7 
provided at paragraphs (8)(ii) and (14)(ii) of the entry for the beetle 
(Rhadine exilis) in this paragraph (i). The units are also depicted on 
Map 1 (index map) provided in paragraph (5) of the entry for the Helotes 
mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (2) Eight caves and their associated karst management areas 
established under the La Cantera Habitat Conservation Plan section 
10(a)(1)(B) permit are adjacent to or within the boundaries of Units 1e, 
3, 6, 8, and 17, but are not designated as critical habitat. These caves 
are Canyon Ranch Pit, Fat Man's Nightmare Cave, Scenic Overlook Cave and 
the surrounding approximately 75 ac (30 ha) adjacent to Unit 1e; Helotes 
Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop Caves and the surrounding approximately 25 
ac (10 ha) adjacent to Unit 3; John Wagner Cave No. 3 and the 
surrounding approximately 4 ac (1.6 ha) adjacent to Unit 6; Hills and 
Dales Pit and the surrounding approximately 70 ac (28 ha) adjacent to 
Unit 8; and Madla's Cave and the surrounding approximately 5 ac (2 ha) 
within Unit 17.
    (3) The primary constituent elements of, and the statements 
regarding developed lands in, critical habitat for the Rhadine exilis 
are identical to those set forth at paragraphs (2) and (3) of the entry 
for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (4) Data layers defining map units were created using a geographic 
information system (GIS), which included cave locations, karst zone 
maps, roads, property boundaries, 2010 aerial photography, and USGS 7.5' 
quadrangles. Points were placed on the GIS.
    (5) Unit 1a: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522870, 3272900; 522872, 3273024; 
522919, 3273156; 523000, 3273241; 523124, 3273312; 523284, 3273323; 
523438, 3273258; 523618, 3273132; 523729, 3273041; 523797, 3272836; 
523784, 3272720; 523724, 3272603; 523633, 3272522; 523515, 3272464; 
523406, 3272460; 523276, 3272492; 523041, 3272654; 522939, 3272737; 
522870, 3272900.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1a is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (6) Unit 1b: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522172, 3270656; 522202, 3270794; 
522259, 3270889; 522375, 3270977; 522521, 3271014; 522677, 3270988; 
522793, 3270905; 522880, 3270758; 522894, 3270605; 522843, 3270457; 
522724, 3270335; 522571, 3270287; 522401, 3270312; 522280, 3270382; 
522186, 3270538; 522172, 3270656
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1b is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (7) Unit 1d: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 524739, 3270323; 524739, 3270454; 
524798, 3270590; 524917, 3270699; 525091, 3270744; 525462, 3270937; 
525613, 3271016; 525757, 3271026; 525893, 3270977; 526000, 3270883; 
526059, 3270741; 526062, 3270603; 525980, 3270370; 525836, 3270243; 
525700, 3270206; 525289, 3270072; 525153, 3270020; 525016, 3270023; 
524883, 3270092; 524788, 3270191; 524739, 3270323.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1d is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (8) Unit 1e: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 526878, 3273091; 527025, 3273128; 
527180, 3273102; 527296, 3273019; 527383, 3272872; 527397, 3272719; 
527346, 3272571; 527228, 3272449; 527074, 3272401; 526905, 3272426; 
526783, 3272496; 526471, 3272434; 526435, 3272317; 526459, 3272223; 
526443, 3272076; 526355, 3271944; 526157, 3271842; 525996, 3271842; 
525853, 3271930; 525762, 3272043; 525703, 3272205; 525729, 3272351; 
525802, 3272494; 525890, 3272776; 525875, 3272893; 525758, 3273054; 
525692, 3273095; 525586, 3273259; 525571, 3273362; 525593, 3273505; 
525692, 3273659; 525875, 3273765; 526047, 3273798; 526252, 3273754; 
526403, 3273633; 526465, 3273472; 526487, 3273281; 526505, 3273157; 
526878, 3273091.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1e is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (9) Unit 1f: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 526537, 3271231; 526567, 3271369; 
526624, 3271464; 526740, 3271552; 526887, 3271589; 527042, 3271563; 
527159, 3271480; 527245, 3271333; 527259, 3271180; 527208, 3271032; 
527090, 3270910; 526936, 3270862; 526767, 3270887; 526645, 3270958; 
526552, 3271113; 526537, 3271231.
    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Unit 1f is provided at paragraph (6)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (10) Unit 2: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 527508, 3276359; 527444, 3276287; 
527343, 3276226; 527229, 3276204; 527117, 3276216; 527116, 3276253; 
527085, 3276279; 527003, 3276270; 526933, 3276334; 526905, 3276386; 
526783, 3276386; 526851, 3276555; 526850, 3276556; 526864, 3276662; 
526908, 3276736; 526960, 3276801; 527010, 3276865; 527213, 3277098; 
527281, 3277166; 527392, 3277230; 527536, 3277252; 527711, 3277190; 
527805, 3277102; 527857, 3277003; 527869, 3276903; 527861, 3276787; 
527803, 3276674; 527699, 3276578;

[[Page 340]]

527644, 3276515; 527643, 3276397; 527630, 3276386; 527530, 3276384; 
527508, 3276359.
    (ii) Note: Map 3 of Unit 2 is provided at paragraph (8)(ii) of the 
entry for the beetle (Rhadine exilis) in this paragraph (i).
    (11) Unit 3: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529583, 3272798; 529599, 3272911; 
529557, 3272947; 529513, 3272978; 529473, 3272967; 529445, 3273019; 
529422, 3273086; 529448, 3273172; 529481, 3273196; 529507, 3273216; 
529496, 3273252; 529503, 3273343; 529563, 3273415; 529676, 3273477; 
529771, 3273498; 529870, 3273496; 529917, 3273446; 529970, 3273350; 
530057, 3273319; 530110, 3273232; 530104, 3273182; 530099, 3273138; 
530147, 3273107; 530178, 3273102; 530182, 3273047; 530190, 3273009; 
530208, 3272933; 530211, 3272920; 530159, 3272895; 530123, 3272875; 
530112, 3272843; 530083, 3272804; 530081, 3272804; 530049, 3272773; 
530020, 3272733; 529995, 3272713; 529909, 3272670; 529790, 3272648; 
529687, 3272657; 529646, 3272722; 529588, 3272791; 529583, 3272798.
    (ii) Note: Map 4 of Unit 3 is provided at paragraph (7)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (12) Unit 4: Bexar County, Texas
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 530856, 3272567; 530829, 3272537; 
530779, 3272510; 530734, 3272516; 530717, 3272422; 530676, 3272341; 
530620, 3272272; 530531, 3272213; 530417, 3272180; 530271, 3272194; 
530240, 3272264; 530185, 3272283; 530180, 3272385; 530234, 3272501; 
530209, 3272542; 530206, 3272578; 530217, 3272624; 530247, 3272658; 
530294, 3272681; 530349, 3272685; 530367, 3272699; 530396, 3272702; 
530448, 3272698; 530442, 3272851; 530447, 3272909; 530473, 3272992; 
530595, 3273076; 530685, 3273138; 530683, 3273167; 530640, 3273210; 
530578, 3273224; 530471, 3273226; 530441, 3273259; 530396, 3273326; 
530369, 3273344; 530362, 3273412; 530385, 3273503; 530436, 3273540; 
530493, 3273576; 530498, 3273608; 530591, 3273684; 530668, 3273720; 
530738, 3273733; 530903, 3273657; 530959, 3273526; 530967, 3273452; 
530973, 3273424; 531003, 3273401; 531069, 3273343; 531081, 3273277; 
531099, 3273245; 531134, 3273194; 531222, 3273176; 531252, 3273111; 
531282, 3273015; 531205, 3272961; 531135, 3272916; 531056, 3272822; 
530975, 3272780; 530909, 3272689; 530855, 3272599; 530856, 3272567.
    (ii) Note: Map 4 of Unit 4 is provided at paragraph (7)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (13) Unit 5: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529536, 3275753; 529533, 3275931; 
529585, 3276056; 529741, 3276191; 529927, 3276249; 530112, 3276208; 
530275, 3276093; 530350, 3275987; 530318, 3275927; 530238, 3275838; 
530169, 3275776; 530109, 3275735; 529970, 3275629; 529950, 3275603; 
529936, 3275565; 529781, 3275523; 529719, 3275529; 529621, 3275548; 
529566, 3275611; 529536, 3275753.
    (ii) Note: Map 5 of Unit 5 is provided at paragraph (8)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (14) Unit 6: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 531676, 3275515; 531639, 3275342; 
531576, 3275302; 531483, 3275283; 531331, 3275337; 531242, 3275350; 
531189, 3275346; 531193, 3275501; 531094, 3275501; 531094, 3275378; 
531072, 3275398; 530953, 3275478; 530909, 3275521; 530851, 3275661; 
530871, 3275702; 530981, 3275903; 531119, 3275970; 531335, 3275950; 
531512, 3275851; 531615, 3275701; 531676, 3275515.
    (ii) Note: Map 5 of Unit 6 is provided at paragraph (8)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (15) Unit 8: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 535007, 3274657; 535063, 3274624; 
535096, 3274626; 535133, 3274610; 535173, 3274570; 535222, 3274516; 
535282, 3274478; 535302, 3274450; 535290, 3274359; 535238, 3274250; 
535215, 3274045; 535226, 3273947; 535209, 3273836; 535160, 3273741; 
535056, 3273640; 535027, 3273631; 535026, 3273654; 535022, 3273714; 
535018, 3273721; 535013, 3273730; 534992, 3273775; 534988, 3273784; 
534962, 3273838; 534962, 3273838; 534936, 3273892; 534909, 3273947; 
534909, 3273947; 534883, 3274002; 534856, 3274057; 534856, 3274057; 
534813, 3274142; 534708, 3274141; 534625, 3274140; 534519, 3274140; 
534389, 3274145; 534389, 3274132; 534168, 3274322; 534058, 3274551; 
533966, 3274645; 533893, 3274683; 533848, 3274736; 533839, 3274809; 
533853, 3274895; 533905, 3274965; 534037, 3275030; 534156, 3275037; 
534290, 3274997; 534292, 3274995; 534881, 3274809; 534894, 3274782; 
534931, 3274737; 534962, 3274695; 535007, 3274657.
    (ii) Note: Map 7 of Unit 8 is provided at paragraph (14)(ii) of the 
entry for the beetle (Rhadine exilis) in this paragraph (i).
    (16) Unit 10a: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 540276, 3277443; 540255, 3277399; 
540189, 3277302; 540076, 3277233; 539945, 3277214; 539851, 3277226; 
539717, 3277295; 539645, 3277377; 539617, 3277449; 539650, 3277471; 
539750, 3277551; 539905, 3277551; 540276, 3277443.
    (ii) Note: Map 9 of Units 10a and 10b follows:

[[Page 341]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.024

    (17) Unit 10b: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 540684, 3277399; 541377, 3277406; 
541368, 3277355; 541302, 3277258; 541180, 3277158; 541037, 3277126; 
540890, 3277155; 540777, 3277226; 540702, 3277336; 540684, 3277399.
    (ii) Note: Map 9 of Unit 10b is provided at paragraph (16)(ii) of 
this entry.
    (18) Unit 14: Bexar County, Texas.

[[Page 342]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 520081, 3258642; 520207, 3258774; 
520339, 3258764; 520542, 3258723; 520744, 3258618; 520822, 3258502; 
520847, 3258327; 521047, 3257873; 521048, 3257838; 521005, 3257658; 
520885, 3257494; 520710, 3257405; 520503, 3257379; 520290, 3257468; 
520158, 3257609; 520006, 3257810; 519891, 3257965; 519848, 3258183; 
519911, 3258441; 520081, 3258642.
    (ii) Note: Map 13 of Unit 14 follows:

[[Page 343]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.025

    (19) Unit 15: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 522689, 3256455; 522687, 3256517; 
522703, 3256601; 522765, 3256718; 522911, 3256823; 523046, 3256851; 
523177, 3256830; 523344, 3256801; 523479, 3256747; 523658, 3256674; 
523725, 3256656; 523834, 3256603; 523918, 3256523; 523969, 3256419; 
523978, 3256293; 523885, 3256159; 523885, 3256069; 523822, 3256015; 
523674, 3255915;

[[Page 344]]

523547, 3255873; 523414, 3255874; 523281, 3255933; 523201, 3256024; 
523017, 3256131; 522987, 3256149; 522940, 3256160; 522894, 3256168; 
522869, 3256174; 522790, 3256246; 522722, 3256345; 522689, 3256455.
    (ii) Note: Map 14 of Unit 15 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.026
    

[[Page 345]]


    (20) Unit 16: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 527412, 3258337; 527348, 3258534; 
527379, 3258716; 527456, 3258844; 527623, 3258959; 527815, 3258972; 
527925, 3258857; 527933, 3258697; 527971, 3258605; 527986, 3258452; 
527934, 3258303; 527925, 3258186; 527663, 3258134; 527498, 3258173; 
527412, 3258337.
    (ii) Note: Map 15 of Unit 16 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.027
    

[[Page 346]]


    (21) Unit 17: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 528980, 3275191; 529043, 3275247; 
529120, 3275242; 529245, 3275219; 529327, 3275184; 529348, 3275167; 
529492, 3275167; 529613, 3275113; 529800, 3275081; 529870, 3274953; 
529819, 3274777; 529698, 3274627; 529486, 3274528; 529360, 3274615; 
529335, 3274712; 529174, 3274840; 528968, 3274859; 528957, 3275049; 
528980, 3275191.
    (ii) Not including land within and bounded by the following UTM Zone 
14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 529490, 
3275008; 529490, 3275006; 529490, 3275005; 529490, 3275003; 529490, 
3275002; 529489, 3275001; 529489, 3274999; 529489, 3274998; 529489, 
3274997; 529489, 3274995; 529489, 3274994; 529488, 3274993; 529488, 
3274992; 529489, 3274991; 529489, 3274986; 529489, 3274983; 529489, 
3274982; 529482, 3274919; 529329, 3274930; 529337, 3274993; 529337, 
3274993; 529337, 3274994; 529336, 3274995; 529337, 3274997; 529337, 
3274998; 529336, 3274999; 529336, 3275001; 529336, 3275002; 529336, 
3275003; 529336, 3275005; 529336, 3275006; 529336, 3275008; 529336, 
3275009; 529336, 3275010; 529336, 3275012; 529336, 3275013; 529336, 
3275014; 529336, 3275016; 529337, 3275017; 529337, 3275018; 529337, 
3275020; 529337, 3275021; 529337, 3275022; 529338, 3275023; 529338, 
3275025; 529338, 3275026; 529339, 3275027; 529339, 3275029; 529339, 
3275030; 529340, 3275031; 529340, 3275033; 529341, 3275034; 529341, 
3275035; 529342, 3275036; 529342, 3275038; 529343, 3275039; 529343, 
3275040; 529344, 3275041; 529344, 3275042; 529345, 3275044; 529346, 
3275045; 529346, 3275046; 529347, 3275047; 529348, 3275048; 529348, 
3275049; 529349, 3275050; 529350, 3275052; 529351, 3275053; 529351, 
3275054; 529352, 3275055; 529353, 3275056; 529354, 3275057; 529355, 
3275058; 529356, 3275059; 529357, 3275060; 529358, 3275061; 529359, 
3275062; 529359, 3275063; 529360, 3275064; 529361, 3275065; 529362, 
3275066; 529363, 3275066; 529364, 3275067; 529366, 3275068; 529367, 
3275069; 529368, 3275070; 529369, 3275070; 529370, 3275071; 529371, 
3275072; 529372, 3275073; 529373, 3275073; 529374, 3275074; 529376, 
3275075; 529377, 3275075; 529378, 3275076; 529379, 3275077; 529380, 
3275077; 529382, 3275078; 529383, 3275078; 529384, 3275079; 529385, 
3275079; 529387, 3275080; 529388, 3275080; 529389, 3275081; 529390, 
3275081; 529392, 3275081; 529393, 3275082; 529394, 3275082; 529396, 
3275082; 529397, 3275083; 529398, 3275083; 529399, 3275083; 529401, 
3275083; 529402, 3275084; 529403, 3275084; 529405, 3275084; 529406, 
3275084; 529407, 3275084; 529409, 3275084; 529410, 3275084; 529412, 
3275084; 529413, 3275084; 529414, 3275084; 529416, 3275084; 529417, 
3275084; 529418, 3275084; 529420, 3275084; 529421, 3275084; 529422, 
3275084; 529424, 3275084; 529425, 3275083; 529426, 3275083; 529428, 
3275083; 529429, 3275083; 529430, 3275082; 529431, 3275082; 529433, 
3275082; 529434, 3275081; 529435, 3275081; 529437, 3275081; 529438, 
3275080; 529439, 3275080; 529440, 3275079; 529442, 3275079; 529443, 
3275078; 529444, 3275078; 529445, 3275077; 529447, 3275077; 529448, 
3275076; 529449, 3275075; 529450, 3275075; 529451, 3275074; 529452, 
3275073; 529454, 3275073; 529455, 3275072; 529456, 3275071; 529457, 
3275070; 529458, 3275070; 529459, 3275069; 529460, 3275068; 529461, 
3275067; 529462, 3275066; 529463, 3275066; 529464, 3275065; 529465, 
3275064; 529466, 3275063; 529467, 3275062; 529468, 3275061; 529469, 
3275060; 529470, 3275059; 529471, 3275058; 529472, 3275057; 529473, 
3275056; 529473, 3275055; 529474, 3275054; 529475, 3275053; 529476, 
3275052; 529477, 3275050; 529477, 3275049; 529478, 3275048; 529479, 
3275047; 529479, 3275046; 529480, 3275045; 529481, 3275044; 529481, 
3275042; 529482, 3275041; 529482, 3275040; 529483, 3275039; 529484, 
3275038; 529484, 3275036; 529485, 3275035; 529485, 3275034; 529486, 
3275033; 529486, 3275031; 529486, 3275030; 529487, 3275029; 529487, 
3275027; 529487, 3275026; 529488, 3275025; 529488, 3275023; 529488, 
3275022; 529489, 3275021; 529489, 3275020; 529489, 3275018; 529489, 
3275017; 529489, 3275016; 529489, 3275014; 529490, 3275013; 529490, 
3275012; 529490, 3275010; 529490, 3275009; 529490, 3275008.
    (iii) Note: Map 5 of Unit 17 is provided at paragraph (8)(ii) of the 
entry for the Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (22) Unit 19: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 548980, 3276370; 549011, 3276172; 
548992, 3276167; 549001, 3276139; 548992, 3276099; 548960, 3276076; 
548867, 3276071; 548767, 3276012; 548725, 3276018; 548608, 3276046; 
548499, 3276055; 548429, 3275955; 548326, 3275856; 548274, 3276042; 
548285, 3276194; 548374, 3276384; 548503, 3276497; 548601, 3276538; 
548815, 3276541; 548963, 3276489; 548980, 3276370.
    (ii) Note: Map 16 of Unit 19 follows:

[[Page 347]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.028

    (23) Unit 23: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 535851, 3276414; 535640, 3276401; 
535639, 3276467; 535670, 3276630; 535613, 3276734; 535616, 3276844; 
535568, 3276883; 535433, 3276912; 535314, 3277003; 535342, 3277121; 
535427, 3277203; 535617, 3277255; 535763, 3277242; 535884, 3277190; 
536017, 3277082; 536080, 3276928; 536088, 3276708; 536003, 3276539; 
535851, 3276414.
    (ii) Note: Map 20 of Unit 23 follows:

[[Page 348]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.029

    (24) Unit 26: Bexar County, Texas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 14N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 520192, 3257071; 520300, 3257163; 
520493, 3257203; 520672, 3257162; 520816, 3257024; 520870, 3256906; 
520901, 3256737; 520865, 3256567; 520821, 3256487; 520710, 3256440; 
520638, 3256540; 520556, 3256555; 520490, 3256557; 520363, 3256547; 
520290, 3256566; 520195, 3256648;

[[Page 349]]

520166, 3256776; 520200, 3256878; 520268, 3256943; 520228, 3257000; 
520192, 3257071.
    (ii) Note: Map 21 of Unit 26 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14FE12.030
    

[[Page 350]]



        Salt Creek Tiger Beetle (Cicindela nevadica lincolniana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Lancaster and Saunders 
Counties, Nebraska, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Salt Creek tiger beetle are the following habitat components:
    (i) Non-vegetated streambanks and mid-channel areas, located 
adjacent to and between saline stream edges and barren salt flats in 
saline and freshwater wetlands, in assemblages that are within 4 miles 
(6 kilometers) of one another;
    (ii) Moist, barren salt flats with:
    (A) Salmo and Saltillo soils or Lamo, Gibbon-Saltine, Obert, and Zoe 
soils with Salmo and Saltillo inclusions;
    (B) Soil electroconductivity ranging from 2,016.0 mS/m to 2,992.2 
mS/m;
    (C) Soil moisture ranging from 43.5 percent to 51.7 percent; and
    (D) Differential hydraulic pressures that create evaporation and 
result in exposed salt on soil surfaces;
    (iii) A natural hydrologic regime resulting in annual high flows in 
saline streams in the early spring and summer, and natural elevation 
changes in groundwater levels to hydrate saline wetlands located on the 
floodplain; and
    (iv) The presence of abundant and diverse flying and non-flying 
invertebrate prey species belonging to the orders Coleoptera, 
Orthoptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, Odonata, Diptera, or Lepidoptera.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing on the effective date of this 
rule. In the future, we will be able to distinguish structures that 
existed at the time of critical habitat designation from structures 
created since critical habitat designation by using dated detailed 
aerial imagery maps.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using GIS software. We defined critical habitat boundaries as 
follows. We utilized the Resource Categorization Study (RCS) (Gilbert 
and Stutheit 1994) to define boundaries of the Salt Creek tiger beetle's 
historic range. Within the RCS boundaries, we then identified existing 
saline wetlands containing the features essential to the conservation of 
the Salt Creek tiger beetle; we also identified saline stream segments 
flowing through the saline wetlands, as represented by National 
Hydrography Data and further refined with aerial photography. Coordinate 
points defining critical habitat unit boundaries were created through an 
automated GIS process using Universal Transverse Mercator as the 
reference coordinate system.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 351]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.004

    (6) Unit 1: Upper Little Salt Creek North, Lancaster County, 
Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 1a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 692489, 4536054; 692486, 4536053; 692479, 4536054; 
692476, 4536059; 692474, 4536062; 692471, 4536063; 692466, 4536064; 
692464, 4536067; 692463, 4536072; 692464, 4536076; 692465, 4536079; 
692468, 4536080; 692471, 4536081; 692475, 4536082; 692485, 4536083; 
692494, 4536069; 692495,

[[Page 352]]

4536064; 692495, 4536062; 692493, 4536057; 692489, 4536054.
    (ii) Tract 1b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 691216, 4538366; 691216, 4538366; 691216, 4538366; 
691216, 4538366; 691217, 4538375; 691222, 4538376; 691225, 4538377; 
691229, 4538381; 691230, 4538384; 691232, 4538389; 691231, 4538394; 
691231, 4538399; 691230, 4538404; 691229, 4538408; 691226, 4538412; 
691224, 4538415; 691221, 4538418; 691216, 4538420; 691214, 4538420; 
691212, 4538419; 691209, 4538418; 691201, 4538419; 691204, 4538432; 
691205, 4538438; 691206, 4538444; 691207, 4538449; 691210, 4538460; 
691213, 4538465; 691220, 4538467; 691224, 4538466; 691227, 4538461; 
691229, 4538455; 691234, 4538451; 691241, 4538452; 691248, 4538455; 
691255, 4538458; 691262, 4538458; 691264, 4538451; 691265, 4538442; 
691262, 4538431; 691257, 4538418; 691256, 4538405; 691257, 4538394; 
691258, 4538384; 691256, 4538379; 691251, 4538371; 691244, 4538366; 
691236, 4538364; 691229, 4538364; 691219, 4538366; 691217, 4538364; 
691231, 4538347; 691235, 4538342; 691241, 4538334; 691244, 4538328; 
691246, 4538323; 691248, 4538317; 691250, 4538311; 691252, 4538306; 
691253, 4538302; 691255, 4538297; 691255, 4538294; 691264, 4538279; 
691262, 4538279; 691188, 4538214; 691189, 4538210; 691194, 4538199; 
691201, 4538189; 691208, 4538181; 691215, 4538174; 691221, 4538167; 
691226, 4538162; 691231, 4538154; 691237, 4538147; 691240, 4538143; 
691242, 4538138; 691244, 4538135; 691243, 4538122; 691242, 4538107; 
691240, 4538097; 691236, 4538087; 691234, 4538081; 691234, 4538075; 
691236, 4538061; 691240, 4538050; 691245, 4538042; 691253, 4538029; 
691259, 4538018; 691268, 4538007; 691276, 4537998; 691281, 4537992; 
691288, 4537983; 691291, 4537975; 691295, 4537967; 691297, 4537958; 
691300, 4537948; 691302, 4537937; 691305, 4537928; 691306, 4537923; 
691308, 4537920; 691310, 4537917; 691314, 4537915; 691318, 4537914; 
691320, 4537914; 691322, 4537915; 691324, 4537915; 691332, 4537900; 
691337, 4537891; 691341, 4537883; 691344, 4537879; 691349, 4537871; 
691353, 4537864; 691356, 4537859; 691357, 4537856; 691359, 4537850; 
691361, 4537845; 691363, 4537840; 691364, 4537837; 691365, 4537830; 
691378, 4537824; 691384, 4537822; 691395, 4537823; 691405, 4537824; 
691412, 4537826; 691415, 4537828; 691416, 4537832; 691417, 4537834; 
691419, 4537835; 691422, 4537836; 691423, 4537836; 691425, 4537835; 
691430, 4537849; 691432, 4537852; 691435, 4537854; 691439, 4537857; 
691444, 4537857; 691449, 4537854; 691454, 4537848; 691456, 4537842; 
691460, 4537835; 691468, 4537827; 691475, 4537836; 691478, 4537839; 
691483, 4537839; 691490, 4537837; 691494, 4537833; 691499, 4537828; 
691505, 4537821; 691511, 4537812; 691515, 4537804; 691519, 4537789; 
691521, 4537780; 691522, 4537772; 691521, 4537765; 691519, 4537759; 
691519, 4537755; 691520, 4537752; 691522, 4537750; 691526, 4537748; 
691528, 4537746; 691530, 4537743; 691532, 4537739; 691532, 4537732; 
691543, 4537717; 691550, 4537706; 691561, 4537690; 691571, 4537679; 
691577, 4537672; 691585, 4537663; 691591, 4537658; 691597, 4537653; 
691602, 4537646; 691607, 4537633; 691610, 4537621; 691612, 4537609; 
691611, 4537599; 691612, 4537588; 691613, 4537576; 691614, 4537563; 
691616, 4537551; 691618, 4537540; 691621, 4537530; 691625, 4537514; 
691630, 4537497; 691635, 4537484; 691641, 4537472; 691645, 4537460; 
691651, 4537449; 691659, 4537438; 691666, 4537430; 691682, 4537419; 
691687, 4537415; 691692, 4537405; 691698, 4537398; 691710, 4537388; 
691714, 4537384; 691723, 4537377; 691729, 4537370; 691734, 4537362; 
691743, 4537327; 691745, 4537316; 691747, 4537304; 691749, 4537298; 
691751, 4537284; 691753, 4537275; 691755, 4537267; 691759, 4537254; 
691762, 4537244; 691764, 4537236; 691765, 4537230; 691767, 4537224; 
691767, 4537218; 691767, 4537215; 691768, 4537209; 691759, 4537194; 
691758, 4537188; 691761, 4537175; 691764, 4537164; 691766, 4537151; 
691767, 4537136; 691767, 4537121; 691769, 4537110; 691771, 4537094; 
691772, 4537082; 691772, 4537071; 691774, 4537065; 691779, 4537058; 
691785, 4537053; 691794, 4537047; 691798, 4537040; 691801, 4537029; 
691800, 4537019; 691798, 4537009; 691796, 4536995; 691798, 4536979; 
691800, 4536965; 691804, 4536953; 691810, 4536944; 691819, 4536938; 
691827, 4536934; 691835, 4536927; 691840, 4536915; 691844, 4536902; 
691847, 4536890; 691852, 4536878; 691860, 4536865; 691869, 4536859; 
691875, 4536855; 691883, 4536852; 691890, 4536851; 691895, 4536851; 
691897, 4536679; 691851, 4536677; 691863, 4536657; 691865, 4536656; 
691867, 4536655; 691870, 4536655; 691901, 4536654; 691902, 4536607; 
691926, 4536599; 691925, 4536654; 692006, 4536656; 692010, 4536647; 
692015, 4536642; 692020, 4536639; 692024, 4536633; 692027, 4536623; 
692029, 4536614; 692035, 4536598; 692040, 4536587; 692047, 4536579; 
692055, 4536570; 692061, 4536561; 692071, 4536551; 692077, 4536544; 
692082, 4536539; 692086, 4536536; 692093, 4536538; 692097, 4536542; 
692099, 4536548; 692102, 4536554; 692104, 4536559; 692105, 4536564; 
692107, 4536567; 692108, 4536569; 692109, 4536569; 692107, 4536589; 
692106, 4536596; 692106, 4536606; 692105, 4536613; 692107, 4536624; 
692108, 4536634; 692110, 4536641; 692112, 4536646; 692114, 4536650; 
692118, 4536653; 692122, 4536655; 692129, 4536657; 692136, 4536657; 
692141, 4536655; 692146, 4536652; 692150, 4536647; 692150, 4536638; 
692150, 4536627; 692150, 4536619; 692149, 4536611; 692147, 4536599; 
692144, 4536591; 692143, 4536583; 692142, 4536578; 692138, 4536568; 
692146, 4536559; 692146, 4536555; 692150, 4536543; 692150, 4536537; 
692149, 4536533; 692147, 4536527; 692145, 4536518; 692143, 4536508; 
692145, 4536500; 692149, 4536493; 692156, 4536488; 692159, 4536485; 
692164, 4536480; 692167, 4536475; 692169, 4536467; 692168, 4536457; 
692165, 4536448; 692162, 4536440; 692159, 4536433; 692157, 4536427; 
692158, 4536418; 692161, 4536408; 692167, 4536398; 692173, 4536390; 
692183, 4536385; 692191, 4536382; 692195, 4536377; 692197, 4536371; 
692197, 4536364; 692194, 4536357; 692189, 4536351; 692182, 4536345; 
692179, 4536342; 692170, 4536335; 692166, 4536332; 692158, 4536326; 
692162, 4536314; 692162, 4536311; 692163, 4536309; 692174, 4536308; 
692180, 4536304; 692185, 4536299; 692189, 4536290; 692193, 4536280; 
692197, 4536273; 692204, 4536268; 692214, 4536264; 692225, 4536263; 
692230, 4536264; 692237, 4536268; 692245, 4536271; 692254, 4536270; 
692265, 4536266; 692272, 4536260; 692278, 4536254; 692284, 4536246; 
692290, 4536239; 692294, 4536233; 692297, 4536226; 692300, 4536216; 
692301, 4536209; 692303, 4536202; 692307, 4536191; 692316, 4536176; 
692319, 4536172; 692321, 4536168; 692326, 4536163; 692333, 4536158; 
692342, 4536155; 692350, 4536153; 692361, 4536152; 692369, 4536150; 
692378, 4536147; 692387, 4536143;

[[Page 353]]

692394, 4536139; 692400, 4536135; 692407, 4536132; 692415, 4536131; 
692421, 4536130; 692425, 4536130; 692435, 4536134; 692442, 4536142; 
692445, 4536151; 692446, 4536160; 692448, 4536169; 692451, 4536181; 
692456, 4536192; 692462, 4536202; 692470, 4536214; 692476, 4536225; 
692482, 4536233; 692487, 4536240; 692493, 4536246; 692497, 4536249; 
692504, 4536251; 692514, 4536252; 692524, 4536251; 692534, 4536249; 
692544, 4536248; 692554, 4536245; 692563, 4536243; 692570, 4536241; 
692575, 4536239; 692580, 4536237; 692584, 4536235; 692587, 4536233; 
692587, 4536232; 692609, 4536242; 692618, 4536262; 692623, 4536267; 
692627, 4536272; 692631, 4536276; 692638, 4536278; 692649, 4536280; 
692668, 4536284; 692675, 4536285; 692682, 4536284; 692686, 4536284; 
692688, 4536282; 692692, 4536280; 692698, 4536274; 692693, 4536246; 
692691, 4536238; 692685, 4536228; 692682, 4536220; 692679, 4536214; 
692675, 4536210; 692671, 4536204; 692667, 4536199; 692663, 4536194; 
692658, 4536192; 692656, 4536192; 692637, 4536160; 692639, 4536159; 
692645, 4536156; 692649, 4536153; 692654, 4536143; 692658, 4536135; 
692662, 4536125; 692665, 4536115; 692669, 4536100; 692671, 4536088; 
692673, 4536072; 692674, 4536057; 692674, 4536048; 692671, 4536039; 
692669, 4536033; 692668, 4536026; 692670, 4536014; 692676, 4536005; 
692684, 4535997; 692692, 4535990; 692699, 4535984; 692707, 4535977; 
692712, 4535971; 692718, 4535958; 692721, 4535945; 692723, 4535933; 
692725, 4535924; 692729, 4535913; 692735, 4535907; 692742, 4535903; 
692749, 4535899; 692754, 4535893; 692759, 4535882; 692760, 4535871; 
692759, 4535860; 692763, 4535846; 692767, 4535839; 692771, 4535833; 
692773, 4535825; 692774, 4535809; 692774, 4535793; 692772, 4535781; 
692771, 4535770; 692770, 4535759; 692770, 4535750; 692770, 4535737; 
692772, 4535728; 692775, 4535719; 692790, 4535682; 692799, 4535665; 
692805, 4535654; 692812, 4535639; 692818, 4535625; 692823, 4535615; 
692830, 4535605; 692836, 4535596; 692843, 4535584; 692846, 4535575; 
692849, 4535563; 692854, 4535548; 692856, 4535532; 692859, 4535516; 
692861, 4535505; 692864, 4535488; 692868, 4535473; 692872, 4535461; 
692876, 4535448; 692877, 4535436; 692879, 4535425; 692881, 4535413; 
692883, 4535399; 692885, 4535384; 692885, 4535371; 692884, 4535360; 
692884, 4535354; 692884, 4535344; 692879, 4535340; 692869, 4535358; 
692864, 4535365; 692854, 4535373; 692845, 4535377; 692834, 4535379; 
692823, 4535381; 692810, 4535381; 692797, 4535378; 692787, 4535377; 
692773, 4535378; 692759, 4535380; 692744, 4535382; 692734, 4535384; 
692724, 4535388; 692716, 4535392; 692708, 4535399; 692703, 4535407; 
692701, 4535413; 692700, 4535419; 692700, 4535424; 692699, 4535429; 
692684, 4535431; 692680, 4535432; 692676, 4535434; 692671, 4535437; 
692667, 4535439; 692662, 4535440; 692657, 4535441; 692652, 4535442; 
692645, 4535442; 692643, 4535440; 692642, 4535434; 692644, 4535421; 
692651, 4535411; 692656, 4535405; 692660, 4535399; 692663, 4535392; 
692664, 4535387; 692663, 4535383; 692656, 4535377; 692648, 4535375; 
692645, 4535369; 692647, 4535358; 692651, 4535345; 692659, 4535334; 
692668, 4535325; 692672, 4535322; 692678, 4535317; 692680, 4535309; 
692680, 4535303; 692681, 4535294; 692682, 4535286; 692686, 4535279; 
692689, 4535274; 692697, 4535270; 692705, 4535269; 692716, 4535273; 
692724, 4535279; 692730, 4535286; 692736, 4535296; 692740, 4535302; 
692744, 4535308; 692751, 4535313; 692761, 4535317; 692766, 4535317; 
692774, 4535315; 692782, 4535310; 692788, 4535305; 692794, 4535296; 
692797, 4535289; 692801, 4535285; 692810, 4535282; 692817, 4535281; 
692821, 4535279; 692825, 4535275; 692828, 4535267; 692829, 4535258; 
692827, 4535249; 692824, 4535243; 692820, 4535236; 692820, 4535229; 
692823, 4535215; 692825, 4535207; 692829, 4535196; 692831, 4535191; 
692833, 4535182; 692832, 4535178; 692833, 4535173; 692835, 4535166; 
692827, 4535159; 692826, 4535156; 692826, 4535153; 692826, 4535147; 
692827, 4535143; 692827, 4535137; 692845, 4535142; 692850, 4535145; 
692854, 4535148; 692858, 4535152; 692862, 4535155; 692870, 4535161; 
692878, 4535164; 692883, 4535166; 692891, 4535167; 692897, 4535169; 
692904, 4535169; 692910, 4535170; 692915, 4535169; 692919, 4535166; 
692926, 4535163; 692930, 4535162; 692934, 4535162; 692938, 4535163; 
692940, 4535166; 692948, 4535175; 692958, 4535168; 692965, 4535164; 
692971, 4535160; 692977, 4535158; 692981, 4535156; 692984, 4535156; 
692987, 4535156; 692989, 4535154; 692981, 4535147; 692975, 4535144; 
692968, 4535140; 692963, 4535136; 692959, 4535133; 692956, 4535131; 
692953, 4535128; 692952, 4535127; 692950, 4535125; 692948, 4535123; 
692947, 4535121; 692945, 4535118; 692828, 4535116; 692744, 4535111; 
692741, 4535111; 692741, 4535110; 692738, 4535113; 692735, 4535116; 
692735, 4535120; 692734, 4535123; 692734, 4535126; 692730, 4535140; 
692729, 4535144; 692725, 4535148; 692720, 4535156; 692714, 4535164; 
692705, 4535170; 692695, 4535174; 692683, 4535175; 692670, 4535177; 
692658, 4535181; 692648, 4535183; 692641, 4535186; 692632, 4535189; 
692625, 4535192; 692618, 4535193; 692613, 4535194; 692607, 4535197; 
692602, 4535201; 692599, 4535207; 692599, 4535213; 692598, 4535217; 
692598, 4535218; 692604, 4535224; 692612, 4535226; 692618, 4535227; 
692628, 4535228; 692637, 4535232; 692644, 4535236; 692650, 4535241; 
692654, 4535248; 692655, 4535255; 692652, 4535265; 692650, 4535277; 
692643, 4535290; 692637, 4535301; 692632, 4535311; 692625, 4535324; 
692616, 4535334; 692609, 4535342; 692599, 4535351; 692592, 4535361; 
692574, 4535375; 692569, 4535378; 692561, 4535382; 692556, 4535384; 
692549, 4535387; 692545, 4535388; 692539, 4535391; 692537, 4535394; 
692536, 4535398; 692537, 4535401; 692542, 4535404; 692550, 4535405; 
692559, 4535405; 692567, 4535408; 692576, 4535414; 692583, 4535422; 
692588, 4535434; 692592, 4535446; 692592, 4535453; 692592, 4535465; 
692594, 4535478; 692597, 4535496; 692597, 4535509; 692595, 4535527; 
692592, 4535540; 692587, 4535552; 692582, 4535560; 692578, 4535566; 
692571, 4535578; 692568, 4535585; 692564, 4535595; 692562, 4535602; 
692561, 4535607; 692562, 4535614; 692565, 4535619; 692569, 4535623; 
692572, 4535626; 692577, 4535630; 692578, 4535631; 692568, 4535638; 
692560, 4535643; 692554, 4535647; 692549, 4535651; 692545, 4535654; 
692540, 4535657; 692538, 4535658; 692534, 4535665; 692520, 4535671; 
692518, 4535674; 692515, 4535680; 692515, 4535688; 692514, 4535695; 
692515, 4535701; 692515, 4535705; 692516, 4535716; 692537, 4535713; 
692541, 4535712; 692548, 4535711; 692551, 4535710; 692554, 4535710; 
692558, 4535710; 692570, 4535711; 692580, 4535724; 692583, 4535726; 
692585, 4535729; 692585, 4535733; 692582, 4535741; 692567, 4535747; 
692547, 4535749; 692540, 4535749; 692532, 4535749; 692528, 4535750; 
692519, 4535750; 692514, 4535763; 692513, 4535766; 692512, 4535771; 
692503, 4535789; 692500, 4535795; 692493, 4535804; 692489, 4535810; 
692483, 4535817; 692479, 4535824;

[[Page 354]]

692475, 4535831; 692469, 4535840; 692467, 4535847; 692464, 4535855; 
692463, 4535861; 692459, 4535873; 692470, 4535884; 692472, 4535886; 
692475, 4535888; 692480, 4535888; 692484, 4535886; 692487, 4535882; 
692489, 4535879; 692493, 4535872; 692496, 4535866; 692499, 4535863; 
692500, 4535861; 692505, 4535861; 692509, 4535866; 692511, 4535875; 
692511, 4535881; 692511, 4535887; 692511, 4535900; 692521, 4535893; 
692528, 4535892; 692537, 4535892; 692544, 4535893; 692555, 4535895; 
692563, 4535898; 692572, 4535902; 692580, 4535905; 692586, 4535908; 
692592, 4535911; 692598, 4535915; 692601, 4535918; 692603, 4535923; 
692602, 4535927; 692597, 4535934; 692587, 4535936; 692577, 4535938; 
692572, 4535940; 692565, 4535948; 692559, 4535953; 692557, 4535961; 
692557, 4535972; 692560, 4535985; 692562, 4535991; 692564, 4535998; 
692565, 4536002; 692565, 4536004; 692565, 4536006; 692579, 4536010; 
692582, 4536011; 692586, 4536014; 692588, 4536018; 692589, 4536024; 
692588, 4536029; 692585, 4536037; 692579, 4536046; 692572, 4536056; 
692567, 4536064; 692561, 4536071; 692556, 4536076; 692551, 4536080; 
692547, 4536083; 692542, 4536087; 692539, 4536092; 692538, 4536096; 
692538, 4536104; 692538, 4536107; 692543, 4536112; 692537, 4536127; 
692537, 4536131; 692539, 4536137; 692544, 4536142; 692551, 4536149; 
692556, 4536153; 692562, 4536156; 692567, 4536159; 692571, 4536162; 
692573, 4536163; 692575, 4536163; 692576, 4536168; 692576, 4536185; 
692561, 4536183; 692553, 4536182; 692544, 4536183; 692539, 4536184; 
692532, 4536184; 692525, 4536180; 692521, 4536174; 692518, 4536164; 
692516, 4536155; 692513, 4536146; 692505, 4536135; 692495, 4536126; 
692483, 4536114; 692474, 4536106; 692465, 4536100; 692458, 4536096; 
692448, 4536091; 692440, 4536089; 692430, 4536087; 692420, 4536088; 
692412, 4536089; 692408, 4536090; 692403, 4536091; 692401, 4536088; 
692399, 4536081; 692399, 4536073; 692394, 4536065; 692388, 4536060; 
692387, 4536057; 692383, 4536053; 692368, 4536058; 692362, 4536059; 
692355, 4536060; 692344, 4536058; 692331, 4536054; 692323, 4536050; 
692316, 4536047; 692309, 4536043; 692301, 4536041; 692292, 4536043; 
692280, 4536047; 692263, 4536058; 692254, 4536064; 692248, 4536069; 
692246, 4536071; 692244, 4536075; 692243, 4536085; 692244, 4536094; 
692246, 4536103; 692247, 4536112; 692248, 4536125; 692246, 4536137; 
692243, 4536151; 692239, 4536165; 692234, 4536171; 692227, 4536174; 
692216, 4536174; 692207, 4536172; 692197, 4536169; 692188, 4536167; 
692182, 4536166; 692177, 4536167; 692173, 4536168; 692170, 4536170; 
692165, 4536173; 692162, 4536168; 692159, 4536165; 692148, 4536154; 
692143, 4536141; 692141, 4536135; 692140, 4536126; 692138, 4536116; 
692137, 4536108; 692136, 4536104; 692142, 4536065; 692149, 4536061; 
692154, 4536061; 692162, 4536062; 692173, 4536063; 692182, 4536067; 
692187, 4536073; 692191, 4536077; 692198, 4536078; 692206, 4536076; 
692209, 4536073; 692211, 4536067; 692212, 4536059; 692212, 4536050; 
692212, 4536038; 692213, 4536026; 692215, 4536019; 692220, 4536013; 
692232, 4536009; 692244, 4536008; 692253, 4536010; 692263, 4536013; 
692273, 4536013; 692281, 4536012; 692288, 4536007; 692291, 4536001; 
692295, 4535995; 692299, 4535988; 692306, 4535980; 692315, 4535973; 
692327, 4535967; 692339, 4535963; 692349, 4535963; 692352, 4535965; 
692360, 4535965; 692366, 4535964; 692369, 4535961; 692370, 4535955; 
692369, 4535950; 692366, 4535944; 692364, 4535941; 692359, 4535936; 
692354, 4535930; 692349, 4535928; 692338, 4535925; 692330, 4535925; 
692323, 4535927; 692316, 4535931; 692311, 4535935; 692307, 4535940; 
692304, 4535946; 692300, 4535953; 692295, 4535959; 692288, 4535963; 
692281, 4535965; 692274, 4535966; 692264, 4535966; 692252, 4535967; 
692243, 4535967; 692236, 4535969; 692230, 4535973; 692218, 4535981; 
692210, 4535981; 692206, 4535984; 692202, 4535986; 692198, 4535989; 
692192, 4535995; 692186, 4535999; 692181, 4536003; 692172, 4536006; 
692165, 4536009; 692157, 4536011; 692147, 4536014; 692137, 4536020; 
692133, 4536025; 692129, 4536031; 692129, 4536032; 692087, 4536080; 
692086, 4536081; 692082, 4536085; 692078, 4536093; 692074, 4536101; 
692071, 4536106; 692069, 4536112; 692059, 4536124; 692050, 4536143; 
692046, 4536150; 692040, 4536157; 692037, 4536160; 692034, 4536164; 
692029, 4536167; 692025, 4536169; 692023, 4536169; 692020, 4536169; 
692004, 4536172; 691997, 4536173; 691997, 4536173; 691900, 4536175; 
691899, 4536174; 691897, 4536174; 691895, 4536172; 691892, 4536169; 
691886, 4536163; 691880, 4536156; 691873, 4536150; 691864, 4536141; 
691854, 4536135; 691845, 4536130; 691836, 4536124; 691827, 4536117; 
691821, 4536107; 691819, 4536098; 691815, 4536087; 691811, 4536078; 
691807, 4536072; 691801, 4536068; 691789, 4536063; 691785, 4536064; 
691779, 4536064; 691769, 4536065; 691766, 4536048; 691765, 4536041; 
691760, 4536033; 691755, 4536029; 691748, 4536026; 691739, 4536024; 
691729, 4536024; 691717, 4536025; 691711, 4536027; 691710, 4536027; 
691704, 4536032; 691698, 4536039; 691695, 4536045; 691694, 4536054; 
691693, 4536065; 691693, 4536076; 691693, 4536084; 691694, 4536090; 
691698, 4536095; 691700, 4536099; 691707, 4536102; 691717, 4536104; 
691717, 4536105; 691718, 4536108; 691718, 4536114; 691719, 4536119; 
691718, 4536127; 691718, 4536135; 691718, 4536141; 691717, 4536153; 
691714, 4536162; 691713, 4536171; 691711, 4536180; 691709, 4536191; 
691706, 4536201; 691702, 4536212; 691701, 4536224; 691702, 4536235; 
691704, 4536243; 691709, 4536247; 691716, 4536251; 691722, 4536251; 
691730, 4536250; 691737, 4536246; 691744, 4536244; 691752, 4536237; 
691755, 4536233; 691758, 4536229; 691760, 4536225; 691763, 4536223; 
691768, 4536220; 691780, 4536220; 691791, 4536219; 691800, 4536220; 
691807, 4536220; 691815, 4536221; 691816, 4536222; 691823, 4536224; 
691832, 4536230; 691837, 4536237; 691838, 4536238; 691841, 4536238; 
691858, 4536248; 691879, 4536269; 691888, 4536284; 691890, 4536284; 
691949, 4536311; 691950, 4536312; 691957, 4536315; 691963, 4536318; 
691967, 4536320; 691971, 4536325; 691974, 4536329; 691975, 4536334; 
691977, 4536342; 691981, 4536351; 691984, 4536354; 691989, 4536357; 
691995, 4536358; 691998, 4536357; 692004, 4536354; 692006, 4536349; 
692007, 4536344; 692007, 4536336; 692007, 4536328; 692008, 4536318; 
692009, 4536312; 692013, 4536302; 692020, 4536295; 692028, 4536291; 
692039, 4536288; 692048, 4536289; 692058, 4536290; 692067, 4536291; 
692075, 4536293; 692080, 4536297; 692083, 4536301; 692084, 4536304; 
692084, 4536311; 692082, 4536319; 692074, 4536327; 692069, 4536332; 
692064, 4536336; 692056, 4536343; 692054, 4536346; 692053, 4536352; 
692054, 4536357; 691999, 4536379; 691820, 4536407; 691708, 4536428; 
691599, 4536568; 691581, 4536673; 691556, 4536672; 691543, 4536678; 
691540, 4536680; 691534, 4536686; 691526, 4536694; 691522, 4536700; 
691520, 4536705; 691517, 4536711; 691515, 4536715; 691513, 4536721; 
691512, 4536724; 691512, 4536732;

[[Page 355]]

691520, 4536738; 691520, 4536741; 691519, 4536745; 691520, 4536753; 
691519, 4536760; 691514, 4536771; 691511, 4536774; 691501, 4536779; 
691492, 4536781; 691486, 4536782; 691475, 4536781; 691459, 4536779; 
691443, 4536778; 691426, 4536782; 691414, 4536787; 691404, 4536795; 
691398, 4536806; 691395, 4536815; 691396, 4536826; 691399, 4536835; 
691404, 4536841; 691412, 4536843; 691418, 4536844; 691430, 4536841; 
691438, 4536839; 691447, 4536834; 691457, 4536828; 691467, 4536820; 
691478, 4536814; 691489, 4536814; 691500, 4536823; 691505, 4536838; 
691505, 4536847; 691503, 4536856; 691500, 4536865; 691499, 4536877; 
691501, 4536889; 691505, 4536902; 691509, 4536915; 691515, 4536942; 
691518, 4536946; 691528, 4536952; 691547, 4536971; 691540, 4536973; 
691538, 4536976; 691534, 4536980; 691530, 4536986; 691525, 4536990; 
691518, 4536997; 691513, 4537000; 691490, 4537017; 691480, 4537031; 
691475, 4537038; 691469, 4537046; 691463, 4537054; 691459, 4537062; 
691455, 4537066; 691451, 4537072; 691451, 4537074; 691448, 4537078; 
691446, 4537080; 691442, 4537084; 691439, 4537089; 691426, 4537079; 
691417, 4537075; 691414, 4537073; 691408, 4537074; 691401, 4537081; 
691398, 4537084; 691394, 4537087; 691387, 4537090; 691382, 4537089; 
691377, 4537084; 691371, 4537076; 691363, 4537068; 691354, 4537065; 
691345, 4537066; 691336, 4537069; 691331, 4537074; 691326, 4537079; 
691322, 4537082; 691316, 4537084; 691307, 4537084; 691304, 4537100; 
691301, 4537108; 691294, 4537115; 691288, 4537123; 691284, 4537126; 
691274, 4537131; 691263, 4537135; 691247, 4537139; 691234, 4537143; 
691221, 4537144; 691209, 4537145; 691199, 4537150; 691186, 4537161; 
691176, 4537169; 691169, 4537176; 691163, 4537181; 691156, 4537187; 
691151, 4537191; 691144, 4537195; 691138, 4537197; 691133, 4537197; 
691123, 4537193; 691110, 4537184; 691095, 4537174; 691080, 4537168; 
691067, 4537164; 691056, 4537162; 691045, 4537161; 691034, 4537165; 
691020, 4537175; 691002, 4537190; 690991, 4537196; 690979, 4537205; 
690971, 4537211; 690966, 4537214; 690958, 4537217; 690954, 4537216; 
690946, 4537216; 690934, 4537215; 690920, 4537215; 690909, 4537214; 
690899, 4537214; 690897, 4537214; 690894, 4537212; 690867, 4537205; 
690857, 4537203; 690850, 4537204; 690842, 4537204; 690833, 4537205; 
690825, 4537205; 690819, 4537204; 690812, 4537203; 690811, 4537203; 
690800, 4537202; 690784, 4537198; 690775, 4537194; 690768, 4537190; 
690761, 4537186; 690751, 4537183; 690740, 4537183; 690731, 4537187; 
690723, 4537192; 690717, 4537198; 690711, 4537207; 690703, 4537215; 
690696, 4537224; 690687, 4537233; 690679, 4537240; 690673, 4537246; 
690669, 4537251; 690666, 4537255; 690664, 4537259; 690662, 4537261; 
690657, 4537273; 690653, 4537276; 690651, 4537277; 690650, 4537279; 
690647, 4537280; 690632, 4537292; 690629, 4537294; 690622, 4537301; 
690613, 4537310; 690608, 4537316; 690602, 4537322; 690598, 4537325; 
690595, 4537328; 690592, 4537332; 690590, 4537333; 690588, 4537334; 
690584, 4537336; 690577, 4537335; 690561, 4537340; 690555, 4537339; 
690547, 4537338; 690541, 4537335; 690536, 4537333; 690529, 4537332; 
690521, 4537335; 690513, 4537339; 690505, 4537346; 690498, 4537351; 
690491, 4537358; 690484, 4537361; 690478, 4537364; 690473, 4537367; 
690467, 4537369; 690464, 4537371; 690451, 4537378; 690444, 4537381; 
690435, 4537381; 690427, 4537379; 690413, 4537376; 690406, 4537378; 
690398, 4537380; 690389, 4537386; 690381, 4537392; 690374, 4537398; 
690371, 4537401; 690359, 4537409; 690355, 4537412; 690341, 4537411; 
690329, 4537411; 690319, 4537415; 690311, 4537419; 690305, 4537420; 
690299, 4537422; 690298, 4537424; 690297, 4537426; 690270, 4537435; 
690270, 4537434; 690254, 4537440; 690243, 4537444; 690228, 4537449; 
690221, 4537451; 690214, 4537455; 690211, 4537458; 690204, 4537464; 
690201, 4537468; 690201, 4537470; 690194, 4537476; 690192, 4537479; 
690190, 4537486; 690186, 4537503; 690184, 4537515; 690181, 4537531; 
690178, 4537541; 690175, 4537550; 690173, 4537555; 690174, 4537560; 
690175, 4537563; 690178, 4537565; 690178, 4537565; 690174, 4537569; 
690173, 4537579; 690174, 4537589; 690173, 4537601; 690172, 4537610; 
690171, 4537623; 690168, 4537635; 690166, 4537643; 690162, 4537651; 
690154, 4537659; 690147, 4537669; 690144, 4537680; 690144, 4537686; 
690145, 4537694; 690154, 4537711; 690155, 4537711; 690164, 4537754; 
690163, 4537758; 690165, 4537769; 690168, 4537778; 690175, 4537794; 
690181, 4537804; 690191, 4537816; 690198, 4537823; 690203, 4537828; 
690208, 4537834; 690209, 4537835; 690209, 4537838; 690209, 4537842; 
690207, 4537846; 690204, 4537849; 690195, 4537848; 690186, 4537846; 
690172, 4537845; 690167, 4537844; 690161, 4537846; 690159, 4537847; 
690158, 4537850; 690157, 4537853; 690156, 4537860; 690162, 4537874; 
690166, 4537879; 690170, 4537883; 690176, 4537886; 690187, 4537889; 
690197, 4537891; 690203, 4537890; 690214, 4537888; 690221, 4537882; 
690228, 4537874; 690232, 4537866; 690239, 4537856; 690243, 4537849; 
690246, 4537840; 690248, 4537827; 690250, 4537813; 690254, 4537800; 
690259, 4537783; 690264, 4537767; 690269, 4537752; 690272, 4537738; 
690273, 4537721; 690275, 4537710; 690276, 4537699; 690273, 4537690; 
690271, 4537683; 690269, 4537682; 690257, 4537655; 690264, 4537644; 
690266, 4537637; 690268, 4537631; 690270, 4537624; 690271, 4537616; 
690269, 4537609; 690262, 4537588; 690258, 4537564; 690268, 4537560; 
690269, 4537559; 690298, 4537585; 690298, 4537586; 690298, 4537588; 
690305, 4537588; 690313, 4537587; 690322, 4537583; 690333, 4537581; 
690343, 4537583; 690351, 4537587; 690361, 4537594; 690367, 4537597; 
690377, 4537597; 690387, 4537591; 690394, 4537581; 690400, 4537571; 
690405, 4537559; 690410, 4537550; 690414, 4537542; 690422, 4537535; 
690432, 4537531; 690444, 4537530; 690458, 4537531; 690471, 4537535; 
690481, 4537537; 690500, 4537535; 690514, 4537531; 690526, 4537530; 
690535, 4537530; 690543, 4537535; 690548, 4537540; 690551, 4537546; 
690554, 4537549; 690560, 4537551; 690568, 4537550; 690576, 4537543; 
690584, 4537532; 690597, 4537505; 690602, 4537496; 690608, 4537486; 
690614, 4537475; 690623, 4537470; 690631, 4537469; 690637, 4537470; 
690642, 4537471; 690648, 4537472; 690665, 4537475; 690677, 4537478; 
690682, 4537479; 690682, 4537482; 690683, 4537488; 690679, 4537498; 
690673, 4537505; 690659, 4537517; 690649, 4537528; 690644, 4537537; 
690641, 4537548; 690638, 4537562; 690632, 4537577; 690628, 4537586; 
690624, 4537592; 690616, 4537599; 690607, 4537602; 690595, 4537604; 
690583, 4537606; 690567, 4537608; 690555, 4537609; 690540, 4537611; 
690529, 4537613; 690521, 4537619; 690514, 4537627; 690503, 4537640; 
690493, 4537650; 690486, 4537659; 690480, 4537667; 690473, 4537677; 
690470, 4537682; 690459, 4537689; 690451, 4537691; 690441, 4537692; 
690434, 4537691; 690424, 4537691; 690420, 4537690; 690413, 4537689; 
690406, 4537688; 690400, 4537688; 690395, 4537688; 690392, 4537690; 
690390, 4537693; 690388, 4537699;

[[Page 356]]

690388, 4537706; 690388, 4537713; 690390, 4537722; 690390, 4537731; 
690390, 4537738; 690390, 4537742; 690390, 4537747; 690391, 4537751; 
690397, 4537758; 690405, 4537762; 690413, 4537761; 690422, 4537757; 
690429, 4537751; 690434, 4537746; 690443, 4537745; 690451, 4537748; 
690457, 4537750; 690462, 4537749; 690470, 4537747; 690478, 4537746; 
690480, 4537745; 690485, 4537744; 690487, 4537742; 690488, 4537740; 
690489, 4537734; 690483, 4537724; 690482, 4537722; 690480, 4537716; 
690482, 4537710; 690489, 4537705; 690501, 4537707; 690514, 4537710; 
690530, 4537715; 690539, 4537717; 690554, 4537717; 690566, 4537714; 
690578, 4537711; 690594, 4537706; 690607, 4537701; 690618, 4537692; 
690631, 4537685; 690646, 4537678; 690666, 4537663; 690682, 4537656; 
690696, 4537654; 690706, 4537656; 690716, 4537660; 690723, 4537663; 
690733, 4537666; 690743, 4537665; 690755, 4537660; 690764, 4537655; 
690771, 4537650; 690777, 4537646; 690782, 4537643; 690785, 4537639; 
690789, 4537634; 690791, 4537631; 690791, 4537627; 690791, 4537625; 
690790, 4537622; 690802, 4537603; 690809, 4537597; 690816, 4537592; 
690826, 4537586; 690834, 4537581; 690843, 4537577; 690850, 4537573; 
690859, 4537567; 690866, 4537562; 690876, 4537557; 690885, 4537554; 
690896, 4537551; 690905, 4537551; 690913, 4537549; 690916, 4537548; 
690919, 4537546; 690921, 4537542; 690921, 4537537; 690926, 4537533; 
690932, 4537529; 690935, 4537525; 690937, 4537520; 690937, 4537515; 
690938, 4537513; 690947, 4537498; 690954, 4537488; 690961, 4537481; 
690966, 4537475; 690974, 4537469; 690981, 4537465; 690991, 4537464; 
691000, 4537465; 691007, 4537467; 691012, 4537469; 691015, 4537469; 
691021, 4537469; 691022, 4537469; 691067, 4537476; 691075, 4537481; 
691079, 4537486; 691086, 4537496; 691089, 4537503; 691091, 4537513; 
691091, 4537522; 691090, 4537532; 691088, 4537542; 691085, 4537553; 
691083, 4537566; 691082, 4537573; 691081, 4537580; 691080, 4537583; 
691080, 4537588; 691078, 4537591; 691076, 4537595; 691073, 4537599; 
691069, 4537601; 691060, 4537602; 691049, 4537604; 691036, 4537608; 
691023, 4537614; 691013, 4537621; 691002, 4537634; 690995, 4537640; 
690989, 4537645; 690974, 4537654; 690963, 4537663; 690958, 4537671; 
690954, 4537680; 690950, 4537691; 690948, 4537702; 690944, 4537714; 
690937, 4537726; 690931, 4537736; 690928, 4537739; 690913, 4537749; 
690906, 4537754; 690898, 4537760; 690891, 4537766; 690885, 4537772; 
690880, 4537777; 690875, 4537781; 690872, 4537782; 690868, 4537786; 
690866, 4537791; 690864, 4537796; 690864, 4537802; 690863, 4537807; 
690866, 4537811; 690868, 4537815; 690871, 4537816; 690875, 4537817; 
690880, 4537816; 690889, 4537813; 690895, 4537810; 690900, 4537805; 
690906, 4537802; 690914, 4537799; 690922, 4537797; 690930, 4537794; 
690940, 4537790; 690951, 4537787; 690962, 4537782; 690970, 4537780; 
690981, 4537776; 690990, 4537772; 690997, 4537766; 691003, 4537759; 
691008, 4537753; 691013, 4537745; 691020, 4537734; 691025, 4537726; 
691033, 4537714; 691036, 4537709; 691038, 4537706; 691041, 4537701; 
691041, 4537700; 691044, 4537699; 691046, 4537697; 691065, 4537683; 
691071, 4537682; 691080, 4537680; 691089, 4537675; 691104, 4537665; 
691110, 4537662; 691118, 4537655; 691122, 4537647; 691126, 4537637; 
691131, 4537625; 691136, 4537612; 691140, 4537601; 691145, 4537589; 
691148, 4537580; 691151, 4537575; 691156, 4537567; 691166, 4537562; 
691176, 4537561; 691183, 4537559; 691190, 4537558; 691199, 4537555; 
691203, 4537552; 691207, 4537544; 691211, 4537536; 691214, 4537527; 
691215, 4537519; 691215, 4537511; 691214, 4537503; 691211, 4537496; 
691210, 4537494; 691210, 4537493; 691204, 4537488; 691211, 4537473; 
691213, 4537466; 691214, 4537456; 691215, 4537448; 691213, 4537439; 
691208, 4537434; 691203, 4537430; 691198, 4537429; 691193, 4537425; 
691192, 4537418; 691194, 4537409; 691203, 4537403; 691208, 4537396; 
691211, 4537390; 691213, 4537384; 691215, 4537379; 691222, 4537372; 
691232, 4537371; 691246, 4537374; 691259, 4537378; 691270, 4537384; 
691281, 4537392; 691290, 4537401; 691297, 4537409; 691305, 4537419; 
691310, 4537431; 691313, 4537441; 691315, 4537454; 691315, 4537466; 
691312, 4537481; 691306, 4537497; 691302, 4537510; 691297, 4537524; 
691294, 4537536; 691289, 4537545; 691288, 4537551; 691286, 4537557; 
691286, 4537564; 691287, 4537570; 691288, 4537573; 691292, 4537574; 
691303, 4537572; 691313, 4537570; 691322, 4537570; 691329, 4537570; 
691335, 4537572; 691340, 4537576; 691346, 4537581; 691354, 4537589; 
691363, 4537597; 691367, 4537602; 691371, 4537606; 691375, 4537611; 
691377, 4537615; 691377, 4537619; 691375, 4537622; 691366, 4537627; 
691354, 4537632; 691344, 4537639; 691339, 4537645; 691332, 4537654; 
691328, 4537665; 691323, 4537675; 691319, 4537681; 691312, 4537689; 
691303, 4537699; 691299, 4537705; 691294, 4537714; 691289, 4537723; 
691287, 4537729; 691286, 4537734; 691285, 4537741; 691287, 4537746; 
691290, 4537754; 691294, 4537758; 691297, 4537758; 691300, 4537760; 
691302, 4537762; 691304, 4537764; 691309, 4537767; 691303, 4537781; 
691303, 4537787; 691303, 4537792; 691303, 4537796; 691305, 4537801; 
691304, 4537804; 691305, 4537807; 691305, 4537808; 691305, 4537810; 
691311, 4537818; 691307, 4537843; 691305, 4537856; 691302, 4537868; 
691299, 4537877; 691297, 4537880; 691292, 4537883; 691284, 4537885; 
691280, 4537886; 691276, 4537891; 691272, 4537900; 691270, 4537909; 
691267, 4537919; 691264, 4537928; 691260, 4537940; 691252, 4537949; 
691244, 4537958; 691237, 4537965; 691230, 4537972; 691222, 4537983; 
691216, 4537995; 691211, 4538009; 691208, 4538026; 691208, 4538042; 
691208, 4538055; 691208, 4538066; 691206, 4538076; 691200, 4538088; 
691197, 4538095; 691193, 4538101; 691190, 4538104; 691188, 4538107; 
691183, 4538111; 691171, 4538122; 691167, 4538126; 691161, 4538132; 
691159, 4538140; 691158, 4538152; 691159, 4538166; 691160, 4538191; 
691161, 4538201; 691162, 4538208; 691162, 4538215; 691074, 4538281; 
691082, 4538281; 691074, 4538281; 691072, 4538296; 691073, 4538303; 
691074, 4538313; 691077, 4538323; 691078, 4538329; 691080, 4538338; 
691079, 4538348; 691075, 4538359; 691072, 4538367; 691068, 4538373; 
691064, 4538377; 691061, 4538380; 691059, 4538383; 691057, 4538387; 
691057, 4538393; 691059, 4538399; 691062, 4538403; 691071, 4538404; 
691078, 4538404; 691089, 4538400; 691094, 4538395; 691097, 4538386; 
691102, 4538375; 691107, 4538368; 691115, 4538360; 691128, 4538355; 
691142, 4538352; 691158, 4538351; 691176, 4538354; 691188, 4538357; 
691193, 4538360; 691200, 4538363; 691205, 4538364; 691209, 4538365; 
691216, 4538366.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 1, Upper Little Salt Creek North (Map 2), 
follows:

[[Page 357]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.005

    (7) Unit 2: Little Salt Creek--Arbor Lake, Lancaster County, 
Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 2a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695582, 4530097; 695584, 4530093; 695585, 4530092; 
695590, 4530091; 695596, 4530091; 695600, 4530088; 695602, 4530085; 
695602, 4530078; 695598, 4530070; 695591, 4530064; 695583, 4530058; 
695572, 4530054; 695561, 4530051; 695555, 4530050; 695547, 4530048; 
695541, 4530045; 695538, 4530043; 695530, 4530040; 695515, 4530031; 
695496, 4530025; 695488, 4530021; 695482, 4530016; 695476, 4530013; 
695471, 4530009; 695465, 4530008; 695457, 4530008; 695450, 4530009; 
695444, 4530012; 695439, 4530017; 695434, 4530023; 695432, 4530031; 
695428,

[[Page 358]]

4530042; 695426, 4530044; 695422, 4530044; 695418, 4530043; 695413, 
4530044; 695411, 4530046; 695409, 4530050; 695409, 4530056; 695411, 
4530061; 695417, 4530065; 695427, 4530068; 695434, 4530074; 695438, 
4530080; 695439, 4530087; 695439, 4530092; 695439, 4530098; 695441, 
4530104; 695443, 4530106; 695450, 4530107; 695458, 4530105; 695467, 
4530103; 695478, 4530101; 695488, 4530099; 695496, 4530097; 695506, 
4530099; 695513, 4530102; 695522, 4530107; 695528, 4530111; 695534, 
4530116; 695540, 4530120; 695548, 4530122; 695558, 4530122; 695565, 
4530124; 695571, 4530123; 695576, 4530122; 695580, 4530116; 695581, 
4530109; 695582, 4530104; 695582, 4530097.
    (ii) Tract 2b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695752, 4530111; 695749, 4530108; 695745, 4530108; 
695738, 4530109; 695729, 4530109; 695722, 4530108; 695716, 4530106; 
695708, 4530104; 695701, 4530104; 695694, 4530104; 695689, 4530105; 
695683, 4530106; 695671, 4530106; 695669, 4530107; 695664, 4530110; 
695662, 4530115; 695659, 4530124; 695658, 4530135; 695659, 4530146; 
695661, 4530154; 695665, 4530165; 695670, 4530172; 695677, 4530181; 
695681, 4530185; 695689, 4530190; 695695, 4530195; 695704, 4530200; 
695710, 4530203; 695715, 4530205; 695721, 4530206; 695731, 4530204; 
695738, 4530200; 695743, 4530198; 695748, 4530194; 695752, 4530190; 
695755, 4530184; 695758, 4530177; 695761, 4530171; 695763, 4530163; 
695764, 4530155; 695764, 4530146; 695762, 4530136; 695760, 4530128; 
695758, 4530122; 695756, 4530117; 695752, 4530111.
    (iii) Tract 2c. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 694865, 4531575; 694912, 4531436; 694913, 4531436; 
694921, 4531431; 694932, 4531426; 694944, 4531421; 694955, 4531418; 
694964, 4531416; 694970, 4531412; 694975, 4531403; 694979, 4531392; 
694982, 4531380; 694987, 4531366; 694993, 4531353; 695000, 4531342; 
695007, 4531330; 695014, 4531318; 695021, 4531310; 695028, 4531306; 
695034, 4531309; 695037, 4531312; 695041, 4531317; 695045, 4531325; 
695048, 4531333; 695050, 4531344; 695056, 4531359; 695061, 4531374; 
695067, 4531381; 695076, 4531387; 695085, 4531390; 695095, 4531394; 
695102, 4531397; 695106, 4531402; 695104, 4531408; 695103, 4531413; 
695102, 4531419; 695105, 4531424; 695111, 4531427; 695119, 4531430; 
695126, 4531435; 695130, 4531439; 695133, 4531441; 695139, 4531441; 
695148, 4531441; 695155, 4531442; 695163, 4531445; 695170, 4531447; 
695174, 4531447; 695177, 4531446; 695180, 4531441; 695182, 4531436; 
695184, 4531433; 695188, 4531427; 695193, 4531418; 695198, 4531408; 
695203, 4531398; 695206, 4531388; 695209, 4531375; 695210, 4531361; 
695209, 4531348; 695206, 4531336; 695202, 4531326; 695197, 4531314; 
695191, 4531307; 695186, 4531301; 695179, 4531294; 695173, 4531284; 
695169, 4531276; 695164, 4531266; 695161, 4531256; 695159, 4531246; 
695160, 4531234; 695160, 4531221; 695167, 4531206; 695178, 4531196; 
695185, 4531193; 695195, 4531190; 695206, 4531187; 695213, 4531183; 
695219, 4531174; 695222, 4531165; 695224, 4531154; 695225, 4531141; 
695225, 4531132; 695224, 4531122; 695223, 4531116; 695222, 4531114; 
695220, 4531104; 695219, 4531097; 695220, 4531087; 695222, 4531077; 
695227, 4531064; 695230, 4531058; 695232, 4531050; 695235, 4531044; 
695237, 4531037; 695238, 4531027; 695239, 4531024; 695238, 4531017; 
695236, 4531013; 695235, 4531012; 695260, 4530964; 695263, 4530964; 
695267, 4530964; 695271, 4530963; 695275, 4530961; 695278, 4530958; 
695284, 4530953; 695288, 4530951; 695293, 4530948; 695311, 4530942; 
695321, 4530947; 695323, 4530952; 695325, 4530958; 695324, 4530964; 
695321, 4530968; 695318, 4530972; 695315, 4530974; 695308, 4530977; 
695302, 4530980; 695295, 4530982; 695287, 4530985; 695282, 4530987; 
695275, 4530990; 695271, 4530995; 695270, 4531001; 695271, 4531006; 
695274, 4531012; 695276, 4531015; 695278, 4531017; 695290, 4531020; 
695302, 4531024; 695308, 4531024; 695314, 4531023; 695318, 4531022; 
695322, 4531019; 695324, 4531017; 695327, 4531014; 695333, 4531011; 
695340, 4531009; 695349, 4531011; 695355, 4531012; 695360, 4531012; 
695365, 4531010; 695368, 4531007; 695372, 4531001; 695376, 4530996; 
695380, 4530991; 695384, 4530988; 695387, 4530987; 695398, 4530981; 
695402, 4530981; 695412, 4530983; 695419, 4530987; 695425, 4530991; 
695430, 4530994; 695436, 4530994; 695445, 4530992; 695452, 4530989; 
695459, 4530985; 695463, 4530979; 695466, 4530974; 695470, 4530966; 
695475, 4530959; 695484, 4530953; 695491, 4530950; 695500, 4530948; 
695509, 4530945; 695516, 4530942; 695522, 4530940; 695527, 4530936; 
695529, 4530933; 695536, 4530924; 695545, 4530917; 695548, 4530913; 
695550, 4530908; 695551, 4530904; 695551, 4530900; 695552, 4530897; 
695552, 4530895; 695552, 4530892; 695564, 4530890; 695568, 4530887; 
695572, 4530885; 695576, 4530882; 695580, 4530878; 695584, 4530872; 
695586, 4530869; 695596, 4530862; 695608, 4530867; 695610, 4530873; 
695611, 4530880; 695613, 4530884; 695616, 4530890; 695618, 4530894; 
695627, 4530904; 695634, 4530909; 695640, 4530914; 695646, 4530917; 
695650, 4530921; 695655, 4530924; 695661, 4530927; 695664, 4530927; 
695667, 4530925; 695672, 4530920; 695674, 4530915; 695676, 4530908; 
695676, 4530900; 695676, 4530892; 695675, 4530884; 695672, 4530872; 
695667, 4530861; 695665, 4530856; 695665, 4530849; 695668, 4530839; 
695674, 4530825; 695679, 4530818; 695685, 4530809; 695692, 4530801; 
695696, 4530792; 695697, 4530779; 695698, 4530768; 695700, 4530754; 
695702, 4530742; 695704, 4530731; 695708, 4530719; 695711, 4530708; 
695714, 4530696; 695716, 4530683; 695714, 4530663; 695709, 4530649; 
695702, 4530635; 695698, 4530627; 695692, 4530618; 695689, 4530608; 
695686, 4530594; 695684, 4530577; 695684, 4530569; 695683, 4530559; 
695680, 4530554; 695675, 4530545; 695670, 4530540; 695667, 4530536; 
695666, 4530533; 695665, 4530530; 695664, 4530517; 695664, 4530514; 
695663, 4530509; 695663, 4530491; 695676, 4530483; 695684, 4530482; 
695690, 4530481; 695698, 4530479; 695705, 4530476; 695711, 4530473; 
695717, 4530471; 695723, 4530469; 695728, 4530466; 695733, 4530462; 
695736, 4530458; 695735, 4530451; 695731, 4530441; 695724, 4530432; 
695714, 4530423; 695706, 4530417; 695693, 4530407; 695681, 4530397; 
695669, 4530384; 695662, 4530374; 695657, 4530364; 695652, 4530356; 
695646, 4530347; 695642, 4530339; 695636, 4530335; 695630, 4530332; 
695623, 4530326; 695617, 4530320; 695609, 4530314; 695603, 4530311; 
695597, 4530309; 695590, 4530308; 695586, 4530305; 695582, 4530300; 
695580, 4530292; 695579, 4530284; 695579, 4530276; 695580, 4530268; 
695582, 4530263; 695587, 4530257; 695594, 4530253; 695599, 4530250; 
695604, 4530245; 695607, 4530241; 695609, 4530234; 695608, 4530226;

[[Page 359]]

695607, 4530217; 695605, 4530208; 695600, 4530201; 695596, 4530195; 
695591, 4530191; 695581, 4530189; 695574, 4530189; 695565, 4530191; 
695559, 4530192; 695552, 4530193; 695544, 4530192; 695538, 4530184; 
695533, 4530176; 695530, 4530172; 695528, 4530169; 695518, 4530178; 
695514, 4530180; 695510, 4530182; 695506, 4530183; 695502, 4530187; 
695492, 4530195; 695486, 4530201; 695483, 4530206; 695480, 4530213; 
695477, 4530219; 695476, 4530222; 695474, 4530224; 695471, 4530227; 
695467, 4530230; 695465, 4530230; 695463, 4530230; 695462, 4530230; 
695453, 4530228; 695443, 4530224; 695441, 4530222; 695441, 4530219; 
695441, 4530211; 695440, 4530203; 695440, 4530195; 695440, 4530189; 
695438, 4530180; 695436, 4530173; 695434, 4530168; 695432, 4530162; 
695425, 4530149; 695412, 4530154; 695407, 4530158; 695402, 4530166; 
695398, 4530173; 695396, 4530182; 695393, 4530192; 695391, 4530202; 
695390, 4530211; 695389, 4530221; 695389, 4530229; 695389, 4530234; 
695390, 4530240; 695389, 4530244; 695389, 4530247; 695387, 4530249; 
695379, 4530255; 695377, 4530256; 695375, 4530259; 695373, 4530261; 
695372, 4530264; 695372, 4530267; 695371, 4530271; 695371, 4530279; 
695368, 4530292; 695367, 4530298; 695366, 4530302; 695363, 4530305; 
695360, 4530307; 695354, 4530307; 695347, 4530308; 695339, 4530307; 
695333, 4530307; 695326, 4530305; 695320, 4530303; 695316, 4530301; 
695313, 4530298; 695310, 4530296; 695307, 4530292; 695307, 4530289; 
695308, 4530283; 695310, 4530271; 695311, 4530260; 695311, 4530249; 
695310, 4530240; 695307, 4530234; 695306, 4530226; 695304, 4530218; 
695302, 4530212; 695301, 4530209; 695299, 4530205; 695295, 4530204; 
695290, 4530205; 695293, 4529952; 695234, 4529971; 695176, 4530206; 
695176, 4530206; 695173, 4530204; 695169, 4530200; 695164, 4530196; 
695160, 4530192; 695156, 4530189; 695147, 4530186; 695137, 4530186; 
695127, 4530187; 695117, 4530190; 695109, 4530193; 695103, 4530198; 
695099, 4530202; 695096, 4530208; 695092, 4530213; 695086, 4530216; 
695083, 4530217; 695076, 4530217; 695071, 4530216; 695064, 4530216; 
695060, 4530215; 695051, 4530206; 695053, 4530191; 695052, 4530187; 
695048, 4530180; 695041, 4530177; 695034, 4530174; 695025, 4530171; 
695016, 4530169; 695008, 4530166; 695000, 4530164; 694992, 4530162; 
694984, 4530160; 694978, 4530160; 694972, 4530161; 694967, 4530163; 
694960, 4530167; 694955, 4530170; 694950, 4530172; 694949, 4530173; 
694926, 4530179; 694915, 4530181; 694913, 4530180; 694909, 4530176; 
694907, 4530176; 694907, 4530175; 694903, 4530174; 694899, 4530174; 
694899, 4530174; 694891, 4530177; 694885, 4530178; 694884, 4530178; 
694873, 4530173; 694866, 4530170; 694859, 4530169; 694851, 4530167; 
694839, 4530170; 694821, 4530178; 694815, 4530180; 694807, 4530182; 
694801, 4530182; 694793, 4530182; 694785, 4530181; 694774, 4530179; 
694766, 4530176; 694762, 4530174; 694756, 4530171; 694752, 4530169; 
694750, 4530167; 694749, 4530165; 694747, 4530164; 694737, 4530175; 
694735, 4530178; 694746, 4530203; 694752, 4530211; 694759, 4530218; 
694766, 4530223; 694776, 4530229; 694783, 4530232; 694791, 4530235; 
694795, 4530238; 694795, 4530243; 694795, 4530253; 694793, 4530264; 
694792, 4530272; 694793, 4530281; 694795, 4530285; 694803, 4530290; 
694822, 4530291; 694832, 4530291; 694846, 4530288; 694859, 4530286; 
694869, 4530283; 694881, 4530285; 694890, 4530289; 694896, 4530293; 
694905, 4530298; 694914, 4530300; 694925, 4530303; 694936, 4530302; 
694948, 4530298; 694957, 4530298; 694967, 4530298; 694973, 4530300; 
694978, 4530300; 694986, 4530300; 694988, 4530300; 694992, 4530300; 
694996, 4530299; 694997, 4530299; 695013, 4530296; 695021, 4530293; 
695028, 4530291; 695037, 4530291; 695046, 4530293; 695054, 4530297; 
695060, 4530299; 695067, 4530301; 695074, 4530302; 695081, 4530302; 
695086, 4530301; 695092, 4530298; 695096, 4530295; 695109, 4530291; 
695121, 4530292; 695129, 4530292; 695137, 4530292; 695146, 4530291; 
695153, 4530290; 695157, 4530289; 695163, 4530288; 695147, 4530420; 
695146, 4530419; 695143, 4530415; 695136, 4530411; 695130, 4530410; 
695124, 4530411; 695116, 4530415; 695108, 4530422; 695105, 4530424; 
695102, 4530431; 695100, 4530435; 695098, 4530440; 695096, 4530443; 
695092, 4530447; 695087, 4530450; 695084, 4530450; 695081, 4530449; 
695061, 4530437; 695057, 4530435; 695051, 4530432; 695045, 4530431; 
695038, 4530431; 695032, 4530436; 695027, 4530443; 695024, 4530451; 
695021, 4530457; 695017, 4530461; 695009, 4530465; 695002, 4530466; 
694993, 4530467; 694984, 4530465; 694976, 4530457; 694968, 4530451; 
694961, 4530449; 694951, 4530448; 694945, 4530447; 694936, 4530445; 
694926, 4530440; 694916, 4530437; 694904, 4530435; 694894, 4530433; 
694885, 4530432; 694876, 4530430; 694868, 4530428; 694863, 4530426; 
694859, 4530423; 694847, 4530415; 694835, 4530406; 694829, 4530401; 
694821, 4530396; 694813, 4530391; 694804, 4530387; 694798, 4530383; 
694790, 4530379; 694785, 4530376; 694780, 4530374; 694772, 4530372; 
694766, 4530371; 694763, 4530371; 694758, 4530377; 694756, 4530385; 
694755, 4530392; 694756, 4530398; 694759, 4530403; 694763, 4530408; 
694769, 4530411; 694775, 4530412; 694782, 4530412; 694791, 4530413; 
694798, 4530414; 694803, 4530417; 694814, 4530423; 694821, 4530428; 
694827, 4530432; 694830, 4530434; 694835, 4530437; 694838, 4530439; 
694838, 4530440; 694844, 4530453; 694846, 4530456; 694850, 4530461; 
694856, 4530464; 694862, 4530466; 694868, 4530468; 694871, 4530470; 
694872, 4530474; 694874, 4530478; 694875, 4530489; 694874, 4530510; 
694872, 4530518; 694869, 4530524; 694862, 4530532; 694855, 4530535; 
694847, 4530539; 694839, 4530543; 694836, 4530545; 694831, 4530547; 
694827, 4530550; 694825, 4530555; 694823, 4530562; 694823, 4530569; 
694824, 4530574; 694827, 4530580; 694828, 4530583; 694834, 4530590; 
694837, 4530592; 694840, 4530594; 694844, 4530596; 694849, 4530597; 
694851, 4530597; 694853, 4530598; 694869, 4530603; 694873, 4530605; 
694879, 4530607; 694884, 4530609; 694888, 4530610; 694896, 4530616; 
694907, 4530626; 694909, 4530628; 694912, 4530630; 694920, 4530632; 
694929, 4530632; 694937, 4530631; 694943, 4530629; 694950, 4530627; 
694955, 4530625; 694960, 4530623; 694963, 4530622; 694964, 4530622; 
694966, 4530620; 694977, 4530618; 694983, 4530621; 694987, 4530626; 
694989, 4530631; 694993, 4530635; 694997, 4530638; 695003, 4530639; 
695012, 4530639; 695020, 4530636; 695030, 4530632; 695038, 4530628; 
695045, 4530626; 695050, 4530625; 695054, 4530625; 695068, 4530623; 
695078, 4530632; 695079, 4530637; 695080, 4530642; 695080, 4530647; 
695079, 4530651; 695079, 4530658; 695078, 4530672; 695079, 4530679; 
695079, 4530689; 695076, 4530699; 695072, 4530708; 695068, 4530715; 
695064, 4530720; 695057, 4530726; 695050, 4530732; 695044, 4530737; 
695036, 4530743; 695028, 4530749; 695022, 4530755; 695018, 4530761; 
695013, 4530774; 695011, 4530784; 695010, 4530794; 695010, 4530807; 
695011, 4530818; 695012, 4530825;

[[Page 360]]

695013, 4530832; 695013, 4530839; 695013, 4530845; 695007, 4530856; 
694999, 4530865; 694989, 4530873; 694981, 4530879; 694970, 4530887; 
694961, 4530895; 694951, 4530903; 694941, 4530912; 694929, 4530922; 
694915, 4530933; 694904, 4530939; 694896, 4530943; 694888, 4530948; 
694884, 4530953; 694879, 4530963; 694873, 4530975; 694870, 4530982; 
694870, 4530990; 694870, 4530998; 694871, 4531004; 694874, 4531012; 
694877, 4531022; 694880, 4531032; 694879, 4531041; 694877, 4531047; 
694871, 4531059; 694864, 4531067; 694855, 4531079; 694846, 4531090; 
694836, 4531101; 694830, 4531108; 694829, 4531110; 694824, 4531114; 
694819, 4531118; 694815, 4531119; 694811, 4531119; 694804, 4531118; 
694797, 4531115; 694791, 4531110; 694786, 4531108; 694779, 4531106; 
694776, 4531106; 694769, 4531108; 694763, 4531111; 694756, 4531114; 
694752, 4531115; 694750, 4531116; 694732, 4531126; 694725, 4531127; 
694716, 4531126; 694705, 4531124; 694697, 4531123; 694686, 4531122; 
694678, 4531122; 694671, 4531122; 694664, 4531122; 694654, 4531118; 
694638, 4531120; 694631, 4531122; 694620, 4531126; 694610, 4531131; 
694603, 4531135; 694599, 4531138; 694596, 4531141; 694592, 4531143; 
694588, 4531144; 694587, 4531144; 694578, 4531142; 694568, 4531144; 
694562, 4531148; 694555, 4531152; 694546, 4531160; 694540, 4531167; 
694535, 4531177; 694530, 4531186; 694526, 4531191; 694520, 4531194; 
694518, 4531195; 694510, 4531198; 694504, 4531201; 694500, 4531206; 
694497, 4531213; 694493, 4531223; 694490, 4531233; 694489, 4531244; 
694489, 4531254; 694492, 4531263; 694495, 4531276; 694499, 4531293; 
694501, 4531304; 694503, 4531316; 694503, 4531330; 694501, 4531342; 
694498, 4531352; 694496, 4531363; 694495, 4531375; 694498, 4531389; 
694501, 4531405; 694502, 4531418; 694502, 4531430; 694503, 4531442; 
694503, 4531453; 694504, 4531459; 694504, 4531464; 694505, 4531469; 
694506, 4531472; 694506, 4531475; 694507, 4531478; 694507, 4531481; 
694506, 4531490; 694505, 4531494; 694505, 4531497; 694506, 4531500; 
694507, 4531502; 694509, 4531504; 694512, 4531505; 694518, 4531506; 
694523, 4531506; 694529, 4531506; 694534, 4531506; 694540, 4531506; 
694545, 4531506; 694552, 4531507; 694562, 4531506; 694570, 4531506; 
694575, 4531505; 694671, 4531593; 694865, 4531575.
    (iv) Tract 2d. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 694708, 4530350; 694706, 4530341; 694705, 4530336; 
694703, 4530331; 694701, 4530326; 694699, 4530322; 694698, 4530321; 
694697, 4530318; 694696, 4530316; 694697, 4530314; 694697, 4530313; 
694699, 4530312; 694706, 4530302; 694708, 4530300; 694710, 4530297; 
694712, 4530293; 694712, 4530290; 694712, 4530284; 694710, 4530279; 
694708, 4530271; 694705, 4530263; 694703, 4530258; 694702, 4530255; 
694698, 4530252; 694695, 4530250; 694692, 4530249; 694689, 4530251; 
694684, 4530253; 694679, 4530257; 694676, 4530258; 694666, 4530264; 
694650, 4530270; 694641, 4530271; 694633, 4530270; 694629, 4530270; 
694624, 4530269; 694618, 4530269; 694614, 4530271; 694609, 4530275; 
694605, 4530279; 694603, 4530283; 694601, 4530288; 694602, 4530292; 
694604, 4530296; 694608, 4530301; 694615, 4530305; 694622, 4530305; 
694631, 4530303; 694638, 4530301; 694649, 4530299; 694656, 4530298; 
694663, 4530296; 694667, 4530296; 694670, 4530298; 694673, 4530302; 
694672, 4530306; 694671, 4530313; 694668, 4530317; 694664, 4530320; 
694658, 4530322; 694652, 4530324; 694646, 4530327; 694644, 4530329; 
694642, 4530334; 694642, 4530336; 694643, 4530340; 694644, 4530344; 
694646, 4530348; 694652, 4530349; 694661, 4530349; 694666, 4530347; 
694671, 4530344; 694674, 4530344; 694677, 4530343; 694679, 4530346; 
694682, 4530352; 694684, 4530357; 694686, 4530361; 694687, 4530365; 
694690, 4530369; 694693, 4530372; 694697, 4530372; 694700, 4530370; 
694703, 4530367; 694705, 4530363; 694706, 4530358; 694708, 4530350.
    (v) Tract 2e. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 694483, 4530368; 694487, 4530364; 694488, 4530362; 
694491, 4530343; 694494, 4530332; 694493, 4530323; 694490, 4530315; 
694485, 4530306; 694482, 4530299; 694481, 4530288; 694484, 4530276; 
694486, 4530272; 694494, 4530266; 694502, 4530265; 694513, 4530265; 
694521, 4530265; 694530, 4530264; 694538, 4530260; 694545, 4530257; 
694550, 4530253; 694555, 4530247; 694561, 4530241; 694565, 4530236; 
694567, 4530233; 694569, 4530231; 694570, 4530228; 694572, 4530227; 
694581, 4530223; 694587, 4530217; 694591, 4530212; 694593, 4530207; 
694591, 4530203; 694590, 4530200; 694586, 4530199; 694579, 4530196; 
694575, 4530194; 694598, 4530176; 694605, 4530177; 694613, 4530178; 
694622, 4530177; 694632, 4530176; 694645, 4530175; 694654, 4530177; 
694661, 4530179; 694667, 4530181; 694675, 4530179; 694683, 4530176; 
694688, 4530171; 694693, 4530163; 694697, 4530156; 694700, 4530150; 
694704, 4530140; 694704, 4530135; 694704, 4530123; 694709, 4530112; 
694706, 4530105; 694700, 4530098; 694696, 4530091; 694694, 4530086; 
694693, 4530078; 694695, 4530070; 694673, 4530067; 694663, 4530063; 
694656, 4530060; 694648, 4530056; 694639, 4530052; 694631, 4530049; 
694622, 4530045; 694613, 4530041; 694605, 4530039; 694600, 4530037; 
694593, 4530038; 694589, 4530039; 694586, 4530041; 694583, 4530042; 
694582, 4530043; 694573, 4530048; 694570, 4530047; 694566, 4530045; 
694564, 4530042; 694562, 4530037; 694561, 4530032; 694559, 4530026; 
694557, 4530019; 694553, 4530014; 694548, 4530010; 694543, 4530007; 
694540, 4530006; 694536, 4530004; 694534, 4530002; 694532, 4529998; 
694531, 4529994; 694531, 4529991; 694532, 4529989; 694522, 4529987; 
694517, 4529985; 694514, 4529985; 694511, 4529988; 694510, 4529993; 
694508, 4530003; 694508, 4530016; 694509, 4530030; 694512, 4530044; 
694515, 4530054; 694519, 4530066; 694523, 4530075; 694528, 4530084; 
694533, 4530092; 694539, 4530099; 694544, 4530104; 694549, 4530106; 
694535, 4530130; 694532, 4530129; 694523, 4530126; 694511, 4530125; 
694502, 4530127; 694494, 4530131; 694488, 4530135; 694481, 4530143; 
694475, 4530149; 694471, 4530156; 694468, 4530164; 694467, 4530171; 
694466, 4530178; 694472, 4530197; 694472, 4530213; 694471, 4530219; 
694469, 4530223; 694464, 4530226; 694459, 4530227; 694456, 4530227; 
694453, 4530229; 694449, 4530233; 694448, 4530237; 694448, 4530246; 
694448, 4530256; 694446, 4530266; 694440, 4530276; 694434, 4530286; 
694428, 4530292; 694423, 4530299; 694417, 4530306; 694413, 4530312; 
694408, 4530323; 694408, 4530331; 694410, 4530338; 694413, 4530342; 
694420, 4530346; 694428, 4530350; 694433, 4530352; 694436, 4530355; 
694437, 4530358; 694435, 4530364; 694431, 4530367; 694424, 4530368; 
694415, 4530367; 694406, 4530368; 694400, 4530371; 694395, 4530378; 
694391, 4530384;

[[Page 361]]

694389, 4530390; 694387, 4530395; 694383, 4530406; 694400, 4530410; 
694408, 4530409; 694420, 4530406; 694432, 4530403; 694444, 4530400; 
694452, 4530396; 694458, 4530394; 694463, 4530391; 694468, 4530387; 
694472, 4530382; 694476, 4530378; 694480, 4530372; 694483, 4530368.
    (vi) Note: Map of Units 2 and 3, Little Salt Creek--Arbor Lake and 
Little Salt Creek--Roper (Map 3), follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.006

    (8) Unit 3: Little Salt Creek--Roper, Lancaster County, Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 3a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 696382, 4529523; 696387, 4529519; 696387, 4529517; 
696387, 4529512; 696385, 4529506; 696384, 4529499; 696383, 4529491; 
696379, 4529481; 696372, 4529468; 696364, 4529460; 696359, 4529455; 
696352, 4529446; 696347, 4529433; 696344, 4529427; 696339, 4529417; 
696336, 4529410; 696333, 4529405; 696328, 4529398; 696326, 4529392; 
696324, 4529388; 696323, 4529385; 696322, 4529384; 696316, 4529376; 
696316, 4529374; 696315, 4529371; 696316, 4529356; 696313, 4529341; 
696314, 4529331; 696317, 4529323; 696320, 4529310; 696325, 4529295; 
696329, 4529281; 696332, 4529264; 696335, 4529246; 696338, 4529232; 
696342, 4529218; 696345, 4529201; 696349, 4529187; 696353, 4529172; 
696357, 4529157; 696361, 4529143; 696366, 4529132; 696370, 4529123; 
696372, 4529113; 696376, 4529101; 696380, 4529089; 696385, 4529082; 
696389, 4529074; 696392, 4529064; 696394, 4529053; 696394, 4529034; 
696396, 4529008; 696395, 4528995; 696393, 4528975; 696394, 4528956; 
696395, 4528938; 696397, 4528925; 696401, 4528909; 696406, 4528898; 
696416, 4528883; 696424, 4528870; 696430, 4528860; 696436, 4528851; 
696440, 4528843; 696443, 4528830; 696446, 4528817; 696450, 4528806; 
696454, 4528795; 696457, 4528780; 696457, 4528766; 696458, 4528751; 
696460, 4528731; 696461, 4528714; 696461, 4528701; 696460, 4528687; 
696458, 4528674; 696454, 4528669; 696447, 4528661; 696440, 4528652; 
696435, 4528644; 696428, 4528632; 696424, 4528620; 696422, 4528607; 
696425, 4528596; 696427, 4528584; 696431, 4528575; 696434, 4528565; 
696437, 4528560; 696442, 4528557; 696450, 4528555; 696456, 4528558; 
696464, 4528561; 696471, 4528564; 696477, 4528564; 696487, 4528559; 
696499, 4528551; 696507, 4528544; 696513,

[[Page 362]]

4528542; 696523, 4528540; 696530, 4528543; 696535, 4528547; 696539, 
4528552; 696543, 4528555; 696547, 4528559; 696551, 4528561; 696556, 
4528560; 696560, 4528556; 696564, 4528551; 696566, 4528544; 696567, 
4528542; 696569, 4528539; 696577, 4528546; 696582, 4528548; 696587, 
4528549; 696589, 4528550; 696594, 4528550; 696598, 4528548; 696600, 
4528545; 696603, 4528540; 696605, 4528536; 696606, 4528533; 696610, 
4528529; 696615, 4528526; 696621, 4528525; 696627, 4528523; 696632, 
4528519; 696636, 4528513; 696636, 4528510; 696636, 4528503; 696636, 
4528494; 696634, 4528488; 696631, 4528469; 696648, 4528449; 696653, 
4528447; 696660, 4528446; 696669, 4528446; 696677, 4528444; 696687, 
4528438; 696695, 4528432; 696706, 4528426; 696711, 4528423; 696717, 
4528422; 696723, 4528420; 696726, 4528419; 696728, 4528418; 696737, 
4528422; 696742, 4528424; 696745, 4528426; 696750, 4528431; 696754, 
4528437; 696758, 4528443; 696761, 4528447; 696765, 4528449; 696768, 
4528450; 696774, 4528449; 696782, 4528447; 696787, 4528446; 696794, 
4528443; 696801, 4528438; 696806, 4528433; 696810, 4528427; 696814, 
4528420; 696816, 4528415; 696816, 4528381; 696829, 4528377; 696832, 
4528376; 696834, 4528376; 696837, 4528375; 696837, 4528374; 696841, 
4528383; 696843, 4528385; 696845, 4528389; 696853, 4528399; 696854, 
4528401; 696857, 4528403; 696862, 4528403; 696868, 4528402; 696879, 
4528398; 696885, 4528395; 696889, 4528392; 696892, 4528388; 696893, 
4528385; 696893, 4528382; 696892, 4528378; 696890, 4528375; 696887, 
4528370; 696884, 4528365; 696878, 4528354; 696888, 4528342; 696892, 
4528334; 696896, 4528325; 696899, 4528314; 696903, 4528307; 696909, 
4528303; 696917, 4528299; 696929, 4528297; 696942, 4528297; 696954, 
4528297; 696966, 4528297; 696979, 4528298; 696989, 4528299; 696999, 
4528298; 697009, 4528298; 697017, 4528297; 697027, 4528295; 697034, 
4528294; 697041, 4528293; 697046, 4528293; 697048, 4528292; 697060, 
4528288; 697063, 4528289; 697067, 4528291; 697073, 4528293; 697078, 
4528293; 697081, 4528293; 697083, 4528294; 697089, 4528292; 697095, 
4528291; 697100, 4528291; 697109, 4528290; 697121, 4528287; 697130, 
4528287; 697139, 4528288; 697150, 4528290; 697159, 4528294; 697170, 
4528298; 697181, 4528301; 697192, 4528301; 697203, 4528301; 697213, 
4528299; 697221, 4528297; 697233, 4528296; 697242, 4528296; 697252, 
4528300; 697261, 4528305; 697268, 4528309; 697279, 4528312; 697288, 
4528313; 697298, 4528311; 697304, 4528309; 697309, 4528306; 697314, 
4528302; 697318, 4528298; 697320, 4528293; 697323, 4528288; 697324, 
4528281; 697325, 4528268; 697331, 4528262; 697339, 4528259; 697347, 
4528259; 697354, 4528258; 697361, 4528259; 697367, 4528263; 697376, 
4528270; 697383, 4528277; 697389, 4528288; 697395, 4528305; 697399, 
4528316; 697403, 4528324; 697411, 4528325; 697418, 4528323; 697423, 
4528318; 697425, 4528311; 697428, 4528299; 697432, 4528289; 697438, 
4528286; 697447, 4528285; 697458, 4528287; 697470, 4528289; 697480, 
4528294; 697495, 4528299; 697509, 4528301; 697519, 4528299; 697525, 
4528296; 697529, 4528290; 697532, 4528281; 697536, 4528268; 697542, 
4528256; 697547, 4528249; 697562, 4528239; 697579, 4528232; 697584, 
4528230; 697590, 4528227; 697595, 4528223; 697598, 4528217; 697600, 
4528203; 697605, 4528192; 697608, 4528183; 697614, 4528174; 697617, 
4528166; 697618, 4528159; 697613, 4528147; 697605, 4528139; 697592, 
4528134; 697582, 4528133; 697566, 4528133; 697557, 4528136; 697550, 
4528140; 697543, 4528147; 697539, 4528156; 697536, 4528161; 697533, 
4528167; 697530, 4528172; 697525, 4528177; 697520, 4528180; 697467, 
4528169; 697446, 4528160; 697445, 4528159; 697441, 4528151; 697436, 
4528141; 697425, 4528126; 697420, 4528114; 697417, 4528103; 697413, 
4528090; 697408, 4528075; 697406, 4528064; 697402, 4528048; 697395, 
4528034; 697388, 4528026; 697379, 4528022; 697373, 4528020; 697368, 
4528015; 697361, 4528010; 697352, 4528011; 697346, 4528020; 697335, 
4528021; 697330, 4528023; 697327, 4528028; 697326, 4528037; 697329, 
4528059; 697330, 4528066; 697329, 4528076; 697324, 4528087; 697318, 
4528101; 697314, 4528111; 697311, 4528120; 697307, 4528127; 697300, 
4528134; 697294, 4528138; 697286, 4528139; 697279, 4528138; 697270, 
4528137; 697264, 4528136; 697257, 4528134; 697251, 4528133; 697246, 
4528131; 697241, 4528128; 697237, 4528118; 697238, 4528108; 697240, 
4528101; 697241, 4528092; 697241, 4528087; 697238, 4528083; 697235, 
4528079; 697250, 4528075; 697252, 4528073; 697255, 4528063; 697253, 
4528045; 697251, 4528039; 697245, 4528032; 697242, 4528025; 697241, 
4528015; 697241, 4528004; 697234, 4527993; 697228, 4527991; 697224, 
4527990; 697220, 4527992; 697215, 4527995; 697211, 4527999; 697208, 
4528004; 697198, 4528001; 697192, 4527998; 697187, 4527997; 697185, 
4527997; 697181, 4527997; 697174, 4527993; 697169, 4527990; 697160, 
4527984; 697150, 4527984; 697139, 4527991; 697126, 4527999; 697117, 
4528005; 697109, 4528013; 697093, 4528026; 697088, 4528031; 697083, 
4528036; 697080, 4528044; 697078, 4528052; 697077, 4528063; 697077, 
4528069; 697071, 4528076; 697065, 4528079; 697060, 4528077; 697055, 
4528074; 697050, 4528072; 697042, 4528068; 697032, 4528066; 697026, 
4528067; 697012, 4528075; 696994, 4528097; 696985, 4528109; 696980, 
4528117; 696973, 4528131; 696970, 4528130; 696968, 4528129; 696961, 
4528130; 696957, 4528131; 696955, 4528132; 696948, 4528140; 696934, 
4528143; 696927, 4528141; 696918, 4528138; 696910, 4528137; 696899, 
4528138; 696889, 4528138; 696878, 4528139; 696868, 4528138; 696859, 
4528138; 696852, 4528137; 696847, 4528136; 696838, 4528134; 696832, 
4528132; 696827, 4528129; 696823, 4528129; 696820, 4528128; 696824, 
4528116; 696826, 4528112; 696828, 4528106; 696828, 4528099; 696822, 
4528096; 696812, 4528089; 696800, 4528083; 696786, 4528074; 696779, 
4528068; 696771, 4528063; 696763, 4528059; 696758, 4528055; 696756, 
4528052; 696756, 4528046; 696756, 4528038; 696756, 4528033; 696755, 
4528027; 696751, 4528022; 696743, 4528020; 696734, 4528019; 696728, 
4528021; 696719, 4528029; 696713, 4528019; 696713, 4528011; 696714, 
4528004; 696715, 4527998; 696717, 4527993; 696722, 4527987; 696727, 
4527984; 696730, 4527983; 696733, 4527982; 696736, 4527981; 696740, 
4527980; 696744, 4527978; 696745, 4527977; 696746, 4527974; 696746, 
4527974; 696735, 4527969; 696734, 4527968; 696802, 4527881; 696803, 
4527883; 696809, 4527891; 696812, 4527895; 696819, 4527909; 696826, 
4527916; 696827, 4527921; 696829, 4527929; 696831, 4527936; 696837, 
4527946; 696843, 4527955; 696852, 4527968; 696860, 4527981; 696867, 
4527990; 696872, 4527998; 696877, 4528005; 696884, 4528011; 696894, 
4528018; 696901, 4528021; 696909, 4528022; 696917, 4528021; 696923, 
4528018; 696928, 4528016; 696937, 4528014; 696944, 4528014; 696948, 
4528016; 696951, 4528018; 696955, 4528021; 696960, 4528023; 696972, 
4528022; 696980, 4528019; 696984, 4528018; 696986, 4528017; 696992, 
4528017; 696998, 4528015; 697005,

[[Page 363]]

4528012; 697012, 4528009; 697018, 4528008; 697022, 4528005; 697025, 
4527999; 697027, 4527992; 697026, 4527986; 697025, 4527982; 697023, 
4527980; 697019, 4527978; 697017, 4527977; 697007, 4527976; 697000, 
4527963; 696996, 4527958; 696992, 4527952; 696987, 4527944; 696977, 
4527936; 696972, 4527935; 696964, 4527936; 696960, 4527937; 696956, 
4527940; 696953, 4527947; 696954, 4527956; 696959, 4527963; 696965, 
4527967; 696968, 4527970; 696970, 4527974; 696970, 4527978; 696970, 
4527986; 696969, 4527987; 696966, 4527988; 696963, 4527989; 696959, 
4527991; 696957, 4527991; 696945, 4527991; 696943, 4527992; 696940, 
4527993; 696937, 4527994; 696934, 4527996; 696930, 4527996; 696924, 
4527996; 696917, 4527996; 696911, 4527996; 696904, 4527994; 696899, 
4527990; 696894, 4527985; 696887, 4527977; 696881, 4527965; 696876, 
4527957; 696870, 4527944; 696864, 4527931; 696862, 4527922; 696858, 
4527916; 696850, 4527906; 696850, 4527901; 696846, 4527891; 696840, 
4527879; 696835, 4527869; 696825, 4527856; 696824, 4527855; 696872, 
4527797; 696761, 4527763; 696356, 4527948; 696344, 4527943; 696334, 
4527942; 696329, 4527943; 696321, 4527944; 696315, 4527946; 696276, 
4527939; 696274, 4527938; 696269, 4527938; 696264, 4527936; 696256, 
4527936; 696244, 4527936; 696235, 4527937; 696226, 4527940; 696217, 
4527946; 696213, 4527954; 696210, 4527962; 696208, 4527973; 696206, 
4527985; 696208, 4527996; 696212, 4528005; 696219, 4528017; 696224, 
4528024; 696231, 4528032; 696239, 4528040; 696247, 4528048; 696251, 
4528053; 696259, 4528081; 696257, 4528083; 696253, 4528084; 696247, 
4528085; 696242, 4528086; 696229, 4528085; 696219, 4528091; 696213, 
4528096; 696209, 4528101; 696204, 4528108; 696201, 4528114; 696198, 
4528120; 696136, 4528145; 696001, 4528185; 695847, 4528311; 695845, 
4528311; 695835, 4528310; 695827, 4528311; 695818, 4528315; 695811, 
4528320; 695803, 4528325; 695789, 4528338; 695776, 4528351; 695770, 
4528359; 695763, 4528367; 695747, 4528396; 695745, 4528408; 695747, 
4528419; 695751, 4528430; 695757, 4528440; 695762, 4528448; 695773, 
4528461; 695787, 4528477; 695795, 4528482; 695806, 4528491; 695808, 
4528492; 695825, 4528576; 695777, 4528860; 695771, 4528866; 695764, 
4528873; 695755, 4528879; 695747, 4528885; 695738, 4528892; 695733, 
4528897; 695727, 4528903; 695723, 4528910; 695722, 4528911; 695720, 
4528914; 695716, 4528917; 695715, 4528918; 695714, 4528919; 695700, 
4528914; 695681, 4528930; 695672, 4528934; 695658, 4528938; 695649, 
4528942; 695642, 4528946; 695638, 4528951; 695632, 4528953; 695626, 
4528957; 695621, 4528960; 695611, 4528964; 695618, 4528976; 695622, 
4528982; 695627, 4528989; 695633, 4528994; 695638, 4529000; 695647, 
4529007; 695656, 4529011; 695666, 4529015; 695676, 4529020; 695685, 
4529022; 695697, 4529024; 695709, 4529025; 695719, 4529027; 695728, 
4529027; 695737, 4529028; 695746, 4529029; 695754, 4529028; 695760, 
4529028; 695768, 4529026; 695775, 4529022; 695782, 4529016; 695786, 
4529012; 695794, 4529004; 695798, 4528996; 695802, 4528989; 695804, 
4528983; 695804, 4528978; 695806, 4528970; 695809, 4528963; 695810, 
4528957; 695810, 4528954; 695822, 4528886; 695825, 4528870; 695827, 
4528863; 695833, 4528852; 695839, 4528843; 695848, 4528836; 695857, 
4528833; 695867, 4528833; 695878, 4528831; 695891, 4528827; 695900, 
4528824; 695913, 4528822; 695926, 4528821; 695935, 4528820; 695945, 
4528820; 695954, 4528822; 695963, 4528826; 695968, 4528831; 695974, 
4528839; 695980, 4528847; 695984, 4528854; 695987, 4528862; 695990, 
4528872; 695990, 4528884; 695989, 4528895; 695986, 4528909; 695984, 
4528923; 695981, 4528937; 695977, 4528950; 695976, 4528962; 695977, 
4528974; 695978, 4528980; 695980, 4528986; 695983, 4528991; 695986, 
4528996; 695990, 4529000; 695994, 4529000; 696000, 4528997; 696004, 
4528991; 696007, 4528986; 696014, 4528982; 696019, 4528983; 696026, 
4528987; 696029, 4528994; 696031, 4528999; 696033, 4529001; 696038, 
4529005; 696042, 4529005; 696044, 4529004; 696070, 4529040; 696070, 
4529042; 696074, 4529048; 696079, 4529055; 696086, 4529060; 696094, 
4529067; 696101, 4529072; 696108, 4529077; 696116, 4529083; 696138, 
4529097; 696145, 4529105; 696151, 4529113; 696157, 4529123; 696162, 
4529129; 696166, 4529136; 696170, 4529143; 696173, 4529151; 696178, 
4529164; 696182, 4529176; 696184, 4529188; 696185, 4529203; 696187, 
4529219; 696187, 4529234; 696186, 4529244; 696188, 4529269; 696187, 
4529280; 696186, 4529296; 696186, 4529309; 696186, 4529320; 696187, 
4529328; 696187, 4529339; 696190, 4529348; 696191, 4529354; 696191, 
4529361; 696191, 4529365; 696192, 4529367; 696192, 4529371; 696192, 
4529373; 696191, 4529382; 696192, 4529386; 696191, 4529389; 696191, 
4529394; 696191, 4529398; 696185, 4529413; 696181, 4529426; 696183, 
4529438; 696185, 4529448; 696190, 4529456; 696193, 4529459; 696198, 
4529461; 696205, 4529462; 696215, 4529459; 696223, 4529454; 696230, 
4529447; 696238, 4529440; 696246, 4529435; 696257, 4529436; 696266, 
4529439; 696274, 4529444; 696276, 4529447; 696279, 4529450; 696282, 
4529453; 696283, 4529453; 696283, 4529460; 696285, 4529466; 696287, 
4529473; 696289, 4529484; 696291, 4529495; 696295, 4529505; 696301, 
4529515; 696304, 4529520; 696310, 4529522; 696318, 4529522; 696327, 
4529522; 696335, 4529523; 696349, 4529523; 696363, 4529524; 696376, 
4529523; 696382, 4529523.
    (ii) Tract 3b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695565, 4528354; 695574, 4528353; 695580, 4528356; 
695586, 4528359; 695593, 4528366; 695599, 4528367; 695606, 4528366; 
695613, 4528361; 695619, 4528360; 695624, 4528359; 695632, 4528361; 
695636, 4528361; 695641, 4528362; 695644, 4528361; 695663, 4528357; 
695667, 4528353; 695675, 4528347; 695683, 4528338; 695693, 4528329; 
695700, 4528322; 695707, 4528313; 695714, 4528306; 695722, 4528299; 
695730, 4528293; 695741, 4528289; 695752, 4528286; 695763, 4528282; 
695774, 4528277; 695782, 4528275; 695793, 4528271; 695802, 4528268; 
695811, 4528263; 695814, 4528261; 695818, 4528260; 695822, 4528258; 
695824, 4528256; 695826, 4528253; 695828, 4528245; 695826, 4528238; 
695823, 4528232; 695822, 4528228; 695816, 4528219; 695813, 4528210; 
695812, 4528203; 695811, 4528197; 695812, 4528189; 695814, 4528184; 
695816, 4528179; 695821, 4528175; 695827, 4528170; 695832, 4528167; 
695837, 4528167; 695842, 4528167; 695846, 4528165; 695846, 4528165; 
695848, 4528159; 695942, 4528107; 695946, 4528107; 695954, 4528106; 
695962, 4528102; 695966, 4528098; 695966, 4528094; 695966, 4528088; 
695965, 4528083; 695963, 4528079; 695960, 4528069; 695958, 4528060; 
695960, 4528050; 695963, 4528045; 695973, 4528042; 695981, 4528040; 
695995, 4528039; 696008, 4528037; 696014, 4528033; 696021, 4528028; 
696028, 4528022; 696037, 4528007; 696043, 4527992; 696046, 4527985;

[[Page 364]]

696047, 4527977; 696047, 4527969; 696043, 4527964; 696034, 4527955; 
696024, 4527948; 696014, 4527941; 696003, 4527934; 695996, 4527928; 
695987, 4527924; 695979, 4527917; 695972, 4527911; 695966, 4527904; 
695960, 4527891; 695954, 4527881; 695947, 4527866; 695939, 4527854; 
695928, 4527841; 695919, 4527832; 695909, 4527827; 695899, 4527824; 
695887, 4527822; 695876, 4527818; 695868, 4527809; 695864, 4527799; 
695859, 4527786; 695854, 4527776; 695845, 4527766; 695836, 4527757; 
695826, 4527751; 695811, 4527746; 695795, 4527744; 695783, 4527747; 
695774, 4527753; 695768, 4527757; 695761, 4527761; 695751, 4527760; 
695740, 4527755; 695731, 4527745; 695725, 4527736; 695718, 4527730; 
695708, 4527729; 695698, 4527729; 695685, 4527732; 695676, 4527733; 
695672, 4527733; 695669, 4527730; 695667, 4527728; 695654, 4527714; 
695652, 4527711; 695649, 4527707; 695648, 4527699; 695646, 4527689; 
695642, 4527680; 695638, 4527675; 695631, 4527673; 695625, 4527673; 
695620, 4527675; 695617, 4527677; 695600, 4527673; 695590, 4527663; 
695584, 4527659; 695575, 4527656; 695567, 4527654; 695559, 4527656; 
695553, 4527658; 695547, 4527664; 695541, 4527673; 695536, 4527682; 
695532, 4527693; 695529, 4527702; 695527, 4527706; 695522, 4527712; 
695518, 4527718; 695514, 4527722; 695506, 4527725; 695496, 4527728; 
695487, 4527733; 695483, 4527738; 695478, 4527750; 695476, 4527759; 
695476, 4527768; 695477, 4527785; 695481, 4527799; 695485, 4527813; 
695485, 4527827; 695485, 4527841; 695484, 4527866; 695482, 4527877; 
695480, 4527888; 695478, 4527897; 695476, 4527906; 695472, 4527914; 
695469, 4527921; 695462, 4527928; 695457, 4527936; 695450, 4527947; 
695443, 4527956; 695438, 4527965; 695434, 4527974; 695430, 4527984; 
695429, 4527991; 695429, 4528000; 695431, 4528012; 695432, 4528022; 
695435, 4528042; 695436, 4528050; 695437, 4528058; 695437, 4528065; 
695436, 4528070; 695434, 4528076; 695432, 4528080; 695428, 4528083; 
695422, 4528086; 695414, 4528088; 695404, 4528090; 695395, 4528093; 
695390, 4528094; 695383, 4528097; 695378, 4528100; 695373, 4528107; 
695368, 4528118; 695365, 4528132; 695364, 4528144; 695363, 4528151; 
695362, 4528155; 695360, 4528166; 695357, 4528172; 695354, 4528179; 
695340, 4528211; 695337, 4528220; 695334, 4528228; 695332, 4528237; 
695330, 4528244; 695329, 4528253; 695331, 4528261; 695332, 4528269; 
695334, 4528275; 695336, 4528280; 695340, 4528284; 695343, 4528285; 
695347, 4528287; 695353, 4528287; 695360, 4528288; 695371, 4528287; 
695382, 4528284; 695393, 4528278; 695403, 4528271; 695412, 4528266; 
695424, 4528264; 695434, 4528266; 695443, 4528270; 695450, 4528279; 
695453, 4528289; 695457, 4528300; 695461, 4528308; 695466, 4528314; 
695472, 4528320; 695476, 4528326; 695482, 4528336; 695489, 4528346; 
695495, 4528354; 695502, 4528364; 695507, 4528368; 695515, 4528368; 
695525, 4528365; 695533, 4528363; 695542, 4528361; 695555, 4528356; 
695565, 4528354.
    (iii) Tract 3c. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695160, 4528323; 695149, 4528321; 695141, 4528322; 
695137, 4528325; 695132, 4528330; 695129, 4528332; 695119, 4528334; 
695103, 4528336; 695093, 4528337; 695084, 4528340; 695076, 4528344; 
695070, 4528348; 695064, 4528355; 695060, 4528363; 695058, 4528370; 
695056, 4528380; 695055, 4528388; 695057, 4528396; 695062, 4528410; 
695066, 4528420; 695072, 4528429; 695077, 4528435; 695083, 4528441; 
695091, 4528446; 695098, 4528450; 695107, 4528452; 695115, 4528454; 
695120, 4528455; 695127, 4528456; 695131, 4528455; 695139, 4528455; 
695146, 4528453; 695150, 4528451; 695155, 4528448; 695167, 4528438; 
695175, 4528426; 695180, 4528420; 695184, 4528417; 695187, 4528416; 
695194, 4528412; 695204, 4528405; 695209, 4528403; 695218, 4528401; 
695227, 4528401; 695236, 4528401; 695243, 4528400; 695252, 4528397; 
695259, 4528393; 695264, 4528388; 695268, 4528381; 695269, 4528370; 
695265, 4528362; 695260, 4528356; 695247, 4528349; 695237, 4528345; 
695223, 4528343; 695209, 4528340; 695200, 4528337; 695190, 4528334; 
695180, 4528330; 695169, 4528326; 695160, 4528323.
    (iv) Tract 3d. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695576, 4528864; 695583, 4528864; 695587, 4528864; 
695595, 4528864; 695602, 4528863; 695606, 4528862; 695608, 4528861; 
695613, 4528857; 695628, 4528846; 695637, 4528842; 695645, 4528841; 
695652, 4528840; 695660, 4528839; 695666, 4528838; 695673, 4528832; 
695677, 4528826; 695681, 4528818; 695686, 4528807; 695690, 4528798; 
695693, 4528790; 695696, 4528781; 695698, 4528771; 695698, 4528763; 
695700, 4528752; 695703, 4528743; 695706, 4528737; 695710, 4528728; 
695711, 4528721; 695710, 4528712; 695706, 4528705; 695697, 4528698; 
695688, 4528695; 695675, 4528694; 695662, 4528694; 695648, 4528697; 
695633, 4528700; 695616, 4528704; 695601, 4528706; 695588, 4528707; 
695576, 4528704; 695562, 4528703; 695551, 4528704; 695541, 4528705; 
695535, 4528708; 695531, 4528714; 695530, 4528725; 695533, 4528735; 
695537, 4528741; 695545, 4528748; 695553, 4528751; 695563, 4528754; 
695567, 4528757; 695571, 4528763; 695572.
    (v) Note: Map of Unit 3 is provided at paragraph (7)(vi) of this 
entry.
    (9) Unit 4: Jack Sinn--Rock Creek, Lancaster and Saunders Counties, 
Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 4a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 698696, 4546073; 698716, 4546073; 698725, 4546074; 
698733, 4546072; 698745, 4546068; 698753, 4546065; 698769, 4546054; 
698781, 4546042; 698795, 4546021; 698802, 4546011; 698806, 4546005; 
698811, 4546003; 698816, 4546001; 698820, 4546002; 698827, 4546004; 
698832, 4546006; 698836, 4546006; 698844, 4546005; 698850, 4546004; 
698855, 4546005; 698862, 4546007; 698866, 4546009; 698869, 4546012; 
698874, 4546020; 698877, 4546027; 698883, 4546036; 698887, 4546039; 
698893, 4546042; 698899, 4546045; 698902, 4546045; 698909, 4546044; 
698919, 4546038; 698929, 4546024; 698941, 4546017; 698948, 4546013; 
698955, 4546010; 698960, 4546009; 698966, 4546008; 698969, 4546007; 
698978, 4546005; 698985, 4546009; 698993, 4546013; 699000, 4546017; 
699008, 4546019; 699018, 4546023; 699030, 4546027; 699039, 4546027; 
699046, 4546027; 699053, 4546025; 699061, 4546021; 699072, 4546017; 
699083, 4546016; 699089, 4546012; 699093, 4546007; 699096, 4546002; 
699097, 4545995; 699097, 4545991; 699094, 4545986; 699090, 4545982; 
699086, 4545978; 699080, 4545975; 699072, 4545974; 699068, 4545973; 
699060, 4545971; 699054, 4545968; 699049, 4545965; 699045, 4545959; 
699040,

[[Page 365]]

4545952; 699037, 4545945; 699032, 4545935; 699026, 4545928; 699020, 
4545925; 699011, 4545921; 699001, 4545916; 698995, 4545914; 698988, 
4545914; 698979, 4545913; 698973, 4545909; 698967, 4545906; 698958, 
4545901; 698948, 4545885; 698943, 4545878; 698936, 4545861; 698934, 
4545838; 698946, 4545838; 698961, 4545838; 698970, 4545841; 698982, 
4545846; 698997, 4545852; 699012, 4545860; 699031, 4545867; 699038, 
4545858; 699044, 4545846; 699046, 4545839; 699047, 4545831; 699047, 
4545823; 699045, 4545820; 699042, 4545816; 699039, 4545814; 699030, 
4545812; 699023, 4545807; 699013, 4545806; 699003, 4545806; 698983, 
4545797; 698975, 4545798; 698967, 4545796; 698961, 4545793; 698954, 
4545788; 698951, 4545785; 698944, 4545778; 698934, 4545764; 698912, 
4545736; 698906, 4545722; 698899, 4545717; 698898, 4545710; 698897, 
4545701; 698898, 4545694; 698898, 4545690; 698900, 4545682; 698900, 
4545672; 698901, 4545661; 698902, 4545653; 698903, 4545648; 698903, 
4545648; 698907, 4545646; 698914, 4545647; 698926, 4545651; 698935, 
4545654; 698953, 4545653; 698950, 4545640; 698949, 4545625; 698946, 
4545603; 698943, 4545580; 698939, 4545557; 698934, 4545540; 698926, 
4545524; 698921, 4545512; 698913, 4545507; 698901, 4545503; 698888, 
4545503; 698874, 4545504; 698866, 4545489; 698863, 4545484; 698859, 
4545479; 698854, 4545474; 698850, 4545474; 698845, 4545472; 698838, 
4545471; 698831, 4545469; 698813, 4545460; 698795, 4545444; 698787, 
4545439; 698780, 4545428; 698775, 4545420; 698772, 4545414; 698770, 
4545406; 698770, 4545397; 698771, 4545387; 698774, 4545362; 698779, 
4545340; 698780, 4545335; 698781, 4545329; 698781, 4545321; 698782, 
4545310; 698782, 4545299; 698781, 4545289; 698780, 4545274; 698780, 
4545260; 698782, 4545250; 698784, 4545236; 698785, 4545228; 698783, 
4545215; 698782, 4545207; 698780, 4545191; 698776, 4545175; 698768, 
4545149; 698765, 4545139; 698762, 4545130; 698761, 4545119; 698761, 
4545109; 698762, 4545086; 698763, 4545077; 698764, 4545065; 698763, 
4545058; 698760, 4545049; 698757, 4545044; 698744, 4545028; 698724, 
4545013; 698713, 4545003; 698709, 4544998; 698705, 4544992; 698701, 
4544985; 698699, 4544978; 698697, 4544972; 698697, 4544964; 698694, 
4544959; 698692, 4544956; 698686, 4544953; 698676, 4544946; 698669, 
4544942; 698662, 4544939; 698654, 4544933; 698646, 4544928; 698639, 
4544920; 698634, 4544910; 698628, 4544890; 698620, 4544868; 698628, 
4544864; 698632, 4544860; 698635, 4544852; 698636, 4544846; 698636, 
4544841; 698632, 4544838; 698629, 4544836; 698626, 4544836; 698619, 
4544837; 698610, 4544849; 698516, 4544847; 698412, 4544848; 698414, 
4544857; 698415, 4544870; 698416, 4544873; 698421, 4544895; 698411, 
4544904; 698404, 4544909; 698402, 4544924; 698401, 4545010; 698401, 
4545076; 698400, 4545183; 698403, 4545252; 698403, 4545337; 698403, 
4545408; 698401, 4545495; 698402, 4545558; 698406, 4545612; 698403, 
4545663; 698402, 4545729; 698404, 4545810; 698406, 4545866; 698406, 
4545890; 698406, 4545932; 698405, 4545976; 698407, 4546025; 698419, 
4546030; 698426, 4546032; 698430, 4546034; 698444, 4546040; 698453, 
4546042; 698466, 4546043; 698478, 4546040; 698495, 4546033; 698504, 
4546029; 698509, 4546030; 698517, 4546031; 698523, 4546035; 698528, 
4546037; 698533, 4546043; 698538, 4546048; 698542, 4546053; 698549, 
4546060; 698556, 4546069; 698562, 4546076; 698573, 4546086; 698586, 
4546095; 698602, 4546098; 698615, 4546101; 698625, 4546104; 698634, 
4546102; 698640, 4546101; 698650, 4546097; 698658, 4546092; 698667, 
4546086; 698674, 4546080; 698684, 4546075; 698696, 4546073.
    (ii) Tract 4b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 700784, 4546113; 700789, 4546099; 700792, 4546088; 
700794, 4546075; 700791, 4546060; 700787, 4546048; 700783, 4546038; 
700774, 4546032; 700758, 4546027; 700740, 4546022; 700727, 4546015; 
700715, 4546004; 700704, 4545992; 700695, 4545976; 700689, 4545963; 
700682, 4545950; 700674, 4545938; 700660, 4545924; 700646, 4545915; 
700632, 4545907; 700612, 4545902; 700591, 4545899; 700573, 4545895; 
700557, 4545890; 700547, 4545880; 700540, 4545867; 700538, 4545853; 
700537, 4545839; 700531, 4545824; 700524, 4545818; 700506, 4545810; 
700493, 4545806; 700478, 4545806; 700466, 4545808; 700459, 4545814; 
700452, 4545822; 700445, 4545832; 700439, 4545839; 700429, 4545843; 
700415, 4545844; 700402, 4545842; 700390, 4545844; 700380, 4545850; 
700373, 4545858; 700366, 4545865; 700359, 4545872; 700352, 4545874; 
700342, 4545877; 700318, 4545875; 700307, 4545871; 700293, 4545865; 
700281, 4545861; 700268, 4545856; 700256, 4545856; 700244, 4545860; 
700237, 4545861; 700215, 4545858; 700200, 4545855; 700179, 4545843; 
700165, 4545836; 700153, 4545832; 700142, 4545833; 700129, 4545831; 
700116, 4545825; 700109, 4545819; 700094, 4545809; 700081, 4545806; 
700066, 4545809; 700049, 4545807; 700038, 4545805; 700027, 4545805; 
700018, 4545808; 700016, 4545813; 700015, 4545822; 700017, 4545841; 
700023, 4545855; 700027, 4545866; 700034, 4545874; 700045, 4545879; 
700059, 4545879; 700069, 4545881; 700083, 4545887; 700097, 4545894; 
700112, 4545899; 700126, 4545902; 700144, 4545905; 700163, 4545906; 
700189, 4545903; 700209, 4545901; 700229, 4545900; 700249, 4545902; 
700264, 4545908; 700278, 4545915; 700288, 4545922; 700300, 4545928; 
700317, 4545936; 700361, 4545952; 700384, 4545961; 700398, 4545968; 
700411, 4545974; 700422, 4545982; 700433, 4545989; 700443, 4545994; 
700454, 4545994; 700466, 4545993; 700481, 4545994; 700490, 4545996; 
700497, 4546000; 700500, 4546008; 700500, 4546018; 700499, 4546028; 
700496, 4546037; 700491, 4546044; 700481, 4546050; 700468, 4546052; 
700458, 4546055; 700449, 4546060; 700445, 4546067; 700442, 4546077; 
700443, 4546089; 700444, 4546095; 700450, 4546102; 700468, 4546109; 
700477, 4546113; 700486, 4546115; 700495, 4546115; 700508, 4546116; 
700519, 4546118; 700531, 4546120; 700545, 4546123; 700559, 4546125; 
700572, 4546123; 700581, 4546122; 700591, 4546124; 700598, 4546126; 
700605, 4546128; 700615, 4546132; 700637, 4546116; 700652, 4546111; 
700668, 4546112; 700677, 4546114; 700688, 4546118; 700694, 4546123; 
700699, 4546129; 700704, 4546132; 700713, 4546135; 700727, 4546136; 
700740, 4546133; 700752, 4546131; 700763, 4546129; 700773, 4546127; 
700779, 4546122; 700784, 4546113.
    (iii) Tract 4c. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 699777, 4546178; 699783, 4546168; 699790, 4546156; 
699798, 4546147; 699810, 4546141; 699822, 4546136; 699830, 4546132; 
699841, 4546126; 699849, 4546120; 699855, 4546111; 699857, 4546100; 
699858, 4546088; 699853, 4546074; 699845, 4546058; 699834, 4546045; 
699826, 4546036;

[[Page 366]]

699816, 4546025; 699803, 4546014; 699794, 4546005; 699784, 4545993; 
699776, 4545979; 699773, 4545968; 699772, 4545962; 699775, 4545951; 
699779, 4545946; 699787, 4545940; 699795, 4545937; 699798, 4545937; 
699801, 4545934; 699805, 4545929; 699784, 4545920; 699778, 4545920; 
699770, 4545918; 699766, 4545914; 699762, 4545911; 699746, 4545927; 
699744, 4545930; 699740, 4545939; 699739, 4545947; 699742, 4545963; 
699748, 4545977; 699754, 4545988; 699763, 4545998; 699775, 4546009; 
699785, 4546019; 699793, 4546026; 699801, 4546036; 699807, 4546044; 
699811, 4546050; 699815, 4546060; 699821, 4546068; 699825, 4546078; 
699826, 4546083; 699826, 4546090; 699825, 4546097; 699820, 4546103; 
699809, 4546109; 699797, 4546110; 699788, 4546113; 699782, 4546122; 
699779, 4546133; 699775, 4546138; 699768, 4546140; 699760, 4546144; 
699756, 4546150; 699754, 4546158; 699754, 4546165; 699753, 4546170; 
699752, 4546170; 699744, 4546172; 699733, 4546169; 699724, 4546161; 
699717, 4546154; 699709, 4546149; 699696, 4546145; 699684, 4546142; 
699671, 4546139; 699661, 4546135; 699655, 4546129; 699646, 4546118; 
699639, 4546105; 699639, 4546098; 699643, 4546081; 699644, 4546073; 
699642, 4546065; 699641, 4546059; 699634, 4546045; 699627, 4546029; 
699623, 4546017; 699621, 4546002; 699618, 4545991; 699616, 4545983; 
699615, 4545977; 699611, 4545972; 699608, 4545968; 699602, 4545963; 
699600, 4545963; 699594, 4545963; 699588, 4545962; 699583, 4545964; 
699577, 4545965; 699571, 4545968; 699565, 4545972; 699560, 4545978; 
699555, 4545986; 699552, 4545991; 699546, 4546008; 699542, 4546024; 
699540, 4546038; 699536, 4546055; 699527, 4546075; 699521, 4546089; 
699511, 4546100; 699504, 4546107; 699497, 4546111; 699484, 4546114; 
699457, 4546112; 699449, 4546112; 699439, 4546109; 699428, 4546104; 
699423, 4546100; 699418, 4546095; 699414, 4546089; 699409, 4546081; 
699406, 4546066; 699404, 4546061; 699402, 4546059; 699399, 4546060; 
699395, 4546062; 699392, 4546063; 699390, 4546068; 699387, 4546076; 
699386, 4546084; 699386, 4546094; 699386, 4546102; 699388, 4546113; 
699395, 4546124; 699399, 4546131; 699403, 4546136; 699410, 4546142; 
699433, 4546149; 699455, 4546150; 699467, 4546154; 699481, 4546152; 
699499, 4546146; 699506, 4546143; 699513, 4546138; 699523, 4546129; 
699532, 4546120; 699537, 4546115; 699542, 4546104; 699547, 4546095; 
699550, 4546082; 699555, 4546069; 699561, 4546052; 699572, 4546024; 
699579, 4546008; 699584, 4546003; 699588, 4546000; 699601, 4546001; 
699601, 4546029; 699604, 4546036; 699606, 4546041; 699611, 4546053; 
699615, 4546065; 699616, 4546080; 699616, 4546097; 699617, 4546110; 
699619, 4546121; 699625, 4546131; 699632, 4546141; 699643, 4546150; 
699658, 4546154; 699667, 4546158; 699681, 4546165; 699691, 4546174; 
699700, 4546182; 699712, 4546189; 699722, 4546195; 699731, 4546198; 
699742, 4546199; 699753, 4546199; 699760, 4546194; 699767, 4546186; 
699777, 4546178.
    (iv) Tract 4d. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 701389, 4546232; 701381, 4546222; 701438, 4546226; 
701441, 4546228; 701446, 4546228; 701448, 4546228; 701457, 4546225; 
701461, 4546231; 701468, 4546239; 701472, 4546242; 701474, 4546244; 
701479, 4546248; 701482, 4546249; 701488, 4546249; 701492, 4546248; 
701495, 4546249; 701495, 4546249; 701505, 4546261; 701511, 4546263; 
701518, 4546264; 701525, 4546264; 701533, 4546261; 701539, 4546255; 
701544, 4546245; 701548, 4546238; 701555, 4546233; 701565, 4546229; 
701573, 4546227; 701580, 4546223; 701586, 4546218; 701589, 4546212; 
701589, 4546206; 701582, 4546198; 701583, 4546185; 701583, 4546184; 
701596, 4546181; 701599, 4546177; 701600, 4546158; 701598, 4546144; 
701597, 4546134; 701594, 4546123; 701591, 4546115; 701586, 4546108; 
701579, 4546104; 701567, 4546101; 701551, 4546099; 701537, 4546098; 
701521, 4546092; 701511, 4546082; 701503, 4546070; 701493, 4546055; 
701489, 4546048; 701481, 4546038; 701474, 4546028; 701467, 4546018; 
701460, 4546009; 701452, 4546001; 701447, 4545998; 701444, 4545995; 
701439, 4545995; 701435, 4545999; 701432, 4546005; 701429, 4546010; 
701427, 4546018; 701425, 4546023; 701427, 4546031; 701431, 4546039; 
701436, 4546047; 701440, 4546055; 701443, 4546062; 701444, 4546070; 
701444, 4546081; 701443, 4546084; 701436, 4546089; 701429, 4546092; 
701422, 4546097; 701418, 4546104; 701414, 4546116; 701413, 4546124; 
701414, 4546135; 701418, 4546148; 701421, 4546155; 701425, 4546164; 
701428, 4546171; 701431, 4546176; 701432, 4546180; 701432, 4546188; 
701432, 4546189; 701369, 4546194; 701369, 4546194; 701357, 4546193; 
701343, 4546193; 701331, 4546194; 701322, 4546195; 701275, 4546175; 
701283, 4546167; 701290, 4546157; 701299, 4546147; 701308, 4546138; 
701315, 4546130; 701320, 4546123; 701323, 4546119; 701326, 4546110; 
701329, 4546098; 701329, 4546091; 701340, 4546095; 701342, 4546094; 
701345, 4546092; 701347, 4546090; 701349, 4546085; 701352, 4546079; 
701353, 4546068; 701351, 4546056; 701348, 4546043; 701342, 4546027; 
701333, 4546014; 701322, 4546003; 701306, 4545995; 701291, 4545988; 
701270, 4545982; 701250, 4545977; 701228, 4545972; 701208, 4545967; 
701185, 4545960; 701165, 4545955; 701148, 4545951; 701139, 4545948; 
701132, 4545947; 701126, 4545949; 701122, 4545951; 701120, 4545954; 
701119, 4545958; 701119, 4545963; 701131, 4545970; 701145, 4545976; 
701159, 4545982; 701169, 4545990; 701174, 4545996; 701177, 4546003; 
701181, 4546010; 701191, 4546014; 701207, 4546018; 701216, 4546022; 
701223, 4546028; 701226, 4546034; 701224, 4546042; 701219, 4546046; 
701209, 4546051; 701207, 4546055; 701206, 4546061; 701211, 4546069; 
701221, 4546072; 701231, 4546073; 701240, 4546074; 701252, 4546077; 
701248, 4546092; 701248, 4546100; 701248, 4546109; 701250, 4546119; 
701251, 4546125; 701252, 4546130; 701253, 4546135; 701252, 4546142; 
701249, 4546147; 701242, 4546154; 701229, 4546161; 701216, 4546167; 
701205, 4546172; 701195, 4546177; 701187, 4546180; 701182, 4546182; 
701180, 4546184; 701180, 4546187; 701178, 4546191; 701179, 4546194; 
701182, 4546198; 701188, 4546202; 701199, 4546202; 701209, 4546200; 
701220, 4546197; 701292, 4546219; 701292, 4546222; 701295, 4546226; 
701302, 4546230; 701307, 4546230; 701312, 4546229; 701317, 4546228; 
701321, 4546225; 701328, 4546224; 701336, 4546219; 701344, 4546231; 
701344, 4546236; 701342, 4546241; 701341, 4546245; 701341, 4546254; 
701344, 4546264; 701347, 4546272; 701353, 4546279; 701361, 4546284; 
701369, 4546288; 701378, 4546290; 701385, 4546290; 701392, 4546289; 
701397, 4546286; 701402, 4546280; 701404, 4546274; 701405, 4546267; 
701405, 4546260; 701402, 4546251; 701398, 4546243; 701394, 4546237; 
701389, 4546232.
    (v) Tract 4e. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM)

[[Page 367]]

Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 
703097, 4546215; 703095, 4546208; 703095, 4546196; 703096, 4546183; 
703098, 4546171; 703101, 4546160; 703107, 4546150; 703112, 4546145; 
703122, 4546142; 703130, 4546142; 703136, 4546143; 703153, 4546145; 
703164, 4546146; 703171, 4546147; 703179, 4546148; 703189, 4546150; 
703194, 4546149; 703198, 4546146; 703200, 4546143; 703202, 4546138; 
703204, 4546131; 703204, 4546124; 703203, 4546118; 703201, 4546112; 
703199, 4546106; 703198, 4546100; 703202, 4546086; 703205, 4546074; 
703205, 4546074; 703161, 4546071; 703137, 4546072; 703137, 4546043; 
703157, 4546008; 703170, 4545997; 703168, 4545988; 703169, 4545981; 
703175, 4545979; 703181, 4545977; 703189, 4545974; 703197, 4545969; 
703198, 4545963; 703201, 4545949; 703208, 4545936; 703213, 4545921; 
703212, 4545906; 703208, 4545899; 703199, 4545894; 703191, 4545893; 
703185, 4545895; 703132, 4545967; 703084, 4546028; 703072, 4546066; 
703041, 4546051; 703009, 4546024; 702961, 4545994; 702924, 4545972; 
702914, 4545880; 702925, 4545838; 702923, 4545836; 702921, 4545825; 
702920, 4545812; 702922, 4545794; 702928, 4545784; 702930, 4545777; 
702929, 4545769; 702925, 4545763; 702921, 4545757; 702915, 4545754; 
702908, 4545750; 702899, 4545746; 702887, 4545742; 702876, 4545740; 
702865, 4545739; 702854, 4545741; 702837, 4545752; 702830, 4545759; 
702827, 4545766; 702826, 4545779; 702826, 4545780; 702856, 4545857; 
702872, 4545878; 702862, 4545934; 702848, 4545989; 702801, 4546000; 
702766, 4545977; 702742, 4545931; 702746, 4545886; 702751, 4545874; 
702750, 4545869; 702751, 4545853; 702753, 4545840; 702759, 4545827; 
702763, 4545819; 702762, 4545814; 702758, 4545808; 702754, 4545804; 
702747, 4545804; 702738, 4545807; 702731, 4545812; 702727, 4545818; 
702722, 4545829; 702717, 4545838; 702710, 4545844; 702705, 4545847; 
702693, 4545848; 702625, 4545934; 702526, 4545955; 702459, 4545968; 
702386, 4545999; 702363, 4545999; 702362, 4546000; 702357, 4546011; 
702352, 4546016; 702349, 4546021; 702344, 4546025; 702337, 4546029; 
702332, 4546031; 702321, 4546034; 702315, 4546036; 702307, 4546037; 
702301, 4546038; 702280, 4546038; 702266, 4546038; 702256, 4546036; 
702247, 4546032; 702238, 4546029; 702233, 4546024; 702229, 4546015; 
702229, 4546009; 702231, 4546003; 702235, 4545996; 702242, 4545992; 
702250, 4545989; 702261, 4545988; 702276, 4545986; 702290, 4545981; 
702295, 4545974; 702294, 4545969; 702290, 4545964; 702290, 4545960; 
702293, 4545955; 702302, 4545945; 702310, 4545936; 702317, 4545921; 
702318, 4545915; 702315, 4545907; 702313, 4545904; 702307, 4545902; 
702296, 4545901; 702283, 4545901; 702270, 4545902; 702258, 4545903; 
702245, 4545907; 702237, 4545911; 702234, 4545916; 702231, 4545927; 
702229, 4545939; 702227, 4545948; 702223, 4545957; 702217, 4545971; 
702210, 4545981; 702202, 4545988; 702192, 4545991; 702184, 4545993; 
702173, 4545994; 702159, 4545996; 702146, 4545999; 702136, 4546005; 
702127, 4546015; 702118, 4546023; 702108, 4546026; 702097, 4546025; 
702082, 4546025; 702073, 4546026; 702063, 4546031; 702059, 4546037; 
702049, 4546044; 702036, 4546047; 702024, 4546047; 702013, 4546044; 
701997, 4546040; 701981, 4546038; 701971, 4546039; 701961, 4546044; 
701953, 4546049; 701945, 4546054; 701935, 4546060; 701924, 4546066; 
701912, 4546073; 701900, 4546079; 701892, 4546086; 701891, 4546087; 
701886, 4546097; 701887, 4546104; 701890, 4546110; 701899, 4546114; 
701909, 4546117; 701915, 4546121; 701980, 4546084; 702085, 4546064; 
702113, 4546063; 702113, 4546063; 702113, 4546059; 702114, 4546056; 
702117, 4546054; 702119, 4546053; 702126, 4546052; 702133, 4546052; 
702140, 4546052; 702151, 4546054; 702159, 4546055; 702166, 4546057; 
702176, 4546061; 702184, 4546069; 702188, 4546075; 702187, 4546079; 
702184, 4546086; 702219, 4546104; 702250, 4546155; 702334, 4546162; 
702350, 4546138; 702357, 4546132; 702365, 4546130; 702379, 4546131; 
702392, 4546132; 702404, 4546130; 702415, 4546124; 702422, 4546117; 
702429, 4546110; 702450, 4546096; 702462, 4546097; 702476, 4546097; 
702490, 4546099; 702505, 4546099; 702516, 4546097; 702530, 4546096; 
702546, 4546095; 702562, 4546094; 702576, 4546096; 702590, 4546099; 
702607, 4546103; 702653, 4546101; 702665, 4546099; 702682, 4546100; 
702693, 4546103; 702710, 4546107; 702728, 4546110; 702741, 4546110; 
702758, 4546109; 702770, 4546104; 702780, 4546097; 702789, 4546089; 
702801, 4546085; 702816, 4546089; 702823, 4546094; 702828, 4546101; 
702838, 4546106; 702849, 4546109; 702860, 4546112; 702870, 4546117; 
702881, 4546126; 702887, 4546132; 702965, 4546131; 703012, 4546142; 
703030, 4546165; 703029, 4546188; 703041, 4546209; 703063, 4546216; 
703071, 4546209; 703072, 4546216; 703074, 4546227; 703077, 4546238; 
703079, 4546247; 703085, 4546253; 703094, 4546258; 703104, 4546260; 
703112, 4546261; 703119, 4546262; 703126, 4546264; 703130, 4546264; 
703136, 4546266; 703138, 4546268; 703140, 4546273; 703139, 4546281; 
703139, 4546289; 703140, 4546298; 703141, 4546306; 703143, 4546312; 
703146, 4546314; 703152, 4546317; 703156, 4546317; 703161, 4546317; 
703166, 4546315; 703169, 4546312; 703169, 4546306; 703168, 4546297; 
703169, 4546285; 703168, 4546271; 703162, 4546258; 703153, 4546249; 
703145, 4546244; 703133, 4546240; 703119, 4546234; 703110, 4546228; 
703104, 4546223; 703097, 4546215.
    (vi) Tract 4f. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 701018, 4546521; 701025, 4546516; 701031, 4546509; 
701035, 4546497; 701036, 4546487; 701039, 4546475; 701045, 4546464; 
701054, 4546454; 701069, 4546442; 701085, 4546431; 701121, 4546421; 
701139, 4546419; 701158, 4546417; 701174, 4546416; 701187, 4546415; 
701198, 4546413; 701208, 4546412; 701217, 4546408; 701220, 4546405; 
701222, 4546401; 701223, 4546396; 701223, 4546392; 701223, 4546388; 
701223, 4546384; 701223, 4546382; 701222, 4546378; 701211, 4546385; 
701207, 4546385; 701202, 4546384; 701196, 4546380; 701190, 4546369; 
701186, 4546360; 701180, 4546350; 701173, 4546344; 701167, 4546340; 
701156, 4546338; 701144, 4546337; 701137, 4546337; 701128, 4546338; 
701118, 4546336; 701108, 4546335; 701101, 4546336; 701096, 4546338; 
701086, 4546338; 701081, 4546324; 701077, 4546318; 701070, 4546312; 
701061, 4546306; 701049, 4546302; 701038, 4546299; 701027, 4546300; 
701016, 4546300; 701009, 4546295; 701003, 4546286; 700997, 4546280; 
700990, 4546274; 700979, 4546272; 700970, 4546273; 700963, 4546276; 
700953, 4546279; 700944, 4546280; 700935, 4546279; 700929, 4546277; 
700926, 4546274; 700918, 4546268; 700927, 4546263; 700930, 4546260; 
700932, 4546254; 700933, 4546247; 700931, 4546242; 700924, 4546236; 
700912, 4546231; 700903, 4546229; 700890, 4546228; 700879, 4546229; 
700866, 4546229; 700859, 4546230; 700854, 4546233; 700852, 4546236;

[[Page 368]]

700850, 4546243; 700851, 4546248; 700851, 4546255; 700848, 4546259; 
700836, 4546260; 700829, 4546259; 700822, 4546258; 700815, 4546257; 
700810, 4546258; 700809, 4546259; 700781, 4546246; 700768, 4546248; 
700763, 4546251; 700757, 4546258; 700750, 4546265; 700743, 4546268; 
700729, 4546271; 700718, 4546270; 700705, 4546268; 700695, 4546266; 
700684, 4546263; 700675, 4546258; 700670, 4546251; 700667, 4546243; 
700666, 4546231; 700662, 4546223; 700656, 4546217; 700645, 4546214; 
700635, 4546210; 700623, 4546199; 700614, 4546191; 700583, 4546171; 
700575, 4546169; 700566, 4546166; 700560, 4546164; 700554, 4546163; 
700547, 4546162; 700542, 4546166; 700540, 4546171; 700537, 4546178; 
700535, 4546184; 700533, 4546189; 700531, 4546193; 700528, 4546196; 
700525, 4546199; 700522, 4546200; 700517, 4546203; 700500, 4546195; 
700493, 4546194; 700485, 4546193; 700474, 4546192; 700466, 4546192; 
700459, 4546194; 700454, 4546197; 700448, 4546200; 700441, 4546201; 
700434, 4546199; 700425, 4546195; 700417, 4546191; 700408, 4546187; 
700398, 4546181; 700392, 4546179; 700385, 4546176; 700378, 4546174; 
700374, 4546173; 700373, 4546174; 700357, 4546150; 700351, 4546147; 
700341, 4546145; 700329, 4546142; 700320, 4546140; 700308, 4546138; 
700299, 4546133; 700292, 4546128; 700282, 4546124; 700275, 4546115; 
700271, 4546110; 700267, 4546107; 700261, 4546101; 700256, 4546099; 
700248, 4546096; 700245, 4546096; 700231, 4546087; 700223, 4546087; 
700214, 4546088; 700204, 4546090; 700200, 4546092; 700196, 4546095; 
700188, 4546100; 700182, 4546104; 700177, 4546107; 700169, 4546107; 
700162, 4546107; 700156, 4546108; 700145, 4546113; 700144, 4546112; 
700140, 4546111; 700134, 4546111; 700128, 4546114; 700125, 4546119; 
700125, 4546120; 700104, 4546121; 700097, 4546122; 700092, 4546126; 
700088, 4546135; 700085, 4546141; 700083, 4546151; 700081, 4546159; 
700078, 4546169; 700073, 4546182; 700066, 4546193; 700055, 4546203; 
700048, 4546210; 700040, 4546217; 700033, 4546222; 700028, 4546224; 
700025, 4546227; 700025, 4546229; 699990, 4546189; 699988, 4546182; 
699979, 4546176; 699969, 4546173; 699961, 4546173; 699955, 4546176; 
699945, 4546176; 699936, 4546186; 699929, 4546188; 699921, 4546187; 
699910, 4546182; 699900, 4546179; 699893, 4546177; 699886, 4546178; 
699881, 4546182; 699880, 4546187; 699882, 4546192; 699886, 4546198; 
699891, 4546201; 699895, 4546203; 699922, 4546240; 699916, 4546237; 
699908, 4546239; 699903, 4546244; 699896, 4546245; 699882, 4546240; 
699874, 4546241; 699866, 4546246; 699859, 4546257; 699854, 4546267; 
699848, 4546277; 699843, 4546283; 699839, 4546287; 699830, 4546290; 
699818, 4546288; 699807, 4546282; 699798, 4546277; 699787, 4546278; 
699778, 4546282; 699768, 4546283; 699756, 4546277; 699744, 4546267; 
699735, 4546260; 699722, 4546254; 699698, 4546250; 699689, 4546252; 
699679, 4546255; 699670, 4546258; 699662, 4546259; 699651, 4546256; 
699642, 4546249; 699635, 4546240; 699633, 4546236; 699628, 4546229; 
699621, 4546225; 699615, 4546223; 699601, 4546223; 699595, 4546220; 
699595, 4546220; 699587, 4546219; 699579, 4546216; 699572, 4546208; 
699568, 4546204; 699559, 4546200; 699549, 4546196; 699529, 4546192; 
699521, 4546192; 699513, 4546193; 699503, 4546192; 699480, 4546195; 
699457, 4546199; 699423, 4546197; 699408, 4546199; 699400, 4546199; 
699397, 4546200; 699382, 4546202; 699372, 4546202; 699367, 4546202; 
699364, 4546202; 699361, 4546200; 699359, 4546200; 699350, 4546195; 
699344, 4546192; 699316, 4546183; 699310, 4546184; 699308, 4546183; 
699299, 4546181; 699293, 4546178; 699285, 4546174; 699272, 4546169; 
699261, 4546166; 699253, 4546166; 699248, 4546166; 699243, 4546166; 
699238, 4546166; 699229, 4546163; 699215, 4546155; 699209, 4546152; 
699205, 4546152; 699202, 4546153; 699199, 4546158; 699193, 4546165; 
699190, 4546167; 699182, 4546174; 699174, 4546176; 699166, 4546179; 
699158, 4546179; 699144, 4546177; 699119, 4546173; 699115, 4546173; 
699110, 4546173; 699105, 4546175; 699102, 4546176; 699099, 4546180; 
699096, 4546184; 699095, 4546190; 699094, 4546196; 699093, 4546202; 
699090, 4546203; 699087, 4546204; 699083, 4546202; 699070, 4546197; 
699064, 4546195; 699059, 4546193; 699053, 4546189; 699033, 4546176; 
699028, 4546171; 699025, 4546167; 699020, 4546164; 699017, 4546162; 
699011, 4546159; 699005, 4546158; 698999, 4546158; 698994, 4546158; 
698984, 4546160; 698980, 4546161; 698977, 4546161; 698973, 4546160; 
698969, 4546159; 698957, 4546150; 698948, 4546142; 698946, 4546140; 
698942, 4546138; 698938, 4546138; 698927, 4546141; 698917, 4546145; 
698906, 4546148; 698898, 4546153; 698891, 4546158; 698889, 4546160; 
698887, 4546164; 698886, 4546170; 698884, 4546181; 698887, 4546190; 
698890, 4546193; 698893, 4546193; 698903, 4546192; 698916, 4546190; 
698934, 4546190; 698949, 4546191; 698960, 4546191; 698971, 4546194; 
698982, 4546196; 698993, 4546198; 699008, 4546205; 699018, 4546210; 
699022, 4546215; 699023, 4546220; 699024, 4546226; 699022, 4546234; 
699019, 4546239; 699013, 4546244; 699006, 4546247; 699000, 4546248; 
698989, 4546246; 698976, 4546247; 698969, 4546239; 698962, 4546235; 
698956, 4546234; 698953, 4546234; 698928, 4546234; 698905, 4546232; 
698883, 4546230; 698863, 4546231; 698854, 4546231; 698849, 4546230; 
698845, 4546227; 698839, 4546223; 698821, 4546208; 698816, 4546202; 
698809, 4546197; 698796, 4546193; 698780, 4546190; 698769, 4546188; 
698762, 4546190; 698754, 4546189; 698747, 4546187; 698739, 4546181; 
698733, 4546178; 698723, 4546177; 698717, 4546176; 698709, 4546176; 
698702, 4546180; 698694, 4546184; 698685, 4546190; 698676, 4546198; 
698669, 4546207; 698662, 4546215; 698653, 4546223; 698647, 4546227; 
698638, 4546233; 698623, 4546240; 698613, 4546245; 698603, 4546250; 
698593, 4546251; 698584, 4546252; 698571, 4546251; 698559, 4546246; 
698559, 4546242; 698559, 4546236; 698557, 4546231; 698554, 4546224; 
698552, 4546220; 698547, 4546211; 698543, 4546205; 698538, 4546197; 
698534, 4546192; 698534, 4546188; 698535, 4546182; 698537, 4546174; 
698540, 4546167; 698544, 4546162; 698550, 4546159; 698556, 4546158; 
698572, 4546159; 698559, 4546133; 698549, 4546115; 698541, 4546105; 
698524, 4546096; 698501, 4546091; 698468, 4546083; 698446, 4546070; 
698434, 4546065; 698424, 4546062; 698416, 4546063; 698410, 4546063; 
698408, 4546141; 698410, 4546191; 698411, 4546216; 698412, 4546240; 
698413, 4546250; 698411, 4546265; 698408, 4546282; 698405, 4546293; 
698401, 4546313; 698403, 4546329; 698393, 4546334; 698391, 4546336; 
698388, 4546342; 698386, 4546349; 698385, 4546361; 698385, 4546371; 
698392, 4546378; 698395, 4546383; 698396, 4546386; 698396, 4546390; 
698395, 4546402; 698391, 4546427; 698390, 4546448; 698390, 4546460; 
698394, 4546470; 698403, 4546478; 698411, 4546482; 698419, 4546486; 
698438, 4546485; 698460, 4546486; 698480, 4546489; 698506, 4546492; 
698533, 4546494; 698540, 4546495; 698551, 4546497; 698559, 4546496; 
698566, 4546493; 698577, 4546482;

[[Page 369]]

698584, 4546475; 698591, 4546470; 698595, 4546468; 698603, 4546467; 
698611, 4546466; 698618, 4546471; 698640, 4546484; 698648, 4546488; 
698657, 4546495; 698669, 4546497; 698679, 4546498; 698687, 4546496; 
698695, 4546493; 698701, 4546489; 698709, 4546488; 698742, 4546485; 
698777, 4546487; 698832, 4546488; 698891, 4546491; 698944, 4546492; 
699004, 4546496; 699049, 4546494; 699110, 4546500; 699218, 4546503; 
699320, 4546505; 699421, 4546505; 699587, 4546513; 699988, 4546508; 
699988, 4546506; 700033, 4546506; 700033, 4546506; 700039, 4546507; 
700238, 4546510; 700245, 4546509; 700252, 4546502; 700261, 4546492; 
700270, 4546487; 700277, 4546480; 700287, 4546473; 700301, 4546467; 
700308, 4546460; 700318, 4546453; 700330, 4546447; 700343, 4546446; 
700355, 4546440; 700365, 4546432; 700374, 4546429; 700386, 4546428; 
700400, 4546426; 700413, 4546430; 700420, 4546432; 700425, 4546436; 
700428, 4546442; 700430, 4546454; 700429, 4546468; 700429, 4546477; 
700431, 4546487; 700435, 4546496; 700442, 4546503; 700453, 4546507; 
700464, 4546509; 700474, 4546510; 700486, 4546511; 700489, 4546511; 
700534, 4546513; 700546, 4546512; 700556, 4546512; 700564, 4546511; 
700565, 4546511; 700565, 4546508; 700566, 4546503; 700563, 4546499; 
700559, 4546488; 700557, 4546481; 700559, 4546471; 700564, 4546463; 
700572, 4546458; 700586, 4546460; 700597, 4546458; 700606, 4546453; 
700612, 4546443; 700617, 4546436; 700632, 4546431; 700664, 4546430; 
700675, 4546427; 700687, 4546425; 700695, 4546421; 700708, 4546417; 
700725, 4546416; 700745, 4546414; 700760, 4546415; 700774, 4546417; 
700788, 4546420; 700801, 4546423; 700810, 4546426; 700817, 4546430; 
700820, 4546436; 700820, 4546446; 700818, 4546456; 700819, 4546469; 
700823, 4546482; 700824, 4546493; 700825, 4546503; 700826, 4546511; 
700829, 4546517; 700838, 4546523; 700849, 4546523; 700896, 4546521; 
700919, 4546524; 700936, 4546525; 700945, 4546525; 700949, 4546525; 
700966, 4546525; 700981, 4546525; 701000, 4546524; 701010, 4546524; 
701018, 4546521; 699928, 4546248; 699925, 4546244; 699932, 4546252; 
699933, 4546259; 699932, 4546257; 699928, 4546248.
    (vii) Tract 4g. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 701602, 4546442; 701600, 4546428; 701597, 4546415; 
701592, 4546405; 701586, 4546395; 701578, 4546386; 701567, 4546378; 
701556, 4546373; 701547, 4546372; 701534, 4546374; 701521, 4546377; 
701505, 4546383; 701494, 4546389; 701484, 4546395; 701473, 4546402; 
701460, 4546408; 701445, 4546411; 701431, 4546414; 701415, 4546414; 
701401, 4546414; 701391, 4546415; 701384, 4546416; 701377, 4546418; 
701372, 4546421; 701369, 4546424; 701367, 4546428; 701367, 4546432; 
701371, 4546435; 701379, 4546437; 701389, 4546437; 701398, 4546437; 
701410, 4546437; 701422, 4546436; 701429, 4546435; 701437, 4546433; 
701447, 4546432; 701456, 4546432; 701475, 4546434; 701493, 4546438; 
701512, 4546444; 701527, 4546451; 701539, 4546460; 701547, 4546468; 
701553, 4546478; 701558, 4546489; 701561, 4546500; 701563, 4546510; 
701565, 4546519; 701568, 4546525; 701570, 4546531; 701573, 4546535; 
701578, 4546539; 701583, 4546539; 701588, 4546539; 701595, 4546534; 
701598, 4546528; 701599, 4546518; 701600, 4546507; 701598, 4546493; 
701596, 4546482; 701595, 4546472; 701597, 4546460; 701600, 4546452; 
701602, 4546442.
    (viii) Tract 4h. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 703217, 4546589; 703217, 4546586; 703217, 4546579; 
703049, 4546561; 702942, 4546563; 702869, 4546558; 702844, 4546498; 
702818, 4546496; 702872, 4546437; 702928, 4546418; 702978, 4546411; 
703039, 4546410; 703095, 4546436; 703144, 4546479; 703218, 4546537; 
703218, 4546519; 703216, 4546517; 703212, 4546515; 703210, 4546512; 
703206, 4546510; 703200, 4546506; 703192, 4546498; 703186, 4546493; 
703171, 4546473; 703188, 4546474; 703194, 4546477; 703200, 4546478; 
703203, 4546478; 703205, 4546477; 703206, 4546471; 703204, 4546466; 
703199, 4546458; 703192, 4546450; 703182, 4546443; 703172, 4546437; 
703164, 4546433; 703156, 4546430; 703149, 4546428; 703142, 4546428; 
703141, 4546429; 703139, 4546435; 703135, 4546434; 703129, 4546431; 
703123, 4546428; 703118, 4546423; 703111, 4546415; 703107, 4546405; 
703103, 4546387; 703095, 4546382; 703088, 4546378; 703082, 4546375; 
703074, 4546371; 703062, 4546366; 703051, 4546363; 703036, 4546359; 
703021, 4546356; 703006, 4546353; 702992, 4546350; 702979, 4546347; 
702966, 4546345; 702954, 4546346; 702943, 4546350; 702925, 4546354; 
702924, 4546357; 702924, 4546358; 702921, 4546364; 702918, 4546373; 
702914, 4546386; 702910, 4546397; 702903, 4546402; 702892, 4546407; 
702880, 4546410; 702865, 4546413; 702855, 4546419; 702850, 4546427; 
702844, 4546434; 702836, 4546437; 702822, 4546437; 702809, 4546440; 
702801, 4546449; 702793, 4546458; 702781, 4546464; 702768, 4546472; 
702764, 4546481; 702762, 4546493; 702762, 4546499; 702764, 4546504; 
702769, 4546508; 702776, 4546512; 702785, 4546514; 702796, 4546515; 
702811, 4546517; 702826, 4546521; 702835, 4546531; 702835, 4546540; 
702833, 4546546; 702828, 4546547; 702817, 4546549; 702807, 4546549; 
702796, 4546548; 702785, 4546545; 702768, 4546545; 702753, 4546545; 
702735, 4546547; 702721, 4546550; 702715, 4546557; 702715, 4546564; 
702716, 4546570; 702718, 4546573; 702720, 4546574; 702723, 4546575; 
702727, 4546576; 702733, 4546577; 702742, 4546579; 702750, 4546580; 
702762, 4546578; 702771, 4546577; 702785, 4546577; 702797, 4546580; 
702807, 4546583; 702818, 4546586; 702831, 4546589; 702842, 4546591; 
702849, 4546591; 702860, 4546587; 703205, 4546592; 703210, 4546593; 
703215, 4546592; 703217, 4546590; 703217, 4546589.
    (ix) Tract 4i. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 704760, 4546632; 704759, 4546528; 704759, 4546503; 
704757, 4546504; 704757, 4546463; 704759, 4546463; 704759, 4546435; 
704751, 4546435; 704745, 4546436; 704737, 4546436; 704723, 4546436; 
704708, 4546436; 704693, 4546437; 704676, 4546438; 704651, 4546439; 
704611, 4546438; 704596, 4546439; 704580, 4546440; 704567, 4546437; 
704548, 4546430; 704533, 4546428; 704516, 4546430; 704503, 4546433; 
704489, 4546440; 704478, 4546444; 704468, 4546444; 704456, 4546442; 
704444, 4546439; 704430, 4546434; 704416, 4546431; 704398, 4546427; 
704381, 4546424; 704361, 4546421; 704342, 4546421; 704329, 4546422; 
704318, 4546425; 704304, 4546435; 704289, 4546434; 704278, 4546456; 
704240, 4546480; 704187, 4546472; 704136, 4546441; 704137, 4546396; 
704167, 4546390; 704206, 4546403; 704264, 4546386; 704303, 4546371; 
704316, 4546313; 704309, 4546288;

[[Page 370]]

704358, 4546279; 704381, 4546306; 704439, 4546354; 704483, 4546377; 
704545, 4546377; 704584, 4546378; 704588, 4546328; 704599, 4546295; 
704651, 4546314; 704692, 4546344; 704762, 4546389; 704763, 4546387; 
704762, 4546381; 704761, 4546372; 704761, 4546359; 704761, 4546342; 
704705, 4546307; 704662, 4546281; 704665, 4546258; 704701, 4546251; 
704723, 4546227; 704761, 4546227; 704761, 4546216; 704761, 4546201; 
704763, 4546181; 704764, 4546161; 704764, 4546137; 704765, 4546123; 
704765, 4546106; 704764, 4546091; 704765, 4546056; 704766, 4546038; 
704766, 4546022; 704766, 4546008; 704765, 4545994; 704766, 4545983; 
704767, 4545974; 704765, 4545968; 704761, 4545963; 704757, 4545960; 
704749, 4545957; 704741, 4545956; 704734, 4545954; 704732, 4545953; 
704731, 4545945; 704730, 4545934; 704729, 4545922; 704727, 4545909; 
704725, 4545901; 704720, 4545898; 704709, 4545894; 704703, 4545898; 
704699, 4545904; 704698, 4545911; 704696, 4545920; 704696, 4545929; 
704696, 4545937; 704694, 4545946; 704693, 4545951; 704690, 4545957; 
704685, 4545961; 704679, 4545962; 704669, 4545965; 704657, 4545965; 
704645, 4545964; 704636, 4545960; 704629, 4545953; 704622, 4545947; 
704615, 4545934; 704612, 4545925; 704608, 4545914; 704608, 4545903; 
704610, 4545895; 704610, 4545892; 704608, 4545889; 704607, 4545883; 
704609, 4545876; 704611, 4545868; 704611, 4545861; 704609, 4545853; 
704607, 4545843; 704604, 4545837; 704602, 4545834; 704598, 4545832; 
704590, 4545831; 704587, 4545834; 704583, 4545842; 704580, 4545857; 
704578, 4545866; 704577, 4545873; 704571, 4545879; 704564, 4545884; 
704557, 4545888; 704551, 4545891; 704547, 4545896; 704545, 4545902; 
704544, 4545914; 704548, 4545924; 704551, 4545932; 704553, 4545937; 
704553, 4545945; 704548, 4545952; 704543, 4545959; 704542, 4545968; 
704545, 4545977; 704552, 4545982; 704564, 4545983; 704574, 4545986; 
704578, 4545992; 704580, 4546009; 704585, 4546021; 704598, 4546029; 
704611, 4546033; 704624, 4546037; 704636, 4546041; 704652, 4546042; 
704664, 4546041; 704676, 4546037; 704689, 4546037; 704698, 4546040; 
704709, 4546044; 704719, 4546050; 704729, 4546057; 704738, 4546065; 
704742, 4546074; 704742, 4546085; 704740, 4546096; 704735, 4546109; 
704727, 4546122; 704723, 4546130; 704720, 4546139; 704719, 4546147; 
704719, 4546155; 704720, 4546161; 704722, 4546164; 704727, 4546169; 
704729, 4546170; 704732, 4546173; 704726, 4546180; 704723, 4546184; 
704715, 4546189; 704708, 4546194; 704702, 4546198; 704694, 4546202; 
704689, 4546205; 704681, 4546209; 704678, 4546214; 704675, 4546224; 
704672, 4546228; 704662, 4546233; 704650, 4546236; 704640, 4546237; 
704629, 4546235; 704617, 4546233; 704605, 4546232; 704592, 4546230; 
704581, 4546232; 704569, 4546233; 704562, 4546234; 704554, 4546235; 
704548, 4546236; 704543, 4546235; 704538, 4546235; 704535, 4546236; 
704533, 4546236; 704533, 4546236; 704524, 4546234; 704520, 4546234; 
704515, 4546234; 704508, 4546234; 704499, 4546232; 704494, 4546229; 
704489, 4546225; 704487, 4546219; 704486, 4546212; 704485, 4546204; 
704482, 4546197; 704471, 4546189; 704463, 4546170; 704454, 4546161; 
704444, 4546153; 704435, 4546148; 704427, 4546144; 704415, 4546141; 
704406, 4546137; 704399, 4546130; 704393, 4546125; 704388, 4546119; 
704380, 4546116; 704373, 4546115; 704365, 4546116; 704354, 4546116; 
704347, 4546111; 704341, 4546105; 704336, 4546098; 704332, 4546094; 
704325, 4546088; 704323, 4546087; 704317, 4546085; 704313, 4546085; 
704312, 4546088; 704310, 4546092; 704310, 4546097; 704311, 4546103; 
704317, 4546113; 704326, 4546125; 704332, 4546133; 704334, 4546136; 
704335, 4546139; 704338, 4546147; 704338, 4546154; 704337, 4546160; 
704333, 4546165; 704325, 4546169; 704315, 4546171; 704305, 4546175; 
704298, 4546178; 704297, 4546179; 704294, 4546184; 704291, 4546193; 
704292, 4546204; 704294, 4546213; 704296, 4546220; 704294, 4546225; 
704286, 4546234; 704279, 4546236; 704272, 4546240; 704268, 4546248; 
704262, 4546256; 704256, 4546261; 704249, 4546264; 704239, 4546266; 
704220, 4546261; 704210, 4546257; 704200, 4546251; 704189, 4546243; 
704181, 4546235; 704175, 4546225; 704168, 4546215; 704162, 4546207; 
704155, 4546203; 704143, 4546201; 704135, 4546202; 704126, 4546206; 
704119, 4546209; 704112, 4546210; 704102, 4546209; 704094, 4546207; 
704093, 4546207; 704086, 4546203; 704086, 4546222; 704088, 4546234; 
704089, 4546240; 704091, 4546246; 704092, 4546255; 704078, 4546258; 
704068, 4546261; 704061, 4546266; 704058, 4546268; 704055, 4546272; 
704052, 4546276; 704050, 4546281; 704048, 4546286; 704046, 4546293; 
704048, 4546301; 704042, 4546301; 704036, 4546304; 704029, 4546314; 
704026, 4546326; 704026, 4546340; 704026, 4546354; 704028, 4546367; 
704032, 4546382; 704037, 4546396; 704043, 4546406; 704050, 4546414; 
704058, 4546419; 704068, 4546419; 704078, 4546416; 704086, 4546409; 
704091, 4546401; 704098, 4546391; 704108, 4546405; 704109, 4546410; 
704109, 4546418; 704109, 4546424; 704106, 4546432; 704103, 4546437; 
704101, 4546443; 704099, 4546455; 704099, 4546455; 704096, 4546455; 
704093, 4546457; 704086, 4546459; 704077, 4546462; 704066, 4546463; 
704056, 4546463; 704044, 4546462; 704032, 4546455; 704027, 4546449; 
704023, 4546439; 704019, 4546431; 704015, 4546418; 704011, 4546399; 
704008, 4546387; 704004, 4546371; 703999, 4546351; 703994, 4546334; 
703990, 4546301; 703978, 4546297; 703974, 4546302; 703971, 4546307; 
703969, 4546315; 703965, 4546323; 703963, 4546328; 703960, 4546334; 
703956, 4546339; 703953, 4546344; 703950, 4546347; 703945, 4546351; 
703938, 4546353; 703931, 4546352; 703926, 4546347; 703924, 4546341; 
703924, 4546333; 703925, 4546322; 703930, 4546311; 703937, 4546299; 
703942, 4546290; 703948, 4546279; 703951, 4546269; 703952, 4546258; 
703949, 4546242; 703943, 4546231; 703933, 4546222; 703916, 4546217; 
703899, 4546212; 703882, 4546210; 703866, 4546211; 703841, 4546215; 
703830, 4546217; 703816, 4546219; 703802, 4546219; 703791, 4546217; 
703780, 4546213; 703771, 4546208; 703767, 4546203; 703764, 4546198; 
703762, 4546190; 703762, 4546187; 703762, 4546184; 703771, 4546185; 
703790, 4546182; 703798, 4546179; 703806, 4546177; 703819, 4546173; 
703832, 4546169; 703847, 4546165; 703866, 4546161; 703877, 4546159; 
703891, 4546158; 703906, 4546157; 703915, 4546159; 703925, 4546162; 
703936, 4546168; 703945, 4546174; 703941, 4546158; 703934, 4546150; 
703921, 4546142; 703906, 4546136; 703889, 4546133; 703875, 4546129; 
703864, 4546122; 703852, 4546113; 703842, 4546100; 703836, 4546084; 
703830, 4546071; 703824, 4546064; 703817, 4546058; 703811, 4546056; 
703804, 4546057; 703799, 4546062; 703797, 4546067; 703797, 4546072; 
703799, 4546075; 703802, 4546079; 703803, 4546082; 703802, 4546086; 
703797, 4546090; 703793, 4546092; 703791, 4546094; 703790, 4546099; 
703789, 4546106; 703792, 4546111; 703794, 4546118; 703796, 4546124; 
703795, 4546130; 703794, 4546135; 703791, 4546139; 703785, 4546144; 
703780, 4546146; 703733, 4546145;

[[Page 371]]

703740, 4546111; 703742, 4546096; 703743, 4546083; 703743, 4546067; 
703742, 4546055; 703739, 4546040; 703734, 4546027; 703727, 4546015; 
703719, 4546005; 703710, 4545998; 703699, 4545993; 703687, 4545989; 
703677, 4545988; 703679, 4545980; 703679, 4545974; 703678, 4545968; 
703676, 4545966; 703667, 4545964; 703654, 4545963; 703644, 4545967; 
703638, 4545968; 703630, 4545966; 703627, 4545963; 703627, 4545960; 
703630, 4545956; 703635, 4545952; 703638, 4545948; 703638, 4545943; 
703635, 4545940; 703632, 4545937; 703626, 4545934; 703620, 4545930; 
703618, 4545926; 703619, 4545922; 703620, 4545910; 703623, 4545908; 
703627, 4545906; 703631, 4545904; 703641, 4545900; 703649, 4545896; 
703656, 4545893; 703670, 4545889; 703687, 4545882; 703700, 4545875; 
703708, 4545869; 703715, 4545858; 703720, 4545847; 703725, 4545832; 
703730, 4545818; 703736, 4545799; 703741, 4545785; 703746, 4545768; 
703752, 4545754; 703759, 4545743; 703768, 4545735; 703777, 4545728; 
703789, 4545721; 703799, 4545715; 703807, 4545708; 703812, 4545702; 
703816, 4545693; 703819, 4545681; 703819, 4545673; 703816, 4545666; 
703812, 4545663; 703808, 4545662; 703805, 4545663; 703802, 4545664; 
703797, 4545668; 703792, 4545674; 703775, 4545692; 703765, 4545702; 
703755, 4545713; 703733, 4545740; 703726, 4545746; 703718, 4545746; 
703707, 4545748; 703698, 4545753; 703694, 4545760; 703690, 4545773; 
703690, 4545782; 703692, 4545790; 703695, 4545801; 703694, 4545811; 
703689, 4545818; 703683, 4545824; 703675, 4545826; 703669, 4545825; 
703662, 4545821; 703658, 4545816; 703652, 4545809; 703647, 4545805; 
703637, 4545801; 703627, 4545801; 703618, 4545803; 703607, 4545807; 
703602, 4545812; 703598, 4545820; 703593, 4545830; 703583, 4545834; 
703573, 4545833; 703562, 4545831; 703548, 4545831; 703541, 4545833; 
703548, 4545846; 703552, 4545868; 703539, 4545891; 703514, 4545893; 
703467, 4545892; 703437, 4545886; 703412, 4545876; 703391, 4545877; 
703381, 4545878; 703370, 4545880; 703361, 4545882; 703353, 4545886; 
703345, 4545890; 703339, 4545892; 703334, 4545891; 703328, 4545884; 
703321, 4545875; 703310, 4545868; 703302, 4545867; 703295, 4545869; 
703289, 4545874; 703285, 4545881; 703276, 4545887; 703265, 4545889; 
703256, 4545891; 703251, 4545894; 703249, 4545899; 703250, 4545906; 
703255, 4545919; 703255, 4545928; 703251, 4545936; 703243, 4545940; 
703239, 4545948; 703239, 4545954; 703244, 4545961; 703251, 4545965; 
703263, 4545966; 703282, 4545963; 703298, 4545964; 703315, 4545967; 
703325, 4545972; 703336, 4545975; 703344, 4545975; 703347, 4545975; 
703350, 4545973; 703354, 4545969; 703356, 4545969; 703358, 4545972; 
703360, 4545974; 703361, 4545977; 703361, 4545985; 703360, 4545990; 
703358, 4545994; 703356, 4545997; 703350, 4546002; 703345, 4546004; 
703374, 4546019; 703405, 4546043; 703398, 4546098; 703361, 4546163; 
703286, 4546236; 703260, 4546291; 703261, 4546292; 703263, 4546303; 
703267, 4546308; 703274, 4546310; 703281, 4546309; 703289, 4546305; 
703294, 4546301; 703296, 4546296; 703299, 4546289; 703301, 4546278; 
703304, 4546268; 703309, 4546257; 703315, 4546251; 703328, 4546247; 
703335, 4546246; 703378, 4546188; 703432, 4546121; 703472, 4546076; 
703512, 4546055; 703512, 4546053; 703516, 4546046; 703521, 4546041; 
703529, 4546037; 703536, 4546031; 703543, 4546027; 703554, 4546019; 
703563, 4546014; 703573, 4546013; 703589, 4546020; 703586, 4546022; 
703579, 4546029; 703570, 4546037; 703561, 4546046; 703554, 4546056; 
703551, 4546063; 703549, 4546071; 703549, 4546082; 703551, 4546095; 
703556, 4546104; 703566, 4546115; 703573, 4546122; 703581, 4546128; 
703592, 4546135; 703597, 4546139; 703607, 4546152; 703625, 4546150; 
703633, 4546150; 703641, 4546152; 703649, 4546155; 703655, 4546159; 
703660, 4546163; 703664, 4546167; 703669, 4546181; 703669, 4546184; 
703669, 4546198; 703668, 4546212; 703667, 4546223; 703666, 4546234; 
703666, 4546241; 703664, 4546249; 703652, 4546257; 703641, 4546261; 
703630, 4546262; 703618, 4546265; 703605, 4546268; 703590, 4546271; 
703578, 4546273; 703570, 4546274; 703560, 4546276; 703552, 4546276; 
703543, 4546273; 703540, 4546269; 703536, 4546262; 703535, 4546253; 
703533, 4546247; 703527, 4546241; 703519, 4546238; 703511, 4546238; 
703503, 4546240; 703495, 4546242; 703494, 4546246; 703490, 4546257; 
703488, 4546269; 703485, 4546281; 703482, 4546287; 703478, 4546292; 
703473, 4546298; 703466, 4546302; 703456, 4546301; 703449, 4546297; 
703440, 4546289; 703432, 4546286; 703420, 4546290; 703414, 4546298; 
703408, 4546304; 703399, 4546307; 703388, 4546308; 703378, 4546311; 
703369, 4546317; 703364, 4546323; 703349, 4546342; 703343, 4546353; 
703340, 4546361; 703338, 4546370; 703335, 4546382; 703331, 4546387; 
703326, 4546391; 703321, 4546400; 703318, 4546412; 703311, 4546432; 
703306, 4546441; 703302, 4546448; 703289, 4546457; 703281, 4546461; 
703270, 4546464; 703261, 4546465; 703254, 4546468; 703250, 4546470; 
703249, 4546472; 703247, 4546477; 703247, 4546516; 703248, 4546515; 
703248, 4546588; 703499, 4546594; 703498, 4546596; 704053, 4546612; 
704057, 4546612; 704067, 4546612; 704079, 4546612; 704089, 4546612; 
704101, 4546612; 704117, 4546612; 704136, 4546613; 704154, 4546614; 
704172, 4546614; 704193, 4546613; 704214, 4546613; 704234, 4546612; 
704253, 4546610; 704274, 4546610; 704293, 4546612; 704309, 4546615; 
704320, 4546616; 704326, 4546615; 704339, 4546609; 704339, 4546609; 
704342, 4546605; 704344, 4546602; 704347, 4546598; 704352, 4546594; 
704359, 4546590; 704369, 4546587; 704379, 4546585; 704390, 4546585; 
704400, 4546589; 704410, 4546597; 704419, 4546604; 704429, 4546609; 
704444, 4546613; 704457, 4546617; 704471, 4546620; 704487, 4546619; 
704502, 4546616; 704512, 4546612; 704517, 4546607; 704517, 4546599; 
704514, 4546591; 704514, 4546583; 704517, 4546577; 704525, 4546572; 
704529, 4546571; 704537, 4546571; 704548, 4546575; 704558, 4546580; 
704568, 4546587; 704575, 4546595; 704582, 4546605; 704589, 4546614; 
704601, 4546622; 704615, 4546624; 704627, 4546624; 704641, 4546620; 
704652, 4546617; 704669, 4546615; 704682, 4546617; 704693, 4546620; 
704713, 4546626; 704724, 4546634; 704731, 4546637; 704739, 4546639; 
704746, 4546640; 704751, 4546639; 704757, 4546637; 704758, 4546635; 
704760, 4546632.
    (x) Tract 4j. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 705755, 4546121; 705768, 4546082; 705807, 4546037; 
705849, 4546006; 705848, 4546004; 705850, 4545994; 705853, 4545987; 
705858, 4545977; 705869, 4545962; 705876, 4545955; 705881, 4545951; 
705887, 4545947; 705894, 4545943; 705898, 4545941; 705904, 4545943; 
705910, 4545950; 705914, 4545956; 705917, 4545962; 705919, 4545967; 
705920, 4545973; 705919, 4545978; 705936, 4545973; 705936, 4545969; 
705938, 4545959; 705937, 4545949; 705931, 4545938; 705924, 4545930; 
705916, 4545926; 705909,

[[Page 372]]

4545924; 705853, 4545938; 705792, 4545978; 705750, 4546016; 705730, 
4545996; 705727, 4545924; 705731, 4545836; 705747, 4545803; 705750, 
4545780; 705743, 4545776; 705735, 4545769; 705731, 4545755; 705729, 
4545741; 705725, 4545732; 705719, 4545724; 705711, 4545721; 705703, 
4545720; 705698, 4545723; 705695, 4545732; 705694, 4545744; 705695, 
4545755; 705694, 4545768; 705695, 4545779; 705695, 4545787; 705694, 
4545794; 705693, 4545800; 705691, 4545803; 705682, 4545808; 705671, 
4545811; 705661, 4545810; 705647, 4545809; 705640, 4545807; 705634, 
4545806; 705628, 4545807; 705624, 4545809; 705620, 4545810; 705611, 
4545809; 705606, 4545803; 705599, 4545812; 705595, 4545818; 705590, 
4545827; 705584, 4545838; 705581, 4545846; 705580, 4545861; 705582, 
4545870; 705584, 4545878; 705589, 4545889; 705594, 4545899; 705597, 
4545907; 705596, 4545917; 705593, 4545933; 705594, 4545942; 705598, 
4545948; 705600, 4545957; 705597, 4545966; 705593, 4545975; 705588, 
4545983; 705582, 4545993; 705579, 4546002; 705576, 4546015; 705572, 
4546025; 705568, 4546039; 705566, 4546053; 705565, 4546064; 705569, 
4546077; 705573, 4546089; 705581, 4546104; 705588, 4546119; 705590, 
4546131; 705592, 4546144; 705589, 4546153; 705586, 4546162; 705580, 
4546169; 705573, 4546178; 705567, 4546185; 705563, 4546194; 705557, 
4546204; 705549, 4546216; 705521, 4546246; 705509, 4546259; 705499, 
4546270; 705490, 4546282; 705483, 4546297; 705480, 4546312; 705480, 
4546327; 705482, 4546341; 705485, 4546358; 705488, 4546374; 705489, 
4546388; 705489, 4546404; 705485, 4546415; 705478, 4546424; 705470, 
4546431; 705464, 4546434; 705448, 4546439; 705437, 4546445; 705424, 
4546452; 705410, 4546460; 705401, 4546465; 705387, 4546473; 705372, 
4546483; 705359, 4546493; 705347, 4546502; 705334, 4546511; 705321, 
4546520; 705306, 4546529; 705297, 4546535; 705285, 4546543; 705273, 
4546552; 705263, 4546564; 705253, 4546573; 705244, 4546577; 705234, 
4546579; 705222, 4546576; 705214, 4546573; 705208, 4546566; 705204, 
4546557; 705202, 4546545; 705199, 4546525; 705195, 4546514; 705193, 
4546509; 705190, 4546502; 705186, 4546493; 705181, 4546483; 705173, 
4546474; 705166, 4546467; 705154, 4546455; 705172, 4546454; 705172, 
4546453; 705202, 4546453; 705226, 4546467; 705225, 4546467; 705229, 
4546472; 705235, 4546483; 705240, 4546499; 705240, 4546509; 705238, 
4546517; 705236, 4546523; 705234, 4546529; 705235, 4546535; 705237, 
4546538; 705245, 4546539; 705252, 4546538; 705261, 4546534; 705266, 
4546526; 705269, 4546515; 705272, 4546501; 705274, 4546492; 705279, 
4546483; 705288, 4546476; 705299, 4546472; 705309, 4546471; 705320, 
4546469; 705331, 4546466; 705345, 4546457; 705354, 4546449; 705367, 
4546443; 705381, 4546439; 705399, 4546434; 705412, 4546431; 705425, 
4546427; 705438, 4546423; 705446, 4546417; 705452, 4546408; 705456, 
4546395; 705458, 4546380; 705458, 4546362; 705455, 4546349; 705452, 
4546336; 705449, 4546325; 705449, 4546315; 705450, 4546306; 705453, 
4546300; 705458, 4546293; 705465, 4546281; 705469, 4546269; 705473, 
4546258; 705478, 4546251; 705490, 4546242; 705499, 4546234; 705509, 
4546221; 705517, 4546207; 705523, 4546195; 705529, 4546185; 705533, 
4546180; 705541, 4546177; 705548, 4546171; 705555, 4546162; 705558, 
4546150; 705557, 4546137; 705555, 4546120; 705551, 4546107; 705547, 
4546093; 705542, 4546081; 705538, 4546071; 705531, 4546059; 705527, 
4546051; 705524, 4546040; 705525, 4546027; 705531, 4546011; 705540, 
4546001; 705550, 4545993; 705558, 4545987; 705564, 4545981; 705569, 
4545975; 705571, 4545968; 705569, 4545955; 705563, 4545942; 705554, 
4545926; 705547, 4545913; 705539, 4545903; 705533, 4545891; 705530, 
4545877; 705529, 4545861; 705531, 4545847; 705533, 4545834; 705534, 
4545821; 705533, 4545811; 705529, 4545804; 705521, 4545798; 705512, 
4545796; 705506, 4545796; 705501, 4545799; 705496, 4545801; 705487, 
4545799; 705481, 4545794; 705472, 4545788; 705463, 4545786; 705455, 
4545788; 705448, 4545790; 705435, 4545794; 705422, 4545787; 705416, 
4545782; 705407, 4545775; 705396, 4545769; 705383, 4545764; 705372, 
4545759; 705358, 4545756; 705345, 4545754; 705333, 4545750; 705317, 
4545740; 705317, 4545740; 705312, 4545745; 705309, 4545748; 705303, 
4545753; 705296, 4545757; 705288, 4545761; 705282, 4545764; 705275, 
4545766; 705269, 4545766; 705256, 4545770; 705245, 4545766; 705242, 
4545764; 705238, 4545762; 705233, 4545760; 705230, 4545759; 705219, 
4545760; 705219, 4545755; 705219, 4545751; 705217, 4545746; 705215, 
4545741; 705212, 4545736; 705208, 4545734; 705205, 4545731; 705202, 
4545728; 705200, 4545724; 705199, 4545720; 705200, 4545714; 705201, 
4545710; 705202, 4545706; 705205, 4545702; 705210, 4545700; 705216, 
4545697; 705222, 4545695; 705230, 4545694; 705239, 4545692; 705247, 
4545690; 705253, 4545687; 705258, 4545682; 705263, 4545673; 705265, 
4545666; 705266, 4545659; 705265, 4545652; 705263, 4545643; 705261, 
4545637; 705260, 4545629; 705260, 4545624; 705261, 4545617; 705264, 
4545614; 705267, 4545611; 705272, 4545608; 705278, 4545602; 705283, 
4545596; 705286, 4545590; 705287, 4545584; 705286, 4545576; 705285, 
4545568; 705283, 4545562; 705281, 4545558; 705279, 4545552; 705279, 
4545546; 705279, 4545541; 705280, 4545536; 705284, 4545527; 705288, 
4545520; 705291, 4545515; 705303, 4545500; 705300, 4545488; 705300, 
4545484; 705313, 4545482; 705322, 4545480; 705329, 4545478; 705337, 
4545475; 705345, 4545472; 705350, 4545467; 705354, 4545460; 705355, 
4545452; 705354, 4545444; 705353, 4545438; 705356, 4545431; 705359, 
4545426; 705362, 4545417; 705362, 4545406; 705361, 4545396; 705356, 
4545386; 705353, 4545380; 705350, 4545375; 705346, 4545372; 705343, 
4545370; 705340, 4545368; 705336, 4545380; 705332, 4545383; 705328, 
4545385; 705321, 4545389; 705316, 4545394; 705312, 4545401; 705310, 
4545408; 705309, 4545416; 705309, 4545424; 705308, 4545432; 705309, 
4545438; 705303, 4545448; 705294, 4545438; 705288, 4545429; 705282, 
4545416; 705278, 4545403; 705275, 4545392; 705274, 4545380; 705275, 
4545368; 705278, 4545360; 705282, 4545351; 705289, 4545344; 705294, 
4545337; 705298, 4545329; 705299, 4545320; 705297, 4545306; 705293, 
4545297; 705287, 4545285; 705282, 4545272; 705282, 4545264; 705284, 
4545255; 705290, 4545243; 705293, 4545240; 705298, 4545236; 705302, 
4545234; 705307, 4545231; 705308, 4545230; 705311, 4545228; 705316, 
4545211; 705325, 4545208; 705327, 4545206; 705330, 4545200; 705332, 
4545193; 705334, 4545184; 705337, 4545176; 705340, 4545170; 705344, 
4545157; 705344, 4545143; 705343, 4545129; 705342, 4545116; 705341, 
4545104; 705339, 4545095; 705338, 4545087; 705340, 4545076; 705342, 
4545069; 705345, 4545063; 705349, 4545055; 705352, 4545043; 705352, 
4545035; 705351, 4545030; 705351, 4545026; 705353, 4545021; 705357, 
4545015; 705360, 4545011; 705360, 4545004; 705359, 4545001; 705356, 
4544999; 705350, 4544999; 705344, 4544999; 705339, 4544999; 705335, 
4544999; 705331, 4544999; 705329,

[[Page 373]]

4544999; 705328, 4545000; 705327, 4545000; 705324, 4545001; 705312, 
4545002; 705307, 4545002; 705301, 4545002; 705293, 4545001; 705287, 
4545003; 705280, 4545007; 705277, 4545011; 705274, 4545023; 705274, 
4545032; 705275, 4545038; 705277, 4545046; 705278, 4545055; 705278, 
4545065; 705274, 4545080; 705268, 4545094; 705253, 4545121; 705247, 
4545133; 705243, 4545145; 705240, 4545161; 705240, 4545175; 705242, 
4545189; 705247, 4545201; 705254, 4545215; 705257, 4545226; 705257, 
4545241; 705256, 4545257; 705251, 4545269; 705246, 4545276; 705242, 
4545282; 705235, 4545288; 705231, 4545297; 705231, 4545305; 705233, 
4545317; 705231, 4545328; 705227, 4545341; 705227, 4545353; 705229, 
4545364; 705234, 4545376; 705240, 4545384; 705246, 4545392; 705255, 
4545402; 705262, 4545410; 705265, 4545420; 705267, 4545432; 705264, 
4545445; 705264, 4545455; 705264, 4545468; 705266, 4545477; 705267, 
4545484; 705267, 4545494; 705267, 4545505; 705266, 4545516; 705265, 
4545532; 705262, 4545549; 705262, 4545557; 705259, 4545565; 705254, 
4545574; 705249, 4545579; 705243, 4545585; 705233, 4545593; 705221, 
4545601; 705200, 4545622; 705193, 4545629; 705186, 4545637; 705182, 
4545648; 705179, 4545659; 705175, 4545666; 705169, 4545672; 705158, 
4545677; 705151, 4545684; 705143, 4545695; 705135, 4545707; 705126, 
4545717; 705118, 4545724; 705111, 4545730; 705081, 4545761; 705070, 
4545769; 705059, 4545773; 705050, 4545773; 705044, 4545772; 705038, 
4545770; 705030, 4545770; 705022, 4545773; 705018, 4545777; 705012, 
4545783; 705009, 4545791; 705006, 4545799; 705006, 4545800; 705070, 
4545821; 705120, 4545864; 705197, 4545924; 705274, 4545961; 705287, 
4546009; 705283, 4546013; 705282, 4546036; 705279, 4546084; 705259, 
4546080; 705236, 4546061; 705231, 4546053; 705211, 4546057; 705218, 
4546078; 705154, 4546095; 705128, 4546061; 705111, 4546061; 705069, 
4546047; 705058, 4546039; 705049, 4546044; 705000, 4546042; 704985, 
4546014; 704993, 4545981; 704992, 4545980; 704969, 4545959; 704964, 
4545971; 704957, 4545980; 704954, 4545985; 704944, 4545992; 704933, 
4545987; 704929, 4545987; 704928, 4545988; 704920, 4545981; 704916, 
4545979; 704912, 4545981; 704912, 4545980; 704912, 4545974; 704910, 
4545970; 704905, 4545966; 704894, 4545962; 704885, 4545960; 704876, 
4545959; 704864, 4545958; 704855, 4545958; 704850, 4545960; 704847, 
4545962; 704839, 4545968; 704817, 4545962; 704809, 4545963; 704804, 
4545965; 704800, 4545968; 704799, 4545971; 704798, 4545973; 704793, 
4546267; 704794, 4546293; 704819, 4546264; 704834, 4546236; 704841, 
4546194; 704837, 4546146; 704832, 4546088; 704842, 4546035; 704860, 
4545996; 704867, 4545996; 704909, 4546008; 704912, 4546045; 704888, 
4546067; 704890, 4546140; 704923, 4546189; 704954, 4546221; 704990, 
4546250; 705072, 4546236; 705123, 4546238; 705122, 4546264; 705116, 
4546331; 705091, 4546330; 705027, 4546348; 704971, 4546375; 704916, 
4546383; 704854, 4546393; 704795, 4546415; 704795, 4546427; 704796, 
4546457; 704813, 4546455; 704845, 4546454; 704897, 4546450; 704949, 
4546444; 704988, 4546425; 705013, 4546412; 705045, 4546390; 705064, 
4546394; 705078, 4546408; 705098, 4546446; 705114, 4546476; 705097, 
4546497; 705064, 4546491; 705009, 4546488; 704971, 4546507; 704942, 
4546531; 704908, 4546562; 704887, 4546591; 704879, 4546589; 704878, 
4546563; 704883, 4546535; 704867, 4546513; 704830, 4546498; 704798, 
4546499; 704799, 4546516; 704799, 4546545; 704839, 4546550; 704843, 
4546573; 704841, 4546603; 704845, 4546641; 704902, 4546642; 704953, 
4546599; 704989, 4546567; 705022, 4546552; 705052, 4546550; 705086, 
4546558; 705110, 4546572; 705147, 4546574; 705175, 4546571; 705182, 
4546583; 705208, 4546589; 705203, 4546608; 705184, 4546629; 705175, 
4546649; 705192, 4546649; 705226, 4546651; 705242, 4546650; 705256, 
4546648; 705268, 4546646; 705338, 4546547; 705428, 4546489; 705500, 
4546443; 705527, 4546362; 705530, 4546352; 705523, 4546336; 705525, 
4546304; 705557, 4546273; 705566, 4546248; 705600, 4546185; 705621, 
4546156; 705612, 4546102; 705605, 4546050; 705637, 4545949; 705659, 
4545895; 705689, 4545912; 705694, 4545992; 705697, 4546111; 705698, 
4546111; 705712, 4546158; 705681, 4546218; 705630, 4546292; 705619, 
4546366; 705604, 4546421; 705540, 4546481; 705491, 4546526; 705413, 
4546573; 705382, 4546602; 705365, 4546641; 705377, 4546643; 705385, 
4546647; 705391, 4546650; 705398, 4546654; 705404, 4546656; 705411, 
4546656; 705417, 4546653; 705420, 4546647; 705419, 4546639; 705417, 
4546628; 705418, 4546620; 705424, 4546607; 705437, 4546592; 705452, 
4546582; 705491, 4546565; 705503, 4546560; 705513, 4546557; 705526, 
4546553; 705538, 4546550; 705546, 4546544; 705552, 4546535; 705559, 
4546522; 705568, 4546510; 705579, 4546498; 705588, 4546487; 705598, 
4546480; 705611, 4546471; 705622, 4546461; 705631, 4546449; 705638, 
4546436; 705643, 4546425; 705645, 4546422; 705650, 4546408; 705654, 
4546395; 705658, 4546381; 705660, 4546369; 705660, 4546359; 705664, 
4546347; 705667, 4546342; 705675, 4546331; 705679, 4546323; 705683, 
4546314; 705683, 4546292; 705685, 4546280; 705687, 4546271; 705694, 
4546259; 705714, 4546246; 705721, 4546237; 705725, 4546229; 705729, 
4546218; 705731, 4546206; 705736, 4546195; 705745, 4546183; 705749, 
4546175; 705755, 4546121.
    (xi) Tract 4k. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 705162, 4546811; 705173, 4546744; 705106, 4546730; 
705075, 4546704; 705137, 4546704; 705207, 4546698; 705306, 4546696; 
705306, 4546696; 705308, 4546688; 705311, 4546678; 705000, 4546667; 
704931, 4546687; 704873, 4546735; 704855, 4546781; 704812, 4546813; 
704812, 4546814; 704812, 4546820; 704811, 4546826; 704808, 4546830; 
704802, 4546831; 704793, 4546827; 704791, 4546825; 704750, 4546834; 
704750, 4546838; 704748, 4546849; 704747, 4546861; 704748, 4546874; 
704752, 4546882; 704762, 4546890; 704773, 4546896; 704782, 4546898; 
704788, 4546902; 704796, 4546906; 704803, 4546913; 704807, 4546923; 
704807, 4546936; 704807, 4546946; 704870, 4546886; 704920, 4546847; 
704958, 4546774; 705006, 4546748; 705048, 4546766; 705076, 4546799; 
705084, 4546840; 705084, 4546893; 705062, 4546927; 705046, 4546957; 
705056, 4546960; 705070, 4546959; 705080, 4546953; 705087, 4546947; 
705095, 4546942; 705103, 4546941; 705112, 4546940; 705122, 4546937; 
705132, 4546930; 705140, 4546923; 705149, 4546917; 705156, 4546913; 
705163, 4546904; 705167, 4546894; 705164, 4546888; 705161, 4546883; 
705159, 4546875; 705161, 4546864; 705165, 4546856; 705168, 4546854; 
705162, 4546811.
    (xii) Tract 41. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 02925, 4547900; 702933, 4547900; 702939, 4547902; 
702948, 4547887;

[[Page 374]]

702968, 4547865; 703001, 4547844; 703038, 4547835; 703043, 4547832; 
703049, 4547829; 703054, 4547824; 703066, 4547809; 703087, 4547807; 
703094, 4547806; 703100, 4547805; 703102, 4547805; 703103, 4547598; 
703106, 4547564; 703105, 4547558; 703104, 4547555; 703099, 4547554; 
703093, 4547555; 703086, 4547558; 703078, 4547562; 703069, 4547567; 
703061, 4547572; 703045, 4547581; 703030, 4547586; 703016, 4547588; 
703001, 4547587; 702990, 4547582; 702980, 4547578; 702953, 4547563; 
702940, 4547560; 702927, 4547563; 702923, 4547568; 702922, 4547572; 
702924, 4547584; 702926, 4547593; 702928, 4547599; 702935, 4547608; 
702954, 4547624; 702961, 4547647; 702928, 4547653; 702897, 4547665; 
702859, 4547666; 702857, 4547669; 702851, 4547678; 702847, 4547690; 
702845, 4547700; 702846, 4547713; 702849, 4547727; 702849, 4547727; 
702874, 4547742; 702907, 4547765; 702913, 4547822; 702912, 4547846; 
702882, 4547872; 702874, 4547884; 702876, 4547891; 702880, 4547899; 
702884, 4547906; 702893, 4547910; 702901, 4547911; 702911, 4547909; 
702917, 4547907; 702921, 4547904; 702925, 4547900.
    (xiii) Tract 4m. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 703489, 4548057; 703478, 4548055; 703470, 4548054; 
703464, 4548053; 703456, 4548057; 703453, 4548053; 703450, 4548052; 
703444, 4548048; 703440, 4548044; 703432, 4548039; 703423, 4548034; 
703411, 4548027; 703401, 4548021; 703388, 4548016; 703383, 4548016; 
703381, 4548020; 703369, 4548005; 703365, 4547997; 703360, 4547989; 
703355, 4547980; 703352, 4547973; 703353, 4547966; 703355, 4547961; 
703357, 4547956; 703358, 4547949; 703335, 4547941; 703324, 4547935; 
703316, 4547924; 703311, 4547910; 703309, 4547893; 703309, 4547877; 
703312, 4547860; 703316, 4547842; 703320, 4547824; 703322, 4547808; 
703319, 4547790; 703314, 4547773; 703308, 4547760; 703307, 4547744; 
703308, 4547727; 703305, 4547714; 703302, 4547696; 703299, 4547677; 
703299, 4547661; 703303, 4547648; 703311, 4547637; 703324, 4547630; 
703338, 4547627; 703351, 4547623; 703360, 4547615; 703371, 4547599; 
703375, 4547590; 703384, 4547577; 703388, 4547570; 703390, 4547553; 
703393, 4547528; 703396, 4547508; 703395, 4547491; 703387, 4547473; 
703376, 4547460; 703366, 4547450; 703358, 4547431; 703357, 4547415; 
703355, 4547402; 703350, 4547393; 703339, 4547384; 703333, 4547374; 
703330, 4547358; 703325, 4547344; 703315, 4547334; 703305, 4547326; 
703293, 4547315; 703284, 4547306; 703258, 4547283; 703246, 4547274; 
703231, 4547262; 703219, 4547253; 703207, 4547244; 703200, 4547234; 
703199, 4547223; 703205, 4547211; 703219, 4547203; 703233, 4547197; 
703240, 4547189; 703241, 4547173; 703237, 4547159; 703229, 4547148; 
703214, 4547137; 703202, 4547123; 703197, 4547114; 703195, 4547103; 
703198, 4547089; 703208, 4547073; 703221, 4547055; 703229, 4547044; 
703236, 4547034; 703241, 4547026; 703247, 4547019; 703254, 4547005; 
703256, 4547008; 703260, 4547012; 703263, 4547015; 703268, 4547023; 
703273, 4547036; 703276, 4547050; 703276, 4547064; 703272, 4547074; 
703267, 4547084; 703265, 4547099; 703267, 4547113; 703269, 4547126; 
703275, 4547135; 703283, 4547145; 703292, 4547154; 703300, 4547162; 
703327, 4547122; 703369, 4547100; 703416, 4547101; 703435, 4547128; 
703465, 4547184; 703526, 4547199; 703620, 4547221; 703684, 4547237; 
703726, 4547259; 703768, 4547339; 703811, 4547361; 703765, 4547387; 
703726, 4547409; 703698, 4547449; 703699, 4547518; 703682, 4547530; 
703674, 4547567; 703674, 4547612; 703659, 4547670; 703638, 4547662; 
703611, 4547629; 703573, 4547594; 703542, 4547552; 703500, 4547509; 
703469, 4547465; 703466, 4547441; 703447, 4547421; 703420, 4547372; 
703381, 4547360; 703381, 4547363; 703378, 4547375; 703376, 4547393; 
703376, 4547406; 703382, 4547419; 703390, 4547430; 703399, 4547444; 
703405, 4547461; 703412, 4547479; 703417, 4547499; 703423, 4547516; 
703431, 4547532; 703433, 4547542; 703462, 4547562; 703520, 4547619; 
703543, 4547688; 703578, 4547749; 703593, 4547795; 703592, 4547837; 
703585, 4547867; 703569, 4547901; 703579, 4547960; 703616, 4547995; 
703610, 4548075; 703610, 4548075; 703615, 4548091; 703619, 4548104; 
703626, 4548112; 703633, 4548121; 703638, 4548128; 703638, 4548136; 
703636, 4548142; 703633, 4548146; 703625, 4548153; 703629, 4548167; 
703631, 4548173; 703632, 4548179; 703633, 4548187; 703633, 4548192; 
703631, 4548198; 703629, 4548204; 703628, 4548208; 703627, 4548223; 
703643, 4548220; 703653, 4548216; 703659, 4548212; 703663, 4548203; 
703664, 4548189; 703664, 4548177; 703668, 4548164; 703669, 4548163; 
703657, 4548152; 703656, 4548102; 703651, 4548021; 703654, 4547960; 
703679, 4547937; 703713, 4547896; 703741, 4547895; 703748, 4547897; 
703744, 4547885; 703737, 4547873; 703730, 4547860; 703723, 4547844; 
703715, 4547831; 703706, 4547821; 703700, 4547810; 703695, 4547788; 
703697, 4547780; 703703, 4547772; 703704, 4547765; 703702, 4547753; 
703696, 4547739; 703691, 4547727; 703691, 4547716; 703693, 4547701; 
703699, 4547689; 703705, 4547679; 703708, 4547671; 703708, 4547657; 
703702, 4547642; 703701, 4547628; 703705, 4547619; 703709, 4547612; 
703706, 4547599; 703702, 4547589; 703701, 4547580; 703707, 4547570; 
703716, 4547564; 703724, 4547561; 703732, 4547556; 703735, 4547549; 
703733, 4547539; 703717, 4547527; 703731, 4547526; 703734, 4547525; 
703736, 4547522; 703739, 4547517; 703740, 4547512; 703740, 4547503; 
703740, 4547492; 703740, 4547486; 703743, 4547478; 703746, 4547476; 
703753, 4547476; 703759, 4547482; 703761, 4547490; 703761, 4547498; 
703766, 4547509; 703776, 4547513; 703786, 4547514; 703799, 4547515; 
703808, 4547514; 703818, 4547513; 703823, 4547513; 703829, 4547511; 
703833, 4547508; 703836, 4547506; 703837, 4547501; 703837, 4547485; 
703862, 4547492; 703871, 4547492; 703884, 4547494; 703890, 4547495; 
703900, 4547496; 703909, 4547494; 703915, 4547491; 703922, 4547483; 
703923, 4547473; 703920, 4547464; 703906, 4547454; 703894, 4547448; 
703883, 4547442; 703874, 4547434; 703868, 4547427; 703865, 4547416; 
703866, 4547405; 703869, 4547394; 703874, 4547381; 703883, 4547373; 
703895, 4547371; 703910, 4547371; 703925, 4547374; 703938, 4547378; 
703950, 4547382; 703961, 4547387; 703971, 4547391; 703976, 4547393; 
703985, 4547396; 703993, 4547397; 704001, 4547396; 704009, 4547393; 
704015, 4547387; 704017, 4547380; 704017, 4547367; 704015, 4547356; 
704010, 4547342; 704002, 4547323; 703996, 4547313; 703987, 4547304; 
703980, 4547298; 703972, 4547291; 703965, 4547281; 703962, 4547274; 
703962, 4547268; 703962, 4547265; 703968, 4547258; 703979, 4547255; 
703991, 4547256; 704023, 4547256; 704036, 4547255; 704049, 4547253; 
704060, 4547249; 704070, 4547246; 704075, 4547242; 704082, 4547231; 
704082, 4547218; 704080, 4547205; 704080, 4547196; 704085, 4547184; 
704089, 4547174; 704091, 4547160; 704089, 4547141; 704084, 4547125; 
704079, 4547109;

[[Page 375]]

704080, 4547094; 704084, 4547084; 704087, 4547079; 704089, 4547069; 
704089, 4547064; 704090, 4547057; 704090, 4547056; 704099, 4547054; 
704100, 4547054; 704106, 4547050; 704111, 4547044; 704114, 4547039; 
704117, 4547033; 704121, 4547025; 704124, 4547021; 704130, 4547015; 
704131, 4547014; 704135, 4547009; 704137, 4547005; 704138, 4547001; 
704138, 4546999; 704136, 4546992; 704154, 4546981; 704178, 4546974; 
704202, 4546969; 704224, 4546963; 704245, 4546959; 704268, 4546957; 
704290, 4546955; 704306, 4546956; 704320, 4546958; 704332, 4546961; 
704345, 4546963; 704355, 4546962; 704367, 4546954; 704377, 4546941; 
704409, 4546916; 704430, 4546912; 704446, 4546908; 704466, 4546904; 
704477, 4546901; 704491, 4546892; 704493, 4546886; 704500, 4546877; 
704507, 4546870; 704518, 4546866; 704534, 4546863; 704567, 4546797; 
704638, 4546765; 704729, 4546782; 704729, 4546746; 704727, 4546732; 
704727, 4546724; 704728, 4546719; 704728, 4546712; 704727, 4546705; 
704727, 4546692; 704727, 4546685; 704728, 4546679; 704729, 4546674; 
704729, 4546670; 704728, 4546669; 704725, 4546668; 704723, 4546668; 
704717, 4546669; 704703, 4546671; 704701, 4546675; 704698, 4546681; 
704696, 4546686; 704694, 4546689; 704690, 4546691; 704684, 4546693; 
704678, 4546694; 704659, 4546696; 704654, 4546696; 704653, 4546696; 
704641, 4546695; 704631, 4546694; 704623, 4546694; 704606, 4546696; 
704576, 4546698; 704521, 4546701; 704500, 4546702; 704480, 4546702; 
704455, 4546701; 704434, 4546699; 704410, 4546698; 704351, 4546691; 
704333, 4546689; 704315, 4546690; 704297, 4546694; 704283, 4546692; 
704265, 4546693; 704243, 4546693; 704219, 4546693; 704201, 4546691; 
704155, 4546688; 704139, 4546686; 704124, 4546685; 704108, 4546684; 
704090, 4546685; 704073, 4546685; 704056, 4546686; 704044, 4546686; 
704028, 4546689; 704010, 4546693; 703997, 4546699; 703987, 4546705; 
703979, 4546716; 703973, 4546727; 703966, 4546741; 703955, 4546761; 
703957, 4546764; 703962, 4546769; 703969, 4546774; 703972, 4546777; 
703973, 4546783; 703971, 4546804; 704011, 4546822; 704024, 4546829; 
704030, 4546843; 704030, 4546843; 704029, 4546851; 704024, 4546857; 
704019, 4546860; 704010, 4546863; 704000, 4546868; 703983, 4546878; 
703976, 4546885; 703971, 4546893; 703966, 4546903; 703963, 4546915; 
703962, 4546924; 703958, 4546935; 703955, 4546938; 703947, 4546945; 
703939, 4546949; 703928, 4546951; 703917, 4546953; 703905, 4546957; 
703900, 4546964; 703893, 4546985; 703889, 4546995; 703884, 4547001; 
703874, 4547007; 703864, 4547013; 703856, 4547023; 703858, 4547032; 
703867, 4547042; 703879, 4547048; 703887, 4547054; 703894, 4547063; 
703894, 4547074; 703888, 4547080; 703883, 4547084; 703880, 4547089; 
703879, 4547100; 703882, 4547110; 703887, 4547121; 703892, 4547131; 
703892, 4547136; 703892, 4547144; 703890, 4547149; 703886, 4547153; 
703878, 4547156; 703872, 4547160; 703866, 4547167; 703861, 4547177; 
703857, 4547180; 703849, 4547180; 703840, 4547178; 703826, 4547174; 
703814, 4547173; 703799, 4547175; 703792, 4547177; 703792, 4547177; 
703776, 4547185; 703762, 4547194; 703744, 4547185; 703744, 4547185; 
703741, 4547183; 703736, 4547182; 703734, 4547181; 703734, 4547181; 
703727, 4547179; 703715, 4547180; 703705, 4547184; 703698, 4547187; 
703692, 4547192; 703685, 4547195; 703670, 4547196; 703661, 4547194; 
703653, 4547191; 703642, 4547189; 703626, 4547187; 703612, 4547185; 
703594, 4547183; 703576, 4547183; 703555, 4547183; 703535, 4547182; 
703520, 4547181; 703505, 4547179; 703491, 4547176; 703479, 4547171; 
703468, 4547166; 703463, 4547159; 703463, 4547155; 703464, 4547151; 
703468, 4547149; 703474, 4547148; 703481, 4547148; 703490, 4547148; 
703503, 4547143; 703497, 4547130; 703488, 4547127; 703478, 4547119; 
703472, 4547112; 703466, 4547102; 703459, 4547089; 703451, 4547074; 
703441, 4547062; 703426, 4547047; 703414, 4547037; 703395, 4547025; 
703375, 4547013; 703348, 4546992; 703344, 4546988; 703331, 4546984; 
703316, 4546983; 703304, 4546983; 703293, 4546981; 703285, 4546980; 
703275, 4546981; 703258, 4546985; 703253, 4546972; 703252, 4546965; 
703251, 4546953; 703253, 4546946; 703259, 4546937; 703266, 4546934; 
703274, 4546931; 703287, 4546929; 703294, 4546925; 703303, 4546919; 
703314, 4546914; 703327, 4546911; 703340, 4546911; 703355, 4546914; 
703367, 4546918; 703378, 4546923; 703388, 4546931; 703391, 4546935; 
703393, 4546940; 703392, 4546945; 703389, 4546950; 703387, 4546954; 
703384, 4546958; 703382, 4546966; 703384, 4546972; 703392, 4546979; 
703407, 4546984; 703423, 4546986; 703436, 4546987; 703449, 4546989; 
703458, 4546992; 703465, 4546997; 703473, 4547001; 703477, 4547005; 
703478, 4547012; 703478, 4547023; 703477, 4547029; 703477, 4547036; 
703478, 4547044; 703482, 4547049; 703491, 4547053; 703500, 4547058; 
703506, 4547063; 703516, 4547076; 703520, 4547087; 703523, 4547096; 
703527, 4547101; 703537, 4547109; 703545, 4547113; 703553, 4547116; 
703572, 4547122; 703581, 4547124; 703587, 4547124; 703591, 4547122; 
703602, 4547112; 703612, 4547100; 703621, 4547089; 703628, 4547086; 
703642, 4547085; 703654, 4547088; 703670, 4547093; 703684, 4547096; 
703695, 4547100; 703708, 4547106; 703720, 4547110; 703728, 4547113; 
703733, 4547114; 703741, 4547115; 703748, 4547116; 703756, 4547115; 
703763, 4547115; 703769, 4547113; 703772, 4547110; 703775, 4547108; 
703776, 4547104; 703775, 4547099; 703774, 4547091; 703772, 4547086; 
703771, 4547083; 703768, 4547080; 703775, 4547071; 703776, 4547069; 
703776, 4547067; 703777, 4547062; 703776, 4547059; 703773, 4547053; 
703770, 4547049; 703763, 4547045; 703752, 4547038; 703744, 4547033; 
703738, 4547028; 703737, 4547021; 703736, 4547015; 703737, 4547006; 
703737, 4547000; 703733, 4546992; 703726, 4546983; 703737, 4546973; 
703745, 4546969; 703756, 4546962; 703764, 4546953; 703771, 4546944; 
703777, 4546938; 703785, 4546934; 703797, 4546933; 703808, 4546932; 
703820, 4546928; 703826, 4546927; 703833, 4546923; 703836, 4546921; 
703839, 4546914; 703840, 4546906; 703838, 4546896; 703835, 4546884; 
703831, 4546871; 703830, 4546863; 703831, 4546854; 703832, 4546847; 
703836, 4546841; 703841, 4546834; 703848, 4546827; 703872, 4546809; 
703881, 4546806; 703895, 4546799; 703903, 4546795; 703910, 4546790; 
703920, 4546785; 703925, 4546780; 703930, 4546773; 703932, 4546765; 
703932, 4546756; 703931, 4546746; 703928, 4546736; 703927, 4546725; 
703930, 4546712; 703935, 4546703; 703942, 4546698; 703950, 4546694; 
703957, 4546691; 703966, 4546688; 703973, 4546684; 703977, 4546679; 
703980, 4546672; 703982, 4546667; 703983, 4546661; 703985, 4546649; 
703333, 4546631; 703154, 4546626; 703154, 4546629; 703118, 4546624; 
703118, 4546619; 702982, 4546615; 702982, 4546615; 702891, 4546611; 
702891, 4546614; 702891, 4546616; 702891, 4546618; 702892, 4546623; 
702895, 4546631; 702898, 4546633; 702904, 4546636; 702909, 4546637; 
702928, 4546639; 702927, 4546640; 702928, 4546644; 702933, 4546652; 
702940, 4546658; 702946, 4546661;

[[Page 376]]

702952, 4546663; 702968, 4546672; 702965, 4546681; 702965, 4546687; 
702966, 4546696; 702968, 4546709; 702969, 4546720; 702975, 4546727; 
702986, 4546726; 702994, 4546725; 703003, 4546730; 703009, 4546737; 
703010, 4546745; 703009, 4546754; 703002, 4546775; 703001, 4546788; 
703003, 4546796; 703008, 4546805; 703016, 4546812; 703023, 4546817; 
703030, 4546819; 703056, 4546824; 703055, 4546829; 703059, 4546836; 
703063, 4546840; 703067, 4546844; 703070, 4546848; 703070, 4546851; 
703066, 4546856; 703059, 4546856; 703051, 4546855; 703047, 4546857; 
703044, 4546860; 703044, 4546865; 703048, 4546871; 703051, 4546875; 
703053, 4546883; 703053, 4546893; 703053, 4546898; 703046, 4546905; 
703038, 4546909; 703031, 4546915; 703025, 4546920; 703016, 4546922; 
703007, 4546925; 702999, 4546928; 702991, 4546930; 702983, 4546929; 
702978, 4546927; 702967, 4546923; 702965, 4546920; 702895, 4546927; 
702837, 4546945; 702809, 4546984; 702755, 4547063; 702713, 4547086; 
702717, 4547093; 702716, 4547097; 702710, 4547101; 702703, 4547103; 
702694, 4547105; 702686, 4547107; 702672, 4547111; 702659, 4547112; 
702646, 4547111; 702639, 4547110; 702627, 4547108; 702612, 4547105; 
702599, 4547102; 702582, 4547095; 702566, 4547090; 702550, 4547087; 
702531, 4547083; 702520, 4547083; 702512, 4547088; 702509, 4547096; 
702507, 4547107; 702507, 4547116; 702510, 4547126; 702514, 4547134; 
702519, 4547140; 702527, 4547149; 702530, 4547153; 702545, 4547151; 
702596, 4547157; 702658, 4547156; 702702, 4547168; 702705, 4547205; 
702698, 4547258; 702694, 4547315; 702706, 4547366; 702707, 4547420; 
702710, 4547419; 702713, 4547417; 702718, 4547412; 702724, 4547406; 
702733, 4547400; 702734, 4547398; 702746, 4547388; 702754, 4547383; 
702777, 4547374; 702784, 4547372; 702791, 4547372; 702765, 4547319; 
702780, 4547256; 702823, 4547170; 702855, 4547133; 702867, 4547149; 
702890, 4547198; 702899, 4547201; 702907, 4547238; 702924, 4547290; 
702935, 4547300; 702949, 4547315; 702962, 4547328; 702972, 4547337; 
702983, 4547343; 702985, 4547342; 702995, 4547342; 703004, 4547344; 
703014, 4547349; 703025, 4547357; 703034, 4547367; 703043, 4547378; 
703053, 4547391; 703062, 4547405; 703072, 4547415; 703080, 4547422; 
703103, 4547430; 703103, 4547429; 703134, 4547443; 703137, 4547446; 
703144, 4547449; 703154, 4547451; 703161, 4547449; 703168, 4547447; 
703176, 4547442; 703184, 4547437; 703193, 4547436; 703205, 4547438; 
703219, 4547439; 703237, 4547438; 703255, 4547436; 703271, 4547435; 
703282, 4547435; 703291, 4547439; 703298, 4547448; 703300, 4547461; 
703299, 4547465; 703296, 4547472; 703293, 4547478; 703289, 4547488; 
703288, 4547501; 703290, 4547509; 703297, 4547519; 703303, 4547531; 
703306, 4547547; 703307, 4547551; 703295, 4547616; 703248, 4547589; 
703172, 4547523; 703144, 4547518; 703139, 4547521; 703137, 4547520; 
703134, 4547523; 703134, 4547526; 703133, 4547542; 703128, 4547550; 
703128, 4547555; 703128, 4547559; 703128, 4547564; 703129, 4547568; 
703130, 4547571; 703133, 4547579; 703133, 4547594; 703133, 4547596; 
703132, 4547603; 703133, 4547603; 703133, 4547604; 703135, 4547622; 
703133, 4547621; 703133, 4547629; 703133, 4547649; 703134, 4547649; 
703132, 4547757; 703131, 4547758; 703130, 4547810; 703131, 4547815; 
703175, 4547811; 703230, 4547836; 703244, 4547854; 703248, 4547852; 
703289, 4547922; 703289, 4547924; 703310, 4547963; 703339, 4548041; 
703363, 4548105; 703377, 4548166; 703397, 4548216; 703414, 4548217; 
703438, 4548218; 703470, 4548219; 703532, 4548221; 703589, 4548225; 
703593, 4548211; 703594, 4548204; 703590, 4548190; 703585, 4548175; 
703579, 4548162; 703574, 4548148; 703570, 4548135; 703565, 4548122; 
703560, 4548115; 703553, 4548107; 703546, 4548097; 703539, 4548087; 
703530, 4548079; 703523, 4548072; 703512, 4548066; 703504, 4548061; 
703496, 4548058; 703489, 4548057; 703746, 4546901; 703746, 4546899; 
703746, 4546900; 703746, 4546901.
    (xiv) Tract 4n. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 703213, 4548983; 703212, 4548980; 703214, 4548981; 
703216, 4548980; 703224, 4548972; 703227, 4548972; 703247, 4548891; 
703261, 4548823; 703258, 4548757; 703244, 4548695; 703279, 4548634; 
703314, 4548625; 703333, 4548677; 703347, 4548724; 703374, 4548847; 
703375, 4548847; 703379, 4548849; 703382, 4548846; 703387, 4548837; 
703389, 4548824; 703388, 4548810; 703388, 4548793; 703394, 4548778; 
703398, 4548770; 703404, 4548759; 703406, 4548742; 703405, 4548728; 
703403, 4548717; 703402, 4548703; 703408, 4548686; 703410, 4548670; 
703410, 4548669; 703383, 4548606; 703387, 4548541; 703416, 4548480; 
703482, 4548378; 703456, 4548298; 703458, 4548249; 703407, 4548248; 
703379, 4548312; 703344, 4548357; 703290, 4548395; 703205, 4548437; 
703135, 4548453; 703132, 4548456; 703126, 4548466; 703122, 4548472; 
703120, 4548476; 703118, 4548481; 703117, 4548485; 703116, 4548490; 
703116, 4548494; 703117, 4548499; 703119, 4548502; 703127, 4548503; 
703137, 4548501; 703147, 4548500; 703157, 4548497; 703165, 4548496; 
703171, 4548497; 703173, 4548501; 703179, 4548508; 703174, 4548519; 
703184, 4548518; 703236, 4548529; 703279, 4548537; 703254, 4548586; 
703225, 4548663; 703217, 4548736; 703208, 4548835; 703200, 4548891; 
703182, 4548942; 703181, 4548946; 703180, 4548961; 703176, 4548977; 
703173, 4548986; 703168, 4548996; 703164, 4549006; 703161, 4549012; 
703159, 4549017; 703158, 4549021; 703157, 4549026; 703159, 4549030; 
703165, 4549034; 703171, 4549034; 703179, 4549030; 703191, 4549020; 
703200, 4549009; 703206, 4549000; 703210, 4548992; 703213, 4548983.
    (xv) Note: Map of Unit 4, Jack Sinn - Rock Creek (Map 4), follows:

[[Page 377]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.007

 Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle (Desmocerus californicus dimorphus) 
                     California. Sacramento County.

    (1) Sacramento Zone. An area in the city of Sacramento enclosed on 
the north by the Route 160 Freeway, on the west and southwest by the 
Western Pacific railroad tracks, and on the east by Commerce Circle and 
its extension southward to the railroad tracks.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.148
    
    (2) American River Parkway Zone. An area of the American River 
Parkway on the south bank of the American River, bounded on the north by 
latitude 30[deg]37[min]30[sec] N, on the west and southwest by Elmanto 
Drive from its junction with Ambassador Drive to its extension

[[Page 378]]

to latitute 38[deg]37[min]30[sec] N, and on the south and east by 
Ambassador Drive and its extension north to latitude 
38[deg]37[min]30[sec] N. Goethe Park, and that portion of the American 
River Parkway northeast of Goethe Park, west of the Jedediah Smith 
Memorial Bicycle Trail, and north to a line extended eastward from Palm 
Drive.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.149
    
         Bay Checkerspot Butterfly (Euphydryas editha bayensis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for San Mateo and Santa 
Clara Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the Bay 
checkerspot butterfly are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) The presence of annual or perennial grasslands with little to no 
overstory that provide north-south and east-west slopes with a tilt of 
more than 7 degrees for larval host plant survival during periods of 
atypical weather (for example, drought). Common grassland species 
include wild oats (Avena fatua), soft chess (Bromus hordeaceus), 
California oatgrass (Danthonia californica), purple needlegrass 
(Nassella pulchra), and Idaho fescue (Festuca idahoensis); less abundant 
in these grasslands are annual and perennial forbs such as filaree 
(Erodium botrys), true clovers (Trifolium sp.), dwarf plantain (Plantago 
erecta), and turkey mullein (Croton setigerus). These species, with the 
exception of dwarf plantain, are not required by the Bay checkerspot 
butterfly, but merely are provided here as an example of species 
commonly found in California grasslands.
    (ii) The presence of the primary larval host plant, dwarf plantain 
(Plantago erecta), and at least one of the secondary host plants, purple 
owl's-clover (Castilleja densiflora) or exserted paintbrush (Castilleja 
exserta), are required for reproduction, feeding, and larval 
development.
    (iii) The presence of adult nectar sources for feeding. Common 
nectar sources include desertparsley (Lomatium spp.), California 
goldfields (Lasthenia californica), tidy-tips (Layia platyglossa), sea 
muilla (Muilla maritima), scytheleaf onion (Allium falcifolium), false 
babystars (Linanthus androsaceus), and intermediate fiddleneck 
(Amsinckia intermedia).
    (iv) Soils derived from serpentinite ultramafic rock (Montara, 
Climara, Henneke, Hentine, and Obispo soil series) or similar soils 
(Inks, Candlestick, Los Gatos, Fagan, and Barnabe soil series) that 
provide areas with fewer aggressive, nonnative plant species for larval 
host plant and adult nectar plant survival and reproduction.
    (v) The presence of stable holes and cracks in the soil, and surface 
rock outcrops that provide shelter for the larval stage of the Bay 
checkerspot butterfly during summer diapause.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing on the effective date of this 
rule and not containing one or more of the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles using USDA National 
Agricultural Imagery Program (NAIP) county-wide MrSID compressed mosaics 
of 1 meter resolution and natural color aerial photography from summer 
2005. Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 10, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map for Bay checkerspot butterfly critical habitat 
units follows:

[[Page 379]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.000

    (6) Unit 1: San Bruno Mountain, San Mateo County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Francisco South.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 52853, 4170062; 52856, 4170038; 52862, 4170043; 52866, 4170045; 
52889, 4170061; 52915, 4170074; 52940, 4170084; 52970, 4170091; 52991, 
4170102; 53010, 4170112; 53036, 4170134; 53057, 4170130; 53070, 4170151; 
53089, 4170171; 53112, 4170170; 53135, 4170154; 53153, 4170109; 53184, 
4170104; 53203, 4170081; 53207, 4170041; 53201, 4169958; 53214, 4169958; 
53241, 4169938; 53257, 4169970; 53281, 4169974; 53303, 4169965; 53323, 
4169971; 53344, 4169964; 53355, 4169943; 53374, 4169943; 53402, 4169930; 
53404, 4169906; 53428, 4169900; 53458, 4169913; 53489, 4169909; 53527, 
4169898; 53563, 4169900; 53592, 4169902; 53627, 4169892; 53656, 4169877; 
53671, 4169859; 53713, 4169856; 53710, 4169804; 53665, 4169711; 53618, 
4169606; 53604, 4169575; 53559, 4169488; 53521, 4169481; 53492, 4169479; 
53478, 4169457; 53474, 4169413; 53454, 4169388; 53434, 4169364; 53387, 
4169340; 53357, 4169322; 53336, 4169300; 53317, 4169269; 53301,

[[Page 380]]

4169264; 53287, 4169242; 53260, 4169178; 53235, 4169105; 53164, 4169029; 
53100, 4169010; 53101, 4168943; 53069, 4168920; 53013, 4168954; 52936, 
4168954; 52882, 4169005; 52824, 4169051; 52752, 4169071; 52718, 4169074; 
52650, 4169066; 52628, 4169020; 52610, 4168977; 52552, 4168965; 52580, 
4169045; 52440, 4169117; 52362, 4169110; 52352, 4169041; 52235, 4169066; 
52242, 4169257; 52198, 4169347; 52168, 4169354; 52159, 4169382; 52152, 
4169426; 52142, 4169428; 52127, 4169422; 52107, 4169432; 52094, 4169445; 
52088, 4169459; 52083, 4169491; 52068, 4169488; 52054, 4169493; 52049, 
4169483; 52049, 4169465; 52046, 4169432; 52038, 4169413; 52024, 4169400; 
52010, 4169390; 51996, 4169388; 51993, 4169373; 51990, 4169352; 51989, 
4169338; 51977, 4169310; 51954, 4169295; 51930, 4169292; 51912, 4169296; 
51896, 4169310; 51876, 4169332; 51849, 4169369; 51827, 4169382; 51815, 
4169391; 51792, 4169390; 51759, 4169390; 51747, 4169402; 51752, 4169424; 
51760, 4169437; 51769, 4169458; 51771, 4169481; 51797, 4169559; 51721, 
4169595; 51695, 4169469; 51667, 4169464; 51647, 4169469; 51623, 4169501; 
51589, 4169527; 51592, 4169674; 51570, 4169677; 51550, 4169674; 51508, 
4169668; 51477, 4169671; 51435, 4169674; 51423, 4169719; 51419, 4169736; 
51408, 4169731; 51394, 4169713; 51379, 4169697; 51354, 4169691; 51341, 
4169690; 51337, 4169681; 51315, 4169681; 51303, 4169689; 51279, 4169713; 
51229, 4169810; 51184, 4169770; 51171, 4169745; 51155, 4169731; 51135, 
4169723; 51129, 4169719; 51129, 4169710; 51129, 4169690; 51127, 4169669; 
51118, 4169651; 51104, 4169629; 51086, 4169609; 51061, 4169598; 51035, 
4169591; 50999, 4169589; 50967, 4169591; 50935, 4169599; 50913, 4169616; 
50896, 4169638; 50882, 4169668; 50844, 4169623; 50831, 4169611; 50810, 
4169588; 50792, 4169588; 50777, 4169590; 50760, 4169600; 50748, 4169602; 
50738, 4169589; 50731, 4169574; 50731, 4169561; 50736, 4169542; 50740, 
4169517; 50741, 4169495; 50736, 4169475; 50729, 4169463; 50723, 4169447; 
50722, 4169430; 50718, 4169415; 50710, 4169399; 50701, 4169385; 50690, 
4169374; 50679, 4169365; 50674, 4169349; 50664, 4169330; 50655, 4169312; 
50635, 4169299; 50623, 4169292; 50613, 4169284; 50613, 4169268; 50597, 
4169255; 50583, 4169239; 50580, 4169215; 50583, 4169191; 50613, 4169153; 
50665, 4169090; 50650, 4169068; 50617, 4169048; 50572, 4169043; 50542, 
4169042; 50519, 4169048; 50498, 4169052; 50483, 4169061; 50461, 4169073; 
50444, 4169085; 50387, 4169124; 50362, 4169151; 50346, 4169178; 50322, 
4169174; 50297, 4169175; 50279, 4169181; 50235, 4169183; 50203, 4169194; 
50169, 4169217; 50139, 4169238; 50122, 4169250; 50104, 4169267; 50081, 
4169290; 50073, 4169317; 50068, 4169345; 50069, 4169377; 50070, 4169388; 
50068, 4169402; 50068, 4169418; 50076, 4169438; 50087, 4169455; 50087, 
4169464; 50068, 4169486; 50054, 4169509; 50044, 4169534; 50035, 4169557; 
50033, 4169584; 50034, 4169608; 50040, 4169631; 50045, 4169650; 50050, 
4169664; 50055, 4169673; 50059, 4169686; 50068, 4169712; 50078, 4169734; 
50090, 4169776; 50096, 4169811; 50117, 4169844; 50136, 4169877; 50152, 
4169904; 50180, 4169920; 50235, 4169925; 50279, 4169932; 50323, 4169940; 
50364, 4169954; 50399, 4169970; 50412, 4169998; 50435, 4170034; 50460, 
4170069; 50490, 4170103; 50485, 4170138; 50482, 4170165; 50479, 4170188; 
50491, 4170214; 50483, 4170257; 50495, 4170295; 50515, 4170330; 50547, 
4170370; 50580, 4170407; 50613, 4170479; 50624, 4170446; 50640, 4170421; 
50667, 4170395; 50706, 4170376; 50730, 4170351; 50756, 4170336; 50784, 
4170314; 50799, 4170279; 50794, 4170250; 50767, 4170227; 50774, 4170205; 
50811, 4170182; 50851, 4170185; 50881, 4170201; 50892, 4170233; 50944, 
4170243; 50957, 4170277; 50980, 4170307; 51017, 4170327; 51050, 4170349; 
51063, 4170366; 51069, 4170404; 51069, 4170462; 51093, 4170507; 51112, 
4170535; 51128, 4170569; 51159, 4170601; 51180, 4170643; 51195, 4170685; 
51203, 4170750; 51268, 4170754; 51274, 4170805; 51322, 4170818; 51364, 
4170820; 51385, 4170786; 51354, 4170744; 51345, 4170699; 51303, 4170619; 
51206, 4170481; 51188, 4170457; 51133, 4170443; 51104, 4170432; 51101, 
4170397; 51113, 4170364; 51119, 4170341; 51150, 4170331; 51167, 4170314; 
51187, 4170309; 51214, 4170298; 51227, 4170315; 51243, 4170321; 51262, 
4170291; 51287, 4170284; 51316, 4170276; 51343, 4170291; 51382, 4170291; 
51427, 4170277; 51455, 4170354; 51495, 4170371; 51506, 4170328; 51536, 
4170284; 51569, 4170288; 51589, 4170279; 51614, 4170278; 51628, 4170264; 
51622, 4170249; 51626, 4170230; 51629, 4170215; 51643, 4170211; 51657, 
4170201; 51673, 4170196; 51689, 4170185; 51711, 4170180; 51736, 4170180; 
51767, 4170176; 51793, 4170180; 51823, 4170182; 51845, 4170150; 51843, 
4170122; 51871, 4170112; 51874, 4170144; 51879, 4170178; 51893, 4170205; 
51914, 4170246; 51916, 4170287; 51943, 4170335; 51944, 4170395; 51956, 
4170442; 51967, 4170500; 51964, 4170535; 51947, 4170559; 51929, 4170584; 
51937, 4170647; 51943, 4170683; 51944, 4170710; 51919, 4170764; 51916, 
4170789; 51925, 4170815; 51944, 4170850; 51955, 4170879; 51974, 4170905; 
51980, 4170939; 51981, 4170982; 51997, 4170985; 52017, 4170989; 52040, 
4170986; 52056, 4170972; 52076, 4170953; 52091, 4170957; 52113, 4170977; 
52150, 4170992; 52173, 4170975; 52186, 4170953; 52150, 4170924; 52147, 
4170872; 52166, 4170834; 52169, 4170799; 52160, 4170686; 52125, 4170673; 
52125, 4170651; 52160, 4170651; 52157, 4170619; 52131, 4170600; 52141, 
4170564; 52173, 4170564; 52176, 4170503; 52128, 4170295; 52125, 4170263; 
52134, 4170222; 52153, 4170202; 52176, 4170190; 52214, 4170190; 52243, 
4170206; 52266, 4170196; 52266, 4170129; 52236, 4170086; 52202, 4170051; 
52145, 4169994; 52165, 4169960; 52221, 4169933; 52269, 4169930; 52319, 
4169895; 52385, 4169894; 52425, 4169868; 52461, 4169881; 52449, 4170010; 
52462, 4170073; 52488, 4170158; 52518, 4170166; 52539, 4170168; 52560, 
4170160; 52575, 4170162; 52596, 4170173; 52616, 4170174; 52651, 4170154; 
52683, 4170159; 52723, 4170154; 52754, 4170155; 52782, 4170155; 52805, 
4170147; 52831, 4170134; 52847, 4170094; returning to 52853, 4170062.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 381]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.001

    (7) Unit 2: Pulgas Ridge, San Mateo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Mateo.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 558502, 4151442; 558422, 4151451; 558339, 4151484; 558223, 
4151555; 558094, 4151656; 557957, 4151788; 557745, 4152013; 557545, 
4152228; 557398, 4152392; 557274, 4152523; 557191, 4152632; 557123, 
4152751; 557076, 4152838; 557061, 4152902; 557012, 4153060; 557027, 
4153077; 557027, 4153130; 556994, 4153145; 556961, 4153171; 556939, 
4153182; 556936, 4153216; 556913, 4153220; 556880, 4153242; 556868, 
4153273; 556867, 4153329; 557060, 4153350; 557277, 4153095; 557358, 
4153009; 557407, 4152900; 557494, 4152681; 557576, 4152631; 557851, 
4152470; 558104, 4152134; 558210, 4152004; 558320, 4151850; 558268, 
4151803; 558302, 4151758; 558363, 4151800; 558474, 4151666; 558625, 
4151470; 558602, 4151463; 558557, 4151448; returning to 558502, 4151442.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 382]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.002

    (8) Unit 3: Edgewood Park, San Mateo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Woodside.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 564162, 4146806; 564197, 4146796; 564234, 4146748; 564270, 
4146731; 564196, 4146657; 564182, 4146642; 564169, 4146630; 564154, 
4146615; 564142, 4146585; 564128, 4146601; 564108, 4146585; 564097, 
4146565; 564092, 4146540; 564078, 4146514; 564061, 4146457; 564032, 
4146525; 564003, 4146549; 563949, 4146575; 563903, 4146582; 563868, 
4146576; 563834, 4146542; 563809, 4146492; 563808, 4146448; 563842, 
4146394; 563811, 4146384; 563774, 4146364; 563747, 4146377; 563726, 
4146394; 563702, 4146416; 563668, 4146413; 563684, 4146384; 563656, 
4146377; 563626, 4146409; 563555, 4146423; 563533, 4146403; 563533, 
4146374; 563520, 4146338; 563543, 4146316; 563596, 4146356; 563604, 
4146338; 563576, 4146297; 563520, 4146284; 563450, 4146312; 563396, 
4146314; 563360, 4146293; 563338, 4146263; 563340, 4146229; 563365, 
4146198; 563424, 4146176; 563464, 4146140; 563488, 4146094; 563459, 
4146043; 563420, 4146003; 563361, 4145965; 563305, 4145945; 563215, 
4145902; 563106, 4145980; 563077,

[[Page 383]]

4145966; 563050, 4145976; 563014, 4145948; 562923, 4146053; 562820, 
4146153; 562674, 4146184; 562550, 4146190; 562503, 4146146; 562432, 
4146134; 562367, 4146141; 562337, 4146177; 562290, 4146269; 562106, 
4146315; 562126, 4146380; 562087, 4146395; 562148, 4146523; 562121, 
4146554; 562162, 4146602; 562260, 4146697; 562284, 4146723; 562369, 
4146818; 562418, 4146870; 562467, 4146918; 562548, 4147005; 562667, 
4147115; 562724, 4147186; 562744, 4147200; 562771, 4147206; 562796, 
4147214; 562816, 4147212; 562849, 4147216; 562862, 4147203; 562874, 
4147191; 562858, 4147160; 562876, 4147148; 562907, 4147149; 562915, 
4147187; 562936, 4147221; 562955, 4147207; 562963, 4147174; 563001, 
4147137; 563034, 4147121; 563052, 4147122; 563063, 4147135; 563063, 
4147160; 563070, 4147174; 563098, 4147180; 563141, 4147173; 563179, 
4147179; 563199, 4147187; 563196, 4147227; 563164, 4147243; 563156, 
4147274; 563140, 4147290; 563124, 4147308; 563103, 4147329; 563087, 
4147356; 563093, 4147379; 563113, 4147405; 563138, 4147424; 563196, 
4147403; 563228, 4147396; 563247, 4147392; 563256, 4147354; 563275, 
4147334; 563304, 4147313; 563304, 4147357; 563312, 4147395; 563324, 
4147437; 563329, 4147458; 563336, 4147478; 563334, 4147508; 563354, 
4147530; 563371, 4147543; 563411, 4147539; 563440, 4147526; 563465, 
4147513; 563468, 4147488; 563457, 4147462; 563446, 4147441; 563436, 
4147420; 563429, 4147405; 563422, 4147390; 563415, 4147377; 563414, 
4147360; 563406, 4147327; 563408, 4147272; 563443, 4147244; 563457, 
4147229; 563480, 4147222; 563502, 4147229; 563517, 4147251; 563534, 
4147276; 563553, 4147283; 563569, 4147282; 563595, 4147274; 563623, 
4147264; 563646, 4147239; 563645, 4147181; 563608, 4147135; 563604, 
4147096; 563609, 4147060; 563647, 4147048; 563675, 4147047; 563668, 
4147013; 563671, 4146982; 563673, 4146964; 563675, 4146954; 563669, 
4146934; 563697, 4146903; 563739, 4146896; 563788, 4146903; 563825, 
4146934; 563853, 4146979; 563862, 4146993; 563882, 4147004; 563902, 
4147007; 563915, 4147002; 563912, 4146981; 563900, 4146963; 563883, 
4146944; 563881, 4146913; 563889, 4146885; 563888, 4146855; 563858, 
4146857; 563817, 4146861; 563749, 4146833; 563727, 4146798; 563744, 
4146751; 563776, 4146699; 563799, 4146661; 563863, 4146689; 563971, 
4146735; 563979, 4146753; 563997, 4146758; 564017, 4146756; 564030, 
4146769; 564048, 4146778; 564080, 4146775; 564099, 4146784; 564131, 
4146803; returning to 564162, 4146806.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 384]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.003

    (9) Unit 4: Jasper Ridge, San Mateo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Palo Alto.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 569513, 4139881; 569524, 4139862; 569550, 4139849; 569569, 
4139829; 569580, 4139812; 569578, 4139791; 569578, 4139780; 569605, 
4139771; 569631, 4139770; 569696, 4139789; 569703, 4139764; 569676, 
4139743; 569686, 4139716; 569736, 4139668; 569782, 4139670; 569815, 
4139659; 569839, 4139671; 569869, 4139687; 569893, 4139716; 569915, 
4139714; 569954, 4139692; 569993, 4139680; 570014, 4139658; 570027, 
4139642; 570046, 4139627; 569983, 4139608; 568859, 4139177; 568865, 
4139205; 568889, 4139237; 568921, 4139265; 568951, 4139280; 568962, 
4139308; 568947, 4139319; 568908, 4139319; 568882, 4139319; 568882, 
4139327; 568885, 4139340; 568885, 4139353; 568876, 4139355; 568869, 
4139342; 568848, 4139319; 568831, 4139278; 568816, 4139261; 568797, 
4139250; 568775, 4139252; 568758, 4139261; 568747, 4139261; 568736, 
4139274; 568745, 4139299; 568749, 4139323; 568728, 4139344; 568702, 
4139342; 568674, 4139342; 568666, 4139342; 568664, 4139362; 568676, 
4139387; 568698, 4139407; 568743,

[[Page 385]]

4139411; 568771, 4139411; 568805, 4139411; 568816, 4139441; 568846, 
4139490; 568852, 4139520; 568852, 4139527; 568844, 4139531; 568833, 
4139507; 568788, 4139495; 568771, 4139495; 568749, 4139505; 568741, 
4139527; 568730, 4139548; 568724, 4139548; 568713, 4139531; 568694, 
4139518; 568685, 4139503; 568674, 4139501; 568657, 4139501; 568642, 
4139495; 568627, 4139484; 568603, 4139473; 568597, 4139499; 568603, 
4139512; 568520, 4139578; 568505, 4139565; 568475, 4139565; 568470, 
4139574; 568479, 4139595; 568485, 4139621; 568481, 4139625; 568462, 
4139617; 568425, 4139604; 568400, 4139604; 568389, 4139623; 568389, 
4139641; 568391, 4139668; 568404, 4139688; 568410, 4139705; 568410, 
4139722; 568412, 4139741; 568417, 4139746; 568408, 4139752; 568389, 
4139737; 568361, 4139718; 568325, 4139694; 568314, 4139694; 568307, 
4139703; 568322, 4139737; 568335, 4139765; 568348, 4139791; 568335, 
4139793; 568315, 4139789; 568305, 4139799; 568296, 4139814; 568270, 
4139808; 568246, 4139783; 568225, 4139748; 568210, 4139748; 568210, 
4139778; 568221, 4139803; 568247, 4139836; 568261, 4139857; 568252, 
4139870; 568210, 4139863; 568165, 4139858; 568142, 4139865; 568145, 
4139890; 568159, 4139919; 568152, 4139934; 568108, 4139937; 568099, 
4139966; 568083, 4139989; 568070, 4140011; 568066, 4140038; 568090, 
4140032; 568131, 4139998; 568168, 4139984; 568203, 4139975; 568250, 
4139976; 568279, 4139979; 568289, 4139967; 568294, 4139945; 568303, 
4139922; 568324, 4139914; 568345, 4139906; 568371, 4139896; 568407, 
4139913; 568461, 4139913; 568495, 4139923; 568526, 4139951; 568571, 
4140000; 568574, 4140034; 568543, 4140051; 568497, 4140049; 568467, 
4140066; 568430, 4140076; 568397, 4140063; 568353, 4140055; 568300, 
4140059; 568250, 4140072; 568225, 4140087; 568205, 4140107; 568200, 
4140141; 568207, 4140177; 568200, 4140183; 568163, 4140157; 568082, 
4140161; 568023, 4140180; 568005, 4140193; 567998, 4140211; 568015, 
4140225; 568027, 4140241; 568028, 4140259; 568006, 4140269; 567984, 
4140271; 567967, 4140280; 567962, 4140301; 567948, 4140320; 567930, 
4140339; 567915, 4140373; 567904, 4140392; 567938, 4140398; 567980, 
4140405; 568008, 4140418; 568001, 4140442; 567988, 4140457; 568031, 
4140467; 568098, 4140470; 568123, 4140484; 568166, 4140471; 568183, 
4140472; 568180, 4140494; 568172, 4140517; 568147, 4140543; 568153, 
4140554; 568184, 4140561; 568209, 4140577; 568249, 4140579; 568285, 
4140585; 568318, 4140597; 568356, 4140608; 568383, 4140600; 568423, 
4140577; 568471, 4140580; 568488, 4140590; 568483, 4140612; 568507, 
4140625; 568551, 4140623; 568572, 4140632; 568606, 4140653; 568658, 
4140676; 568681, 4140691; 568705, 4140693; 568723, 4140687; 568741, 
4140684; 568762, 4140673; 568807, 4140653; 568830, 4140634; 568862, 
4140607; 568873, 4140591; 568894, 4140584; 568891, 4140566; 568881, 
4140556; 568856, 4140536; 568838, 4140520; 568834, 4140499; 568812, 
4140474; 568803, 4140445; 568791, 4140422; 568786, 4140395; 568739, 
4140382; 568733, 4140366; 568719, 4140353; 568682, 4140355; 568648, 
4140350; 568651, 4140331; 568668, 4140312; 568672, 4140286; 568653, 
4140278; 568668, 4140256; 568713, 4140235; 568736, 4140273; 568769, 
4140284; 568805, 4140303; 568827, 4140297; 568848, 4140312; 568872, 
4140321; 568918, 4140335; 568964, 4140327; 569000, 4140248; 569024, 
4140226; 569058, 4140256; 569097, 4140267; 569129, 4140244; 569166, 
4140211; 569186, 4140185; 569202, 4140165; 569217, 4140136; 569219, 
4140119; 569228, 4140106; 569240, 4140094; 569260, 4140088; 569282, 
4140073; 569286, 4140045; 569284, 4140017; 569286, 4139986; 569279, 
4139961; 569254, 4139955; 569242, 4139943; 569217, 4139920; 569211, 
4139900; 569246, 4139893; 569275, 4139877; 569305, 4139877; 569342, 
4139883; 569367, 4139919; 569404, 4139945; 569434, 4139949; 569455, 
4139945; 569485, 4139917; returning to 569513, 4139881.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 386]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.004

    (10) Unit 5: Metcalf, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 611242, 4121203; 611273, 4121300; 611382, 4121353; 611488, 
4121320; 611607, 4121360; 611707, 4121423; 611776, 4121486; 611856, 
4121482; 611945, 4121496; 612084, 4121502; 612190, 4121555; 612315, 
4121543; 612448, 4121585; 612577, 4121572; 612974, 4121532; 613302, 
4121410; 613507, 4121310; 613672, 4121337; 613907, 4121337; 614056, 
4121410; 614393, 4121110; 614418, 4121079; 614479, 4121095; 614513, 
4121108; 614547, 4121103; 614579, 4121103; 614616, 4121102; 614628, 
4121071; 614610, 4121032; 614633, 4121024; 614691, 4121025; 614737, 
4121019; 614760, 4120988; 614750, 4120961; 614713, 4120939; 614711, 
4120903; 614703, 4120876; 614718, 4120863; 614731, 4120832; 614743, 
4120810; 614774, 4120852; 614784, 4120819; 614904, 4120878; 614919, 
4120849; 614913, 4120812; 614919, 4120775; 614897, 4120730; 614874, 
4120715; 614886, 4120686; 614891, 4120659; 614921, 4120671; 614969, 
4120678; 614999, 4120664; 614999, 4120625; 614974,

[[Page 387]]

4120593; 614980, 4120547; 614950, 4120517; 614942, 4120488; 614970, 
4120470; 614986, 4120424; 614996, 4120339; 615037, 4120410; 615163, 
4120270; 615782, 4119656; 615873, 4119555; 616548, 4118936; 616751, 
4118743; 617140, 4118453; 617774, 4118066; 617873, 4118037; 617986, 
4118057; 618040, 4118015; 617983, 4117993; 617934, 4117940; 617896, 
4117916; 617930, 4117901; 617984, 4117896; 618000, 4117874; 618032, 
4117863; 618054, 4117849; 618052, 4117820; 618027, 4117810; 618025, 
4117766; 618067, 4117760; 618067, 4117728; 618144, 4117713; 618222, 
4117720; 618262, 4117696; 618278, 4117655; 618256, 4117633; 618279, 
4117591; 618286, 4117527; 618323, 4117503; 618317, 4117455; 618359, 
4117439; 618413, 4117435; 618427, 4117461; 618457, 4117471; 618489, 
4117476; 618489, 4117501; 618516, 4117516; 618545, 4117506; 618559, 
4117469; 618589, 4117466; 618618, 4117430; 618642, 4117442; 618642, 
4117477; 618684, 4117503; 618711, 4117527; 618730, 4117550; 618760, 
4117564; 618797, 4117553; 618818, 4117545; 618836, 4117511; 618852, 
4117500; 618877, 4117494; 618874, 4117457; 618894, 4117445; 618932, 
4117427; 618932, 4117442; 618957, 4117445; 618976, 4117432; 618976, 
4117393; 619062, 4117364; 619092, 4117373; 619113, 4117369; 619111, 
4117323; 619145, 4117283; 619062, 4117188; 619058, 4117150; 619037, 
4117123; 618984, 4117044; 619147, 4117114; 619236, 4117123; 619294, 
4117077; 619329, 4117080; 619357, 4117092; 619387, 4117074; 619392, 
4117037; 619382, 4117011; 619414, 4117004; 619446, 4116993; 619441, 
4116938; 619469, 4116920; 619483, 4116876; 619460, 4116840; 619496, 
4116812; 619525, 4116780; 619536, 4116746; 619553, 4116743; 619592, 
4116766; 619630, 4116739; 619626, 4116701; 619641, 4116687; 619677, 
4116701; 619706, 4116681; 619753, 4116690; 619769, 4116667; 619745, 
4116648; 619789, 4116592; 619775, 4116566; 619685, 4116547; 619768, 
4116513; 619764, 4116489; 619720, 4116399; 619758, 4116390; 619725, 
4116298; 619792, 4116295; 619827, 4116268; 619843, 4116231; 619832, 
4116189; 619956, 4116200; 620026, 4116196; 620027, 4116146; 620037, 
4116090; 619981, 4115976; 620018, 4115910; 619981, 4115866; 619891, 
4115850; 619903, 4115813; 619978, 4115796; 619996, 4115766; 620072, 
4115793; 620111, 4115763; 620096, 4115712; 620116, 4115680; 620199, 
4115750; 620314, 4115703; 620320, 4115653; 620356, 4115633; 620401, 
4115659; 620444, 4115506; 620503, 4115495; 620571, 4115549; 620617, 
4115454; 620788, 4115324; 620903, 4115266; 620995, 4115260; 621058, 
4115374; 621097, 4115435; 621107, 4115413; 621122, 4115390; 621149, 
4115374; 621156, 4115344; 621200, 4115254; 621608, 4115039; 621668, 
4115004; 621715, 4114977; 621744, 4114932; 621789, 4114879; 621788, 
4114836; 621788, 4114810; 621768, 4114773; 621773, 4114740; 621772, 
4114662; 621773, 4114638; 621766, 4114618; 621782, 4114597; 621842, 
4114600; 621857, 4114586; 621875, 4114583; 621881, 4114552; 621827, 
4114518; 621800, 4114474; 621727, 4114441; 621038, 4114280; 620937, 
4114292; 620831, 4114261; 620046, 4114525; 619795, 4114578; 619736, 
4114633; 619738, 4114702; 619674, 4114732; 619453, 4114356; 619351, 
4114262; 619197, 4114240; 619041, 4114293; 618895, 4114410; 618599, 
4114424; 618361, 4114506; 618185, 4114530; 617740, 4115026; 617095, 
4115754; 616662, 4116332; 616403, 4116568; 616244, 4116697; 616203, 
4116810; 616126, 4117005; 615933, 4117032; 615789, 4117099; 615722, 
4117186; 615933, 4117280; 616097, 4117217; 616167, 4117292; 616030, 
4117460; 615914, 4117446; 615683, 4117614; 615229, 4117907; 615099, 
4117854; 615457, 4117510; 615390, 4117438; 615003, 4117751; 614469, 
4118133; 613965, 4118481; 613890, 4118524; 613954, 4118666; 613790, 
4118831; 613636, 4118894; 613636, 4119149; 613557, 4119283; 613403, 
4119531; 613254, 4119651; 613077, 4119606; 612893, 4119620; 612832, 
4119665; 612853, 4119708; 612847, 4119729; 612784, 4119705; 612770, 
4119740; 612715, 4119760; 612640, 4119824; 612618, 4119872; 612583, 
4119977; 612062, 4120400; 611707, 4120758; 611686, 4120748; 611631, 
4120824; 611294, 4121127; returning to 611242, 4121203.
    (ii) Note: Unit 5 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.

[[Page 388]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.005

    (11) Unit 6: Tulare Hill, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 610971, 4120478; 611134, 4120435; 611200, 4120245; 611116, 
4120132; 611181, 4119977; 611212, 4119824; 611280, 4119743; 611293, 
4119653; 611241, 4119512; 610967, 4119335; 610786, 4119391; 610392, 
4119622; 610302, 4119674; 610057, 4119813; 610117, 4119846; 609929, 
4120074; 609799, 4120229; 609915, 4120374; 609819, 4120430; 610113, 
4120749; 610310, 4120833; 610459, 4120769; 610531, 4120847; 610797, 
4120659; 610776, 4120464; 610843, 4120449; returning to 610971, 4120478.
    (ii) Note: Unit 6 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (12) Unit 7: Santa Teresa Hills, Santa Clara County, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, 
Santa Teresa Hills, and Morgan Hill.

[[Page 389]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 608447, 4119332; 608474, 4119309; 608576, 4119335; 608615, 
4119330; 608689, 4119306; 608706, 4119356; 608749, 4119377; 608758, 
4119360; 608746, 4119302; 608760, 4119230; 608722, 4119159; 608656, 
4119124; 608669, 4119080; 608762, 4119101; 608846, 4119140; 608892, 
4119222; 609000, 4119082; 609117, 4119040; 609190, 4119077; 609244, 
4119107; 609509, 4119359; 609534, 4119358; 609548, 4119366; 609549, 
4119393; 609568, 4119444; 609582, 4119466; 609606, 4119520; 609628, 
4119547; 609656, 4119568; 610016, 4119783; 610228, 4119650; 610177, 
4119543; 610143, 4119434; 610086, 4119368; 610019, 4119278; 609929, 
4119219; 609928, 4119116; 609956, 4119070; 610001, 4119067; 610048, 
4119044; 610138, 4119037; 610165, 4119006; 610240, 4118997; 610306, 
4118956; 610325, 4118923; 610343, 4118915; 610381, 4118905; 610405, 
4118877; 610414, 4118822; 610436, 4118812; 610464, 4118833; 610521, 
4118824; 610564, 4118822; 610592, 4118815; 610612, 4118795; 610617, 
4118776; 610617, 4118756; 610624, 4118735; 610650, 4118729; 610669, 
4118717; 610700, 4118710; 610723, 4118718; 610757, 4118723; 610773, 
4118706; 610780, 4118658; 610790, 4118646; 610787, 4118598; 610775, 
4118570; 610773, 4118536; 610771, 4118519; 610782, 4118517; 610822, 
4118530; 610842, 4118528; 610864, 4118520; 610880, 4118508; 610899, 
4118501; 610915, 4118487; 610914, 4118461; 610906, 4118446; 610889, 
4118430; 610886, 4118417; 610902, 4118393; 610900, 4118367; 610896, 
4118340; 610912, 4118330; 610934, 4118310; 610940, 4118282; 610932, 
4118260; 610935, 4118251; 610949, 4118231; 610955, 4118207; 610957, 
4118181; 610964, 4118176; 610991, 4118168; 610989, 4118152; 610992, 
4118113; 611000, 4118109; 611019, 4118109; 611041, 4118121; 611066, 
4118127; 611096, 4118122; 611114, 4118125; 611160, 4118145; 611185, 
4118147; 611220, 4118143; 611254, 4118124; 611259, 4118093; 611250, 
4118046; 611250, 4118012; 611247, 4117972; 611255, 4117966; 611276, 
4117974; 611292, 4117975; 611331, 4117963; 611374, 4117922; 611421, 
4117919; 611446, 4117915; 611462, 4117908; 611475, 4117891; 611511, 
4117839; 611533, 4117814; 611554, 4117805; 611567, 4117772; 611556, 
4117741; 611560, 4117712; 611562, 4117677; 611517, 4117611; 611572, 
4117536; 611578, 4117500; 611570, 4117478; 611547, 4117451; 611503, 
4117429; 611458, 4117422; 611405, 4117439; 611323, 4117480; 611291, 
4117518; 611268, 4117566; 611230, 4117618; 611169, 4117625; 611100, 
4117637; 611072, 4117668; 611021, 4117766; 610962, 4117743; 610985, 
4117678; 611007, 4117611; 610957, 4117563; 610836, 4117565; 610800, 
4117537; 610773, 4117534; 610752, 4117518; 610733, 4117438; 610716, 
4117404; 610610, 4117272; 610572, 4117243; 610501, 4117238; 610412, 
4117262; 610370, 4117294; 610350, 4117341; 610281, 4117354; 610220, 
4117381; 610179, 4117413; 610146, 4117441; 610127, 4117492; 610058, 
4117531; 609819, 4117309; 609692, 4117372; 609593, 4117353; 609526, 
4117409; 609460, 4117386; 609405, 4117409; 609091, 4117456; 608872, 
4117364; 608840, 4117297; 608733, 4117262; 608502, 4117237; 608524, 
4117204; 608603, 4117138; 608723, 4117081; 608830, 4117067; 608934, 
4117066; 609071, 4117093; 609181, 4117210; 609225, 4117208; 609240, 
4117159; 609163, 4117083; 609228, 4117009; 609303, 4116981; 609325, 
4117003; 609303, 4117052; 609302, 4117087; 609324, 4117084; 609349, 
4117043; 609401, 4117059; 609409, 4117162; 609430, 4117203; 609458, 
4117190; 609471, 4117150; 609435, 4117016; 609506, 4116986; 609350, 
4116852; 609333, 4116880; 609256, 4116873; 609228, 4116889; 609205, 
4116873; 609163, 4116848; 609131, 4116849; 609102, 4116863; 609061, 
4116836; 609011, 4116841; 608843, 4116838; 608804, 4116864; 608758, 
4116878; 608714, 4116867; 608672, 4116827; 608625, 4116899; 608542, 
4116933; 608489, 4117019; 608426, 4117079; 608382, 4117115; 608343, 
4117134; 608305, 4117136; 608259, 4117127; 608216, 4117129; 608210, 
4117170; 608197, 4117192; 608138, 4117197; 608062, 4117234; 608020, 
4117241; 607997, 4117227; 607959, 4117228; 607963, 4117262; 607941, 
4117301; 607896, 4117334; 607909, 4117377; 608067, 4117348; 608170, 
4117343; 608289, 4117332; 608298, 4117392; 608239, 4117418; 608166, 
4117436; 608066, 4117450; 608012, 4117453; 607942, 4117507; 607907, 
4117572; 607938, 4117605; 607924, 4117642; 607848, 4117626; 607678, 
4117759; 607397, 4117766; 607129, 4117689; 606990, 4117599; 606767, 
4117931; 606643, 4118119; 606701, 4118302; 606742, 4118358; 606828, 
4118289; 606858, 4118323; 606693, 4118461; 606644, 4118391; 606609, 
4118328; 606542, 4118254; 606425, 4118183; 606179, 4118078; 605438, 
4118128; 605263, 4118203; 605074, 4118293; 604975, 4118365; 605178, 
4118600; 604548, 4118947; 604625, 4119145; 604788, 4119569; 604936, 
4119955; 604817, 4119974; 604817, 4120089; 604555, 4120119; 604414, 
4120139; 604283, 4120149; 604549, 4120858; 604561, 4120889; 604564, 
4120912; 604561, 4120952; 604572, 4120972; 604606, 4120977; 604622, 
4120963; 604624, 4120946; 604628, 4120920; 604645, 4120904; 604680, 
4120899; 604729, 4120910; 604729, 4120867; 604787, 4120831; 604810, 
4120814; 604844, 4120783; 604890, 4120765; 604924, 4120799; 604948, 
4120835; 604970, 4120831; 604986, 4120786; 605003, 4120742; 605064, 
4120714; 605093, 4120722; 605132, 4120760; 605163, 4120770; 605185, 
4120744; 605219, 4120689; 605272, 4120656; 605329, 4120668; 605395, 
4120706; 605405, 4120671; 605424, 4120642; 605452, 4120646; 605473, 
4120657; 605509, 4120656; 605548, 4120664; 605588, 4120656; 605614, 
4120682; 605643, 4120689; 605647, 4120649; 605679, 4120645; 605711, 
4120633; 605746, 4120610; 605728, 4120571; 605712, 4120545; 605685, 
4120526; 605653, 4120525; 605613, 4120522; 605608, 4120506; 605619, 
4120496; 605645, 4120487; 605709, 4120480; 605729, 4120443; 605749, 
4120426; 605775, 4120431; 605792, 4120456; 605809, 4120473; 605836, 
4120498; 605864, 4120508; 605879, 4120512; 605904, 4120506; 605928, 
4120490; 605945, 4120465; 605949, 4120449; 605945, 4120432; 605953, 
4120401; 605971, 4120390; 606001, 4120399; 606040, 4120411; 606076, 
4120422; 606105, 4120433; 606133, 4120448; 606158, 4120474; 606200, 
4120494; 606241, 4120516; 606272, 4120540; 606310, 4120548; 606353, 
4120567; 606378, 4120587; 606394, 4120604; 606407, 4120596; 606422, 
4120586; 606474, 4120580; 606521, 4120577; 606553, 4120566; 606589, 
4120544; 606625, 4120524; 606653, 4120496; 606653, 4120520; 606626, 
4120579; 606625, 4120607; 606650, 4120613; 606703, 4120612; 606736, 
4120611; 606751, 4120586; 606748, 4120556; 606762, 4120552; 606804, 
4120566; 606861, 4120594; 606917, 4120615; 606968, 4120624; 607030, 
4120627; 607084, 4120614; 607139, 4120594; 607197, 4120614; 607194, 
4120598; 607195, 4120569; 607195, 4120549; 607188, 4120521; 607174, 
4120507; 607179, 4120472; 607191, 4120455; 607214, 4120443; 607247, 
4120427; 607277, 4120408; 607280, 4120373; 607298, 4120340; 607305, 
4120307; 607332,

[[Page 390]]

4120290; 607364, 4120276; 607395, 4120272; 607414, 4120266; 607434, 
4120261; 607453, 4120267; 607461, 4120254; 607462, 4120237; 607458, 
4120220; 607449, 4120201; 607437, 4120184; 607421, 4120162; 607397, 
4120136; 607370, 4120088; 607327, 4120023; 607297, 4119983; 607182, 
4119926; 607113, 4119874; 607064, 4119832; 607020, 4119802; 606938, 
4119784; 606848, 4119768; 606800, 4119732; 606822, 4119719; 606891, 
4119713; 606982, 4119681; 607021, 4119632; 607033, 4119550; 607049, 
4119507; 607064, 4119439; 607068, 4119404; 607099, 4119389; 607118, 
4119342; 607152, 4119323; 607181, 4119286; 607199, 4119244; 607188, 
4119204; 607145, 4119123; 607167, 4119087; 607256, 4119070; 607355, 
4119123; 607619, 4119104; 607673, 4119099; 607702, 4119117; 607733, 
4119120; 607774, 4119125; 607775, 4119165; 607814, 4119200; 607861, 
4119222; 607909, 4119212; 607985, 4119188; 608024, 4119217; 607998, 
4119236; 608004, 4119270; 608048, 4119275; 608100, 4119228; 608157, 
4119228; 608207, 4119263; 608269, 4119268; 608314, 4119280; 608363, 
4119287; 608409, 4119297; 608425, 4119321; returning to 608447, 4119332.
    (ii) Note: Unit 7 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (13) Unit 8: Calero Reservoir, Santa Clara County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa 
Teresa Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 605493, 4116867; 605661, 4116896; 605718, 4116853; 605799, 
4116844; 605856, 4116923; 605938, 4116906; 606045, 4116752; 606122, 
4116520; 606156, 4116383; 606165, 4116288; 606051, 4116182; 606069, 
4116127; 606132, 4116039; 606177, 4116025; 606230, 4116083; 606269, 
4115997; 606336, 4116015; 606337, 4115938; 606300, 4115931; 606262, 
4115861; 606326, 4115838; 606387, 4115849; 606433, 4115829; 606519, 
4115734; 606574, 4115740; 606867, 4115901; 606937, 4115907; 606994, 
4115890; 607043, 4115856; 607081, 4115818; 607068, 4115755; 607090, 
4115693; 607144, 4115664; 607241, 4115643; 607290, 4115588; 607342, 
4115554; 607159, 4115391; 607119, 4115368; 607073, 4115389; 607047, 
4115495; 606903, 4115584; 606837, 4115586; 606861, 4115560; 606919, 
4115549; 606944, 4115530; 606950, 4115482; 606978, 4115469; 606996, 
4115393; 606975, 4115370; 606902, 4115402; 606901, 4115371; 606921, 
4115339; 606904, 4115306; 606880, 4115337; 606861, 4115296; 606876, 
4115251; 606935, 4115241; 606958, 4115263; 606986, 4115195; 607026, 
4115199; 607027, 4115255; 607060, 4115266; 607082, 4115207; 607089, 
4115149; 607179, 4115149; 607266, 4115115; 607415, 4115156; 607464, 
4115136; 607555, 4115164; 607716, 4115136; 607712, 4115003; 607657, 
4114850; 607604, 4114753; 607518, 4114686; 607611, 4114702; 607791, 
4114919; 607826, 4114984; 607808, 4115366; 607972, 4115293; 608186, 
4115186; 608470, 4115055; 608850, 4114830; 608992, 4114854; 609129, 
4114812; 609117, 4115020; 608880, 4115233; 608512, 4115397; 608059, 
4115492; 608029, 4115644; 607959, 4115592; 607880, 4115595; 607966, 
4115726; 608052, 4115817; 608155, 4115878; 608258, 4115908; 608358, 
4115910; 608437, 4115938; 608556, 4115906; 608545, 4115971; 608608, 
4115990; 608682, 4115957; 608750, 4115901; 608776, 4115906; 608815, 
4115934; 608892, 4115927; 608946, 4115873; 608948, 4115826; 608906, 
4115731; 608967, 4115710; 609032, 4115647; 609481, 4115100; 609477, 
4115025; 609577, 4114951; 609821, 4114856; 609866, 4114711; 609880, 
4114582; 610030, 4114486; 610081, 4114398; 610120, 4114330; 610159, 
4114322; 610155, 4114287; 610124, 4114240; 610287, 4114038; 610327, 
4113965; 610319, 4113865; 610257, 4113742; 610202, 4113705; 610079, 
4113729; 609993, 4113754; 609891, 4113813; 609798, 4113845; 609735, 
4113885; 609737, 4113963; 609663, 4114035; 609563, 4114088; 609524, 
4114248; 609455, 4114356; 609212, 4114403; 609004, 4114676; 608945, 
4114439; 608774, 4114422; 608635, 4114302; 608547, 4114164; 608453, 
4113729; 608135, 4113470; 608079, 4113433; 608043, 4113356; 608038, 
4113230; 608012, 4113254; 607980, 4113238; 607947, 4113270; 607907, 
4113243; 607855, 4113282; 607814, 4113362; 607802, 4113545; 607694, 
4113606; 607526, 4113700; 607691, 4113754; 607691, 4114069; 607465, 
4114176; 607326, 4114660; 606930, 4114755; 606709, 4114597; 606401, 
4114641; 606250, 4114805; 605916, 4114924; 605715, 4115195; 605293, 
4115604; 605224, 4115604; 605180, 4115755; 605224, 4115869; 605035, 
4116101; 605042, 4116215; 605067, 4116309; 605123, 4116366; 605229, 
4116454; 605338, 4116598; 605387, 4116705; returning to 605493, 4116867.
    (ii) Note: Unit 8 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (14) Unit 9: Kalana Hills, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Subunit 9A: Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 
coordinates (E,N): 612463, 4115364; 612548, 4115283; 612611, 4115228; 
612581, 4115190; 612560, 4115157; 612725, 4114962; 612697, 4114924; 
612640, 4114916; 612512, 4114806; 612469, 4114770; 612456, 4114706; 
612331, 4114635; 612276, 4114621; 612159, 4114668; 612036, 4114796; 
611975, 4114842; 611928, 4114901; 611857, 4114927; 611811, 4114924; 
611806, 4115198; 611735, 4115382; 611703, 4115487; 611772, 4115526; 
611741, 4115600; 611742, returning to 4115605; 612028, 4115820; 
returning to 612463, 4115364.
    (ii) Subunit 9B: Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 
coordinates (E,N): 613292, 4114458; 613477, 4114328; 613645, 4114236; 
613859, 4114112; 613800, 4114081; 613704, 4114080; 613628, 4114115; 
613571, 4114099; 613525, 4114035; 613464, 4114059; 613430, 4114072; 
613389, 4114098; 613269, 4114176; 613135, 4114270; 613043, 4114292; 
612952, 4114245; 612882, 4114296; 612769, 4114341; 612771, 4114386; 
612807, 4114455; 612779, 4114504; 612761, 4114557; 612827, 4114609; 
612910, 4114621; 613020, 4114550; 613029, 4114509; 612967, 4114492; 
612953, 4114422; 612990, 4114368; 613090, 4114360; 613112, 4114463; 
613178, 4114499; returning to 613292, 4114458;
    (iii) Note: Unit 9 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (15) Unit 10: Hale, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Unit 10: Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 
coordinates (E,N): 617448, 4111989; 617422, 4111978; 617343, 4111978;

[[Page 391]]

617295, 4111947; 617252, 4111862; 617269, 4111828; 617405, 4111774; 
617445, 4111797; 617501, 4111797; 617512, 4111746; 617589, 4111729; 
617733, 4111766; 618083, 4111853; 618116, 4111766; 618023, 4111705; 
617936, 4111647; 617899, 4111684; 617764, 4111596; 617933, 4111368; 
617964, 4111303; 617953, 4111188; 617891, 4111138; 617937, 4111083; 
617919, 4111040; 617865, 4111014; 617798, 4111069; 617586, 4110876; 
617618, 4110838; 617504, 4110738; 617459, 4110704; 617380, 4110673; 
617197, 4110835; 617009, 4111119; 616981, 4111133; 616936, 4111110; 
616925, 4111147; 616908, 4111187; 616885, 4111204; 616843, 4111232; 
616817, 4111274; 616809, 4111303; 616781, 4111297; 616758, 4111257; 
616724, 4111221; 616713, 4111159; 616744, 4111088; 616724, 4111060; 
616730, 4111037; 616789, 4110983; 616702, 4110933; 616668, 4110952; 
616620, 4110952; 616611, 4110901; 616436, 4111062; 616394, 4111037; 
616410, 4110989; 616472, 4110988; 616532, 4110930; 616523, 4110872; 
616555, 4110831; 616077, 4110537; 616073, 4110327; 615914, 4110402; 
615846, 4110431; 615912, 4110524; 615761, 4110576; 615745, 4110646; 
615715, 4110728; 615645, 4110790; 615684, 4110906; 615779, 4110867; 
615779, 4110825; 615918, 4110725; 616038, 4110856; 615936, 4110930; 
615947, 4111077; 615894, 4111105; 615830, 4111216; 615902, 4111306; 
615866, 4111429; 615933, 4111449; 616044, 4111449; 616147, 4111428; 
616225, 4111410; 616275, 4111430; 616313, 4111483; 616368, 4111489; 
616399, 4111520; 616394, 4111579; 616380, 4111625; 616430, 4111650; 
616484, 4111622; 616498, 4111585; 616555, 4111562; 616671, 4111591; 
616659, 4111653; 616685, 4111715; 616741, 4111780; 616846, 4111829; 
616677, 4112120; 616760, 4112261; 616792, 4112343; 617011, 4112356; 
617160, 4112394; 617286, 4112306; 617433, 4112045; returning to 617448, 
4111989 .
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (16) Unit 11: Bear Ranch, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Gilroy.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 628304, 4108774; 628402, 4108819; 628507, 4108797; 628590, 
4108729; 628635, 4108675; 628659, 4108564; 628747, 4108397; 628931, 
4108012; 629104, 4107674; 629171, 4107133; 629022, 4107043; 628875, 
4107022; 628732, 4107075; 628575, 4107128; 628449, 4107072; 628322, 
4107074; 628234, 4107094; 628173, 4107173; 628166, 4107286; 628210, 
4107426; 628327, 4107650; 628375, 4107703; 628458, 4107736; 628368, 
4107898; 628263, 4108172; 628208, 4108414; returning to 628304, 4108774.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 11 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 392]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.006

    (17) Unit 12: San Martin, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mt. Madonna and Gilroy.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 622150, 4104262; 622178, 4104216; 622192, 4104170; 622217, 
4104195; 622241, 4104226; 622274, 4104226; 622296, 4104208; 622309, 
4104171; 622302, 4104120; 622340, 4104110; 622347, 4104088; 622336, 
4104047; 622334, 4103984; 622320, 4103948; 622317, 4103898; 622330, 
4103845; 622404, 4103809; 622421, 4103769; 622421, 4103689; 622441, 
4103649; 622487, 4103631; 622538, 4103599; 622557, 4103529; 622591, 
4103461; 622575, 4103406; 622538, 4103358; 622441, 4103346; 622399, 
4103363; 622352, 4103322; 622274, 4103300; 622206, 4103304; 622098, 
4103341; 622020, 4103370; 621920, 4103382; 621843, 4103390; 621812, 
4103362; 621779, 4103365; 621739, 4103372; 621700, 4103404; 621682, 
4103449; 621705, 4103496; 621667, 4103560; 621569, 4103489; 621509, 
4103489; 621463, 4103477; 621464, 4103459; 621411, 4103467; 621348, 
4103472; 621288, 4103477; 621223, 4103476; 621183, 4103476; 621127, 
4103476; 621079, 4103490; 621030, 4103508; 620988, 4103525; 620973, 
4103571; 620996, 4103623; 621025,

[[Page 393]]

4103666; 621055, 4103695; 621076, 4103707; 621079, 4103733; 621087, 
4103764; 621112, 4103805; 621046, 4103796; 621009, 4103805; 620979, 
4103791; 620922, 4103774; 620887, 4103775; 620871, 4103811; 620845, 
4103873; 620806, 4103922; 620751, 4103944; 620702, 4103984; 620679, 
4103961; 620627, 4103961; 620593, 4103979; 620591, 4104020; 620568, 
4104053; 620542, 4104032; 620509, 4104030; 620482, 4104039; 620450, 
4104073; 620393, 4104116; 620330, 4104174; 620283, 4104200; 620255, 
4104240; 620230, 4104262; 620197, 4104288; 620191, 4104325; 620193, 
4104362; 620203, 4104399; 620176, 4104412; 620126, 4104472; 620132, 
4104499; 620211, 4104578; 620245, 4104578; 620329, 4104574; 620440, 
4104541; 620510, 4104492; 620543, 4104480; 620529, 4104405; 620612, 
4104386; 620646, 4104431; 620657, 4104489; 620672, 4104509; 620728, 
4104541; 620794, 4104556; 620852, 4104539; 620909, 4104525; 620931, 
4104568; 620942, 4104598; 620946, 4104627; 620968, 4104627; 620988, 
4104586; 621013, 4104556; 621034, 4104566; 621046, 4104621; 621098, 
4104634; 621083, 4104537; 621176, 4104528; 621262, 4104540; 621334, 
4104549; 621398, 4104575; 621488, 4104622; 621559, 4104617; 621598, 
4104563; 621688, 4104533; 621739, 4104536; 621811, 4104464; 621836, 
4104417; 621908, 4104391; 621951, 4104417; 622007, 4104440; 622132, 
4104423; 622160, 4104403; 622153, 4104371; 622118, 4104356; 622033, 
4104350; 622004, 4104340; 621974, 4104326; 621951, 4104304; 621969, 
4104286; 621996, 4104293; 622032, 4104294; 622060, 4104274; 622115, 
4104272; returning to 622150, 4104262.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 12 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 394]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.007

    (18) Unit 13: Kirby, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 614073, 4122412; 613927, 4122313; 613818, 4122194; 613722, 
4121982; 613609, 4121926; 613463, 4121895; 613322, 4121923; 613199, 
4122005; 613063, 4121982; 612938, 4122012; 612845, 4121942; 612809, 
4121823; 612723, 4121727; 612574, 4121711; 612435, 4121734; 612295, 
4121716; 612154, 4121723; 612079, 4121699; 612017, 4121720; 611996, 
4121655; 611902, 4121653; 611790, 4121695; 611662, 4121642; 611579, 
4121554; 611512, 4121447; 611422, 4121445; 611365, 4121419; 611310, 
4121420; 611247, 4121377; 610975, 4121590; 610770, 4121774; 610611, 
4121899; 610472, 4122085; 610310, 4122006; 610106, 4122145; 610077, 
4122227; 610126, 4122316; 610217, 4122395; 610179, 4122447; 610133, 
4122430; 610089, 4122512; 610125, 4122559; 610156, 4122607; 610157, 
4122653; 610128, 4122660; 610058, 4122641; 610016, 4122607; 609977, 
4122674; 610091, 4122763; 610187, 4122847; 610220, 4122921; 610249, 
4122977; 610374, 4123102; 610254, 4123181; 610015,

[[Page 395]]

4123335; 609613, 4123583; 609641, 4123630; 609399, 4123790; 609324, 
4123843; 609182, 4124041; 608934, 4123924; 608736, 4124027; 608538, 
4124145; 608423, 4124256; 608167, 4124471; 608065, 4124633; 608059, 
4124666; 607803, 4124871; 607677, 4124973; 607615, 4125109; 607637, 
4125224; 607756, 4125351; 607593, 4125474; 607351, 4125490; 607272, 
4125663; 607018, 4125820; 606980, 4125845; 606948, 4125876; 606896, 
4125972; 606890, 4125996; 606845, 4125998; 606796, 4126045; 606753, 
4126055; 606663, 4126127; 606595, 4126178; 606463, 4126353; 606314, 
4126287; 606282, 4126331; 606153, 4126428; 605939, 4126505; 605841, 
4126533; 605785, 4126693; 605832, 4126844; 605701, 4126851; 605621, 
4127118; 605715, 4127161; 605847, 4127159; 605992, 4127130; 606076, 
4127058; 606215, 4127099; 606422, 4127010; 606465, 4126897; 606699, 
4126796; 606886, 4126695; 607019, 4126736; 607190, 4126796; 607356, 
4126935; 607437, 4127065; 607306, 4127251; 607149, 4127421; 607062, 
4127440; 606910, 4127537; 606714, 4127727; 606521, 4127943; 606345, 
4128015; 606227, 4128006; 606179, 4127924; 606131, 4127779; 606097, 
4127827; 606067, 4127868; 605982, 4127883; 605953, 4128027; 605857, 
4127996; 605761, 4128001; 605703, 4128063; 605662, 4128160; 605702, 
4128211; 605770, 4128251; 605842, 4128289; 605912, 4128287; 605946, 
4128220; 605992, 4128138; 606059, 4128152; 606148, 4128174; 606210, 
4128152; 606324, 4128056; 606410, 4128049; 606321, 4128171; 606343, 
4128210; 606614, 4128290; 606611, 4128519; 606706, 4128535; 606802, 
4128525; 607015, 4128424; 607079, 4128412; 607069, 4128316; 607125, 
4128227; 607190, 4128215; 607202, 4128263; 607252, 4128252; 606865, 
4127849; 607067, 4127789; 607267, 4127710; 607475, 4127729; 607713, 
4127722; 607817, 4127626; 607733, 4127426; 607803, 4127314; 607825, 
4127248; 607762, 4127173; 607740, 4127113; 607808, 4127063; 607894, 
4127046; 608043, 4127019; 608116, 4126921; 608123, 4126707; 608000, 
4126634; 607880, 4126543; 607769, 4126507; 607654, 4126497; 607668, 
4126413; 607779, 4126408; 607805, 4126324; 608058, 4126129; 608255, 
4125992; 608610, 4125722; 608893, 4125417; 609482, 4125417; 609838, 
4125398; 610196, 4125396; 610302, 4125557; 610370, 4125506; 610487, 
4125492; 610584, 4125439; 610692, 4125442; 610769, 4125405; 610827, 
4125316; 610877, 4125249; 610937, 4125251; 610947, 4125345; 610759, 
4125562; 610815, 4125701; 610858, 4125797; 610945, 4125841; 611101, 
4125858; 611199, 4125833; 611308, 4125853; 611356, 4125884; 611424, 
4125805; 611461, 4125744; 611542, 4125723; 611602, 4125671; 611673, 
4125610; 611808, 4125456; 611970, 4125331; 612147, 4125249; 612322, 
4125103; 612539, 4124931; 612515, 4124823; 612590, 4124756; 612648, 
4124664; 612753, 4124575; 612773, 4124506; 612879, 4124335; 612972, 
4124219; 613073, 4124178; 613129, 4124085; 613251, 4123917; 613206, 
4123339; 613193, 4122893; 613280, 4122832; 613351, 4122715; 613426, 
4122657; 613489, 4122657; 613563, 4122662; 613669, 4122607; 613741, 
4122596; 614073, 4122412.
    (ii) Note: Unit 13 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.

          Fender's Blue butterfly (Icaricia icarioides fenderi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Benton, Lane, Polk, and 
Yamhill Counties, Oregon, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Fender's blue butterfly are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Early seral upland prairie, wet prairie, or oak savanna habitat 
with a mosaic of low-growing grasses and forbs, an absence of dense 
canopy vegetation, and undisturbed subsoils;
    (ii) Larval host-plants Lupinus sulphureus ssp. kincaidii, L. 
arbustus, or L. albicaulis;
    (iii) Adult nectar sources, such as: Allium acuminatum (tapertip 
onion), Allium amplectens (narrowleaf onion), Calochortus tolmiei 
(Tolmie's mariposa lilly), Camassia quamash (small camas), Cryptantha 
intermedia (clearwater cryptantha), Eriophyllum lanatum (wooly 
sunflower), Geranium oreganum (Oregon geranium), Iris tenax (toughleaf 
iris), Linum angustifolium (pale flax), Linum perenne (blue flax), 
Sidalcea campestris (Meadow checkermallow), Sidalcea virgata (rose 
checker-mallow), Vicia cracca (bird vetch), V. sativa (common vetch), 
and V. hirsute (tiny vetch);
    (iv) Stepping-stone habitat consisting of undeveloped open areas 
with the physical characteristics appropriate for supporting the short-
stature prairie oak savanna plant community (well-drained soils), within 
1.2 miles (2 km) of natal lupine patches.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas, and the 
land on which such structures are located) existing on the effective 
date of this rule and not containing one or more of the primary 
constituent elements.
    (4) Critical Habitat Map Units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using USGS 24,000 scale Digital Ortho Quads captured in 2000. 
Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 10, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 coordinates.
    (5) Note: Map 1 (Index map for Fender's blue butterfly) follows:

[[Page 396]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.001

    (6) Unit 1 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-1), Yamhill County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 1A (FBB-1A): 477069, 5022493; 477070, 5022487; 477067, 
5022487; 477065, 5022493; 477063, 5022498; 477063, 5022510; 477046, 
5022526; 477039, 5022566; 477039, 5022576; 477038, 5022585; 477039, 
5022591; 477039, 5022824; 477055, 5022862; 477073, 5022873; 477056, 
5022893; 477056, 5022901; 477057, 5022907; 477061, 5022907; 477060, 
5022896; 477081, 5022888; 477101, 5022884; 477099, 5022848; 477110, 
5022829; 477111, 5022528; 477098, 5022513; 477069, 5022504; 477067, 
5022498; 477069, 5022493.
    (ii) Unit 1B (FBB-1B): 477876, 5021643; 477881, 5021641; 477902, 
5021642; 477941, 5021640; 477957, 5021634; 477983, 5021620; 478008, 
5021592; 478031, 5021554; 478078, 5021484; 478068, 5021464; 478035, 
5021445; 477996, 5021442; 477983, 5021440; 477989, 5021435; 477986, 
5021427; 477979, 5021419; 477968, 5021420; 477956, 5021427; 477931, 
5021437; 477898, 5021440; 477878, 5021434; 477854, 5021427; 477857,

[[Page 397]]

5021435; 477855, 5021439; 477846, 5021438; 477836, 5021433; 477812, 
5021449; 477790, 5021465; 477773, 5021478; 477759, 5021499; 477745, 
5021504; 477743, 5021519; 477744, 5021519; 477737, 5021537; 477732, 
5021541; 477731, 5021541; 477731, 5021541; 477731, 5021541; 477731, 
5021541; 477730, 5021541; 477730, 5021541; 477729, 5021541; 477727, 
5021541; 477727, 5021541; 477727, 5021541; 477727, 5021541; 477727, 
5021541; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 
5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 
5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477725, 5021543; 477724, 
5021543; 477724, 5021543; 477724, 5021543; 477724, 5021543; 477723, 
5021543; 477723, 5021543; 477723, 5021543; 477722, 5021543; 477722, 
5021544; 477721, 5021544; 477720, 5021543; 477720, 5021543; 477720, 
5021543; 477720, 5021543; 477720, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477718, 5021543; 477718, 
5021543; 477718, 5021543; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 
5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477719, 
5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 
5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477720, 
5021545; 477720, 5021545; 477720, 5021545; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 
5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 
5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477722, 
5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477723, 5021545; 477723, 
5021545; 477723, 5021545; 477723, 5021545; 477723, 5021545; 477724, 
5021545; 477725, 5021544; 477725, 5021544; 477725, 5021544; 477725, 
5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 
5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477727, 5021543; 477728, 
5021543; 477729, 5021543; 477715, 5021554; 477698, 5021582; 477695, 
5021586; 477695, 5021589; 477690, 5021600; 477691, 5021601; 477707, 
5021609; 477719, 5021607; 477739, 5021612; 477777, 5021616; 477823, 
5021631; 477839, 5021635; 477849, 5021641; 477867, 5021641; 477876, 
5021643.
    (iii) Note: Map 2 (Unit 1 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-1)) 
follows:

[[Page 398]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.002

    (7) Unit 2 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-2), Yamhill County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 2 (FBB-2): 470959, 5003231; 470965, 5003226; 470972, 
5003226; 470984, 5003224; 470992, 5003223; 471004, 5003220; 471012, 
5003218; 471016, 5003215; 471018, 5003209; 471014, 5003202; 471011, 
5003200; 471006, 5003198; 470998, 5003191; 470991, 5003187; 470988, 
5003186; 470981, 5003180; 470977, 5003176; 470973, 5003168; 470970, 
5003165; 470968, 5003159; 470968, 5003151; 470968, 5003132; 470968, 
5003123; 470967, 5003109; 470965, 5003099; 470962, 5003090; 470961, 
5003075; 470965, 5003070; 470966, 5003065; 470967, 5003055; 470965, 
5003048; 470969, 5003041; 470974, 5003036; 470979, 5003036; 470984, 
5003035; 470986, 5003035; 470990, 5003032; 470995, 5003027; 470998, 
5003022; 470998, 5003015; 470998, 5003010; 470994, 5003007; 470988, 
5003006; 470977, 5003006; 470973, 5003006; 470963, 5003004; 470957, 
5003001; 470949, 5002996; 470947, 5002994; 470945, 5002987; 470944, 
5002981; 470946, 5002976; 470949,

[[Page 399]]

5002967; 470958, 5002964; 470965, 5002964; 470973, 5002962; 470981, 
5002958; 470988, 5002955; 470994, 5002951; 470999, 5002946; 471004, 
5002937; 471005, 5002932; 471010, 5002924; 471012, 5002918; 471010, 
5002913; 471011, 5002902; 471003, 5002893; 470992, 5002886; 470982, 
5002892; 470966, 5002893; 470956, 5002901; 470945, 5002909; 470932, 
5002914; 470925, 5002911; 470914, 5002904; 470905, 5002901; 470893, 
5002900; 470876, 5002901; 470868, 5002895; 470867, 5002887; 470879, 
5002867; 470888, 5002866; 470935, 5002861; 470970, 5002859; 470988, 
5002861; 470991, 5002853; 470998, 5002837; 471002, 5002828; 471012, 
5002821; 471016, 5002816; 471015, 5002796; 471017, 5002785; 471017, 
5002776; 471016, 5002766; 471015, 5002751; 471014, 5002740; 471012, 
5002737; 471008, 5002734; 470998, 5002731; 470988, 5002734; 470981, 
5002737; 470975, 5002739; 470967, 5002744; 470959, 5002745; 470951, 
5002747; 470943, 5002747; 470929, 5002745; 470924, 5002744; 470917, 
5002740; 470908, 5002741; 470894, 5002743; 470884, 5002741; 470878, 
5002739; 470871, 5002737; 470865, 5002735; 470861, 5002735; 470853, 
5002735; 470843, 5002736; 470834, 5002737; 470826, 5002742; 470819, 
5002745; 470814, 5002751; 470811, 5002758; 470811, 5002764; 470809, 
5002774; 470805, 5002784; 470801, 5002791; 470797, 5002795; 470787, 
5002802; 470780, 5002802; 470772, 5002802; 470760, 5002805; 470752, 
5002811; 470750, 5002818; 470747, 5002830; 470746, 5002840; 470744, 
5002861; 470743, 5002874; 470740, 5002886; 470738, 5002896; 470735, 
5002904; 470731, 5002910; 470729, 5002911; 470716, 5002892; 470717, 
5002872; 470704, 5002848; 470692, 5002827; 470696, 5002824; 470691, 
5002816; 470690, 5002804; 470692, 5002800; 470703, 5002799; 470698, 
5002794; 470700, 5002783; 470695, 5002776; 470691, 5002769; 470690, 
5002762; 470695, 5002753; 470682, 5002753; 470682, 5002723; 470692, 
5002723; 470689, 5002717; 470691, 5002709; 470694, 5002702; 470684, 
5002700; 470675, 5002699; 470665, 5002704; 470657, 5002701; 470651, 
5002704; 470645, 5002701; 470640, 5002694; 470623, 5002696; 470617, 
5002697; 470608, 5002697; 470604, 5002707; 470589, 5002716; 470582, 
5002715; 470580, 5002725; 470564, 5002726; 470563, 5002707; 470555, 
5002695; 470553, 5002676; 470548, 5002670; 470553, 5002660; 470562, 
5002655; 470562, 5002646; 470557, 5002635; 470564, 5002625; 470557, 
5002608; 470514, 5002689; 470514, 5002732; 470561, 5002844; 470604, 
5002950; 470685, 5003149; 470688, 5003164; 470693, 5003185; 470725, 
5003387; 470725, 5003399; 470728, 5003400; 470728, 5003406; 470733, 
5003407; 470738, 5003441; 470741, 5003444; 470749, 5003447; 470755, 
5003446; 470764, 5003444; 470769, 5003441; 470775, 5003430; 470778, 
5003422; 470780, 5003416; 470782, 5003411; 470787, 5003400; 470790, 
5003393; 470794, 5003387; 470797, 5003383; 470810, 5003372; 470817, 
5003367; 470829, 5003362; 470836, 5003356; 470841, 5003352; 470852, 
5003349; 470856, 5003345; 470858, 5003343; 470869, 5003337; 470878, 
5003335; 470891, 5003328; 470895, 5003325; 470901, 5003320; 470914, 
5003313; 470925, 5003301; 470930, 5003295; 470937, 5003286; 470945, 
5003282; 470948, 5003277; 470948, 5003271; 470948, 5003260; 470951, 
5003247; 470955, 5003235; 470959, 5003231.
    (ii) Note: Map 3 (Unit 2 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-2)) 
follows:

[[Page 400]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.003

    (8) Unit 3 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-3), Polk County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 3 (FBB-3): 466744, 4985295; 466788, 4985264; 466788, 
4985266; 466788, 4985267; 466788, 4985268; 466789, 4985269; 466789, 
4985270; 466790, 4985271; 466791, 4985272; 466792, 4985273; 466793, 
4985273; 466795, 4985273; 466796, 4985274; 466797, 4985273; 466798, 
4985273; 466800, 4985272; 466800, 4985272; 466801, 4985271; 466802, 
4985270; 466802, 4985269; 466803, 4985267; 466803, 4985266; 466803, 
4985265; 466802, 4985264; 466805, 4985263; 466814, 4985246; 466828, 
4985234; 466834, 4985222; 466841, 4985196; 466839, 4985170; 466828, 
4985145; 466814, 4985129; 466805, 4985129; 466783, 4985143; 466767, 
4985178; 466742, 4985216; 466725, 4985214; 466725, 4985212; 466721, 
4985211; 466718, 4985210; 466715, 4985211; 466711, 4985212; 466707, 
4985213; 466700, 4985220; 466694, 4985237; 466694, 4985239; 466694, 
4985241; 466696, 4985243; 466710, 4985258; 466681,

[[Page 401]]

4985295; 466683, 4985320; 466691, 4985320; 466712, 4985309; 466744, 
4985295.
    (ii) Note: Map 4 (Unit 3 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-3)) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.004

    (9) Unit 4 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-4), Polk County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 4A (FBB-4A): 480420, 4981038; 480415, 4980660; 480465, 
4980658; 480509, 4980632; 480539, 4980585; 480559, 4980485; 480655, 
4980012; 480670, 4980021; 480700, 4980045; 480721, 4980066; 480736, 
4980087; 480757, 4980126; 480772, 4980165; 480790, 4980221; 480805, 
4980257; 480811, 4980275; 480850, 4980311; 480865, 4980329; 480892, 
4980347; 480943, 4980338; 480973, 4980332; 480997, 4980317; 481021, 
4980302; 481036, 4980287; 481093, 4980302; 481105, 4980299; 481150, 
4980293; 481188, 4980278; 481215,

[[Page 402]]

4980266; 481218, 4980239; 481272, 4980218; 481290, 4980218; 481335, 
4980218; 481371, 4980215; 481401, 4980212; 481446, 4980212; 481473, 
4980221; 481482, 4980236; 481506, 4980254; 481542, 4980257; 481584, 
4980257; 481617, 4980251; 481719, 4980272; 481776, 4980281; 481926, 
4980287; 482124, 4980275; 482147, 4980262; 482161, 4980236; 482177, 
4980217; 482190, 4980197; 482191, 4980181; 482193, 4980161; 482184, 
4980150; 482154, 4980150; 482109, 4980135; 482067, 4980117; 482058, 
4980075; 482052, 4980027; 481998, 4980024; 481977, 4980018; 481959, 
4980003; 481938, 4980003; 481920, 4980009; 481899, 4980015; 481875, 
4980003; 481866, 4979937; 481473, 4979934; 481476, 4979898; 481476, 
4979835; 481482, 4979793; 481470, 4979754; 481464, 4979730; 481455, 
4979703; 481434, 4979682; 481413, 4979649; 481380, 4979628; 481338, 
4979625; 481293, 4979619; 481248, 4979613; 481233, 4979601; 481215, 
4979577; 481194, 4979562; 481150, 4979505; 481120, 4979448; 481099, 
4979418; 481069, 4979382; 481039, 4979352; 481018, 4979334; 480985, 
4979322; 480928, 4979319; 480868, 4979313; 480835, 4979310; 480805, 
4979313; 480781, 4979304; 480739, 4979268; 480703, 4979235; 480679, 
4979211; 480667, 4979229; 480664, 4979265; 480664, 4979320; 480631, 
4979301; 480562, 4979290; 480500, 4979319; 480430, 4979365; 480364, 
4979418; 480295, 4979482; 480192, 4979594; 480162, 4979636; 480146, 
4979629; 480153, 4979478; 480132, 4979469; 480081, 4979470; 480069, 
4979463; 480014, 4979470; 479987, 4979491; 479974, 4979497; 479955, 
4979499; 479950, 4979491; 479949, 4979474; 479980, 4979422; 479985, 
4979353; 479986, 4979247; 479955, 4979176; 479892, 4979121; 479789, 
4979108; 479733, 4979057; 479709, 4979033; 479669, 4978987; 479621, 
4978771; 479610, 4978730; 479588, 4978684; 479536, 4978649; 479490, 
4978639; 479442, 4978604; 479317, 4978553; 479262, 4978567; 479166, 
4978639; 479121, 4978705; 479115, 4978766; 479123, 4978846; 479124, 
4978910; 479125, 4978980; 479136, 4979163; 479138, 4979243; 479160, 
4979487; 479170, 4979514; 479211, 4979570; 479216, 4979575; 479226, 
4979608; 479267, 4979631; 479289, 4979636; 479317, 4979621; 479337, 
4979585; 479357, 4979503; 479386, 4979425; 479394, 4979339; 479420, 
4979229; 479431, 4979203; 479437, 4979189; 479463, 4979159; 479505, 
4979144; 479515, 4979151; 479558, 4979182; 479590, 4979220; 479615, 
4979263; 479634, 4979344; 479637, 4979377; 479627, 4979430; 479599, 
4979493; 479567, 4979539; 479517, 4979565; 479479, 4979591; 479448, 
4979641; 479427, 4979687; 479442, 4979726; 479483, 4979721; 479523, 
4979726; 479636, 4979673; 479674, 4979658; 479689, 4979658; 479704, 
4979652; 479706, 4979658; 479702, 4979671; 479704, 4979680; 479709, 
4979687; 479718, 4979687; 479726, 4979685; 479732, 4979688; 479725, 
4979696; 479712, 4979698; 479700, 4979702; 479694, 4979712; 479677, 
4979727; 479671, 4979737; 479657, 4979744; 479647, 4979749; 479641, 
4979754; 479640, 4979762; 479629, 4979768; 479616, 4979772; 479610, 
4979778; 479603, 4979787; 479591, 4979790; 479582, 4979793; 479572, 
4979797; 479564, 4979803; 479556, 4979804; 479545, 4979812; 479530, 
4979818; 479523, 4979826; 479513, 4979823; 479506, 4979832; 479500, 
4979842; 479497, 4979852; 479487, 4979861; 479471, 4979865; 479459, 
4979860; 479446, 4979857; 479431, 4979857; 479415, 4979864; 479402, 
4979872; 479393, 4979882; 479357, 4979902; 479332, 4979906; 479304, 
4979923; 479280, 4979933; 479251, 4979937; 479208, 4979982; 479184, 
4980014; 479170, 4980039; 479157, 4980082; 479148, 4980099; 479149, 
4980126; 479158, 4980154; 479155, 4980237; 479150, 4980299; 479129, 
4980320; 479108, 4980347; 479100, 4980373; 479105, 4980406; 479115, 
4980442; 479118, 4980493; 479105, 4980533; 479106, 4980564; 479115, 
4980602; 479110, 4980644; 479110, 4980683; 479110, 4980720; 479124, 
4980755; 479131, 4980796; 479136, 4980835; 479149, 4980865; 479167, 
4980878; 479187, 4980883; 479210, 4980892; 479224, 4980903; 479235, 
4980911; 479248, 4980909; 479266, 4980896; 479279, 4980880; 479288, 
4980866; 479294, 4980851; 479290, 4980840; 479292, 4980832; 479303, 
4980821; 479314, 4980812; 479321, 4980800; 479342, 4980795; 479356, 
4980790; 479364, 4980792; 479374, 4980790; 479382, 4980780; 479392, 
4980770; 479402, 4980759; 479407, 4980742; 479414, 4980719; 479422, 
4980693; 479430, 4980679; 479449, 4980659; 479473, 4980619; 479509, 
4980619; 479536, 4980613; 479568, 4980594; 479588, 4980578; 479596, 
4980556; 479604, 4980531; 479607, 4980512; 479609, 4980497; 479619, 
4980487; 479636, 4980487; 479648, 4980486; 479659, 4980480; 479671, 
4980469; 479704, 4980398; 479706, 4980386; 479702, 4980362; 479704, 
4980343; 479711, 4980330; 479727, 4980313; 479740, 4980301; 479758, 
4980294; 479785, 4980295; 479836, 4980302; 479893, 4980332; 479923, 
4980343; 479952, 4980354; 479966, 4980359; 479982, 4980358; 479990, 
4980366; 479994, 4980387; 479992, 4980413; 479983, 4980435; 479974, 
4980464; 479942, 4980502; 479908, 4980532; 479883, 4980552; 479854, 
4980578; 479835, 4980590; 479820, 4980608; 479808, 4980638; 479818, 
4980663; 479831, 4980688; 479856, 4980704; 479881, 4980702; 479905, 
4980696; 479927, 4980689; 479954, 4980688; 479989, 4980698; 480013, 
4980714; 480029, 4980729; 480046, 4980739; 480067, 4980747; 480091, 
4980753; 480117, 4980754; 480138, 4980754; 480156, 4980749; 480173, 
4980738; 480181, 4980739; 480188, 4980746; 480170, 4980766; 480158, 
4980778; 480158, 4980793; 480158, 4980810; 480160, 4980824; 480168, 
4980835; 480169, 4980847; 480173, 4980863; 480179, 4980878; 480197, 
4980892; 480221, 4980911; 480245, 4980928; 480273, 4980947; 480296, 
4980966; 480330, 4980984; 480356, 4981000; 480386, 4981021; 480405, 
4981037; 480420, 4981038.
    (ii) Unit 4B (FBB-4B): 480860, 4983078; 480881, 4983054; 480869, 
4983018; 480854, 4983006; 480830, 4982992; 480818, 4982974; 480821, 
4982950; 480821, 4982944; 480821, 4982923; 480836, 4982905; 480845, 
4982908; 480860, 4982911; 480872, 4982923; 480884, 4982938; 480896, 
4982953; 480902, 4982965; 480917, 4982974; 480962, 4982956; 480968, 
4982950; 480977, 4982947; 480977, 4982932; 480974, 4982905; 480992, 
4982911; 481046, 4982920; 481070, 4982926; 481106, 4982932; 481157, 
4982941; 481178, 4982941; 481184, 4982944; 481196, 4982950; 481205, 
4982950; 481220, 4982950; 481229, 4982950; 481244, 4982956; 481253, 
4982953; 481280, 4982962; 481337, 4982953; 481364, 4982932; 481364, 
4982914; 481361, 4982848; 481361, 4982812; 481367, 4982770; 481355, 
4982716; 481361, 4982623; 481358, 4982518; 481340, 4982314; 481349, 
4982287; 481346, 4982218; 481343, 4982125; 481337, 4982089; 481343, 
4982062; 481337, 4982050; 481328, 4982047; 481334, 4982023; 481337, 
4982002; 481328, 4981984; 481331, 4981969; 481337, 4981954; 481349, 
4981930; 481352, 4981888; 481355, 4981867; 481355, 4981828; 481346, 
4981742; 481349, 4981724; 481343, 4981703; 481075, 4981699; 481048, 
4981722; 481059, 4982492; 480646, 4982496; 480545, 4982422; 480553,

[[Page 403]]

4982004; 480564, 4981927; 480530, 4981858; 480456, 4981838; 480352, 
4981823; 480247, 4981830; 480158, 4981846; 480089, 4981861; 480050, 
4981850; 480023, 4981761; 480011, 4981656; 479988, 4981567; 479977, 
4981509; 479984, 4981417; 480010, 4981359; 480004, 4981154; 479663, 
4981161; 479609, 4981154; 479582, 4981030; 479532, 4980899; 479526, 
4980905; 479499, 4980920; 479487, 4980926; 479472, 4980935; 479435, 
4980999; 479436, 4981283; 479442, 4981328; 479442, 4981367; 479454, 
4981382; 479475, 4981394; 479505, 4981415; 479535, 4981445; 479562, 
4981499; 479574, 4981517; 479583, 4981556; 479589, 4981601; 479607, 
4981622; 479619, 4981628; 479634, 4981631; 479649, 4981628; 479667, 
4981619; 479688, 4981616; 479697, 4981604; 479697, 4981631; 479691, 
4981661; 479694, 4981691; 479688, 4981712; 479652, 4981763; 479628, 
4981787; 479631, 4981825; 479634, 4982011; 479625, 4982026; 479601, 
4982038; 479598, 4982050; 479613, 4982050; 479652, 4982053; 479682, 
4982047; 479739, 4982056; 479736, 4982344; 479748, 4982644; 479751, 
4982674; 479751, 4982713; 479748, 4982746; 479754, 4982764; 479913, 
4982761; 479931, 4982758; 479949, 4982758; 479964, 4982746; 479979, 
4982740; 479988, 4982722; 480006, 4982689; 480015, 4982689; 480033, 
4982692; 480072, 4982704; 480108, 4982710; 480129, 4982719; 480141, 
4982722; 480159, 4982728; 480168, 4982728; 480179, 4982728; 480188, 
4982716; 480197, 4982719; 480209, 4982737; 480218, 4982743; 480242, 
4982746; 480254, 4982758; 480269, 4982770; 480287, 4982773; 480299, 
4982773; 480314, 4982767; 480323, 4982758; 480320, 4982740; 480317, 
4982722; 480329, 4982704; 480341, 4982698; 480350, 4982707; 480365, 
4982710; 480698, 4982806; 480695, 4982821; 480692, 4982836; 480689, 
4982860; 480692, 4982887; 480689, 4982908; 480686, 4982929; 480683, 
4982950; 480686, 4982986; 480695, 4983006; 480704, 4983036; 480716, 
4983054; 480731, 4983060; 480752, 4983063; 480770, 4983072; 480806, 
4983063; 480815, 4983063; 480830, 4983069; 480842, 4983078; 480860, 
4983078.
    (iii) Note: Map 5 (Unit 4 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-4)) 
follows:

[[Page 404]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.005

    (10) Unit 5 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-5), Polk County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 5 (FBB-5): 474272, 4973321; 474269, 4973168; 474273, 
4973168; 474274, 4973107; 474153, 4973107; 474153, 4973026; 474053, 
4973026; 474051, 4973029; 474049, 4973032; 474047, 4973034; 474042, 
4973034; 474039, 4973035; 474038, 4973084; 474044, 4973086; 474045, 
4973092; 474045, 4973097; 474045, 4973104; 474045, 4973109; 474046, 
4973116; 474047, 4973121; 474046, 4973128; 474047, 4973134; 474047, 
4973139; 474046, 4973146; 474047, 4973152; 474048, 4973154; 474047, 
4973158; 474048, 4973164; 474049, 4973164; 474052, 4973165; 474054, 
4973165; 474061, 4973165; 474067, 4973165; 474074, 4973165; 474079, 
4973166; 474083, 4973168; 474098, 4973263; 474107, 4973322; 474272, 
4973321.
    (ii) Note: Map 6 (Unit 5 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-5)) 
follows:

[[Page 405]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.006

    (11) Unit 6 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-6), Polk County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 6A (FBB-6A): 475279, 4966872; 475243, 4966871; 475222, 
4966886; 475213, 4966910; 475218, 4966935; 475240, 4966947; 475327, 
4966950; 475355, 4966941; 475361, 4966915; 475341, 4966880; 475311, 
4966874; 475279, 4966872.
    (ii) Unit 6B (FBB-6B): 476378, 4965968; 476384, 4965952; 476405, 
4965950; 476419, 4965937; 476444, 4965919; 476463, 4965906; 476473, 
4965897; 476487, 4965882; 476493, 4965872; 476506, 4965856; 476509, 
4965842; 476521, 4965821; 476538, 4965819; 476542, 4965808; 476540, 
4965796; 476532, 4965791; 476525, 4965780; 476519, 4965777; 476512, 
4965770; 476507, 4965760; 476499, 4965757; 476493, 4965753; 476484, 
4965744; 476477, 4965750; 476466, 4965743; 476463, 4965733; 476448, 
4965733; 476435, 4965730; 476427, 4965729; 476423, 4965722; 476413, 
4965718; 476411, 4965713; 476384, 4965707; 476355, 4965699; 476346, 
4965699; 476339, 4965702; 476299, 4965693; 476290,

[[Page 406]]

4965699; 476285, 4965694; 476259, 4965694; 476247, 4965701; 476238, 
4965709; 476222, 4965716; 476209, 4965725; 476202, 4965722; 476202, 
4965709; 476186, 4965715; 476186, 4965722; 476188, 4965840; 476262, 
4965902; 476327, 4965906; 476329, 4965931; 476331, 4965951; 476344, 
4965964; 476364, 4965964; 476376, 4965961; 476378, 4965968.
    (iii) Note: Map 7 (Unit 6 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-6)) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.007

    (12) Units 7, 8, and 9 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-7, FBB-8, 
and FBB-9), Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 7 (FBB-7): 472041, 4940614; 472041, 4940616; 472040, 
4940619; 472041, 4940623; 472043, 4940628; 472043, 4940632; 472043, 
4940636; 472043,

[[Page 407]]

4940639; 472045, 4940641; 472047, 4940642; 472048, 4940642; 472051, 
4940646; 472051, 4940651; 472051, 4940655; 472051, 4940658; 472051, 
4940660; 472050, 4940665; 472053, 4940667; 472057, 4940668; 472060, 
4940670; 472063, 4940668; 472066, 4940668; 472070, 4940667; 472070, 
4940663; 472073, 4940660; 472078, 4940658; 472080, 4940661; 472083, 
4940662; 472087, 4940663; 472090, 4940662; 472092, 4940663; 472095, 
4940664; 472100, 4940664; 472104, 4940663; 472106, 4940661; 472107, 
4940659; 472109, 4940656; 472113, 4940654; 472115, 4940653; 472115, 
4940650; 472117, 4940648; 472120, 4940647; 472121, 4940645; 472121, 
4940641; 472122, 4940640; 472123, 4940636; 472124, 4940633; 472121, 
4940632; 472116, 4940631; 472114, 4940629; 472112, 4940626; 472110, 
4940622; 472110, 4940618; 472109, 4940613; 472108, 4940609; 472104, 
4940605; 472102, 4940599; 472103, 4940594; 472104, 4940590; 472105, 
4940586; 472105, 4940586; 472104, 4940582; 472100, 4940579; 472093, 
4940558; 472089, 4940535; 472102, 4940527; 472103, 4940510; 472115, 
4940498; 472124, 4940503; 472127, 4940510; 472139, 4940515; 472141, 
4940507; 472138, 4940499; 472146, 4940494; 472164, 4940503; 472202, 
4940512; 472206, 4940531; 472188, 4940534; 472187, 4940543; 472200, 
4940547; 472206, 4940555; 472202, 4940572; 472218, 4940570; 472251, 
4940569; 472260, 4940564; 472276, 4940554; 472282, 4940544; 472285, 
4940531; 472293, 4940519; 472286, 4940510; 472283, 4940499; 472297, 
4940500; 472300, 4940495; 472311, 4940488; 472311, 4940478; 472320, 
4940474; 472338, 4940465; 472348, 4940472; 472357, 4940472; 472362, 
4940461; 472368, 4940442; 472375, 4940417; 472375, 4940401; 472375, 
4940393; 472376, 4940386; 472381, 4940384; 472384, 4940372; 472392, 
4940365; 472407, 4940365; 472417, 4940360; 472431, 4940353; 472442, 
4940342; 472442, 4940330; 472448, 4940313; 472451, 4940311; 472434, 
4940281; 472417, 4940275; 472391, 4940279; 472389, 4940288; 472373, 
4940293; 472366, 4940287; 472355, 4940295; 472355, 4940315; 472332, 
4940334; 472332, 4940335; 472330, 4940336; 472301, 4940344; 472299, 
4940360; 472299, 4940361; 472311, 4940365; 472327, 4940351; 472329, 
4940349; 472342, 4940348; 472343, 4940367; 472356, 4940366; 472367, 
4940381; 472367, 4940397; 472363, 4940405; 472338, 4940405; 472319, 
4940428; 472305, 4940430; 472296, 4940445; 472281, 4940449; 472273, 
4940443; 472273, 4940443; 472251, 4940425; 472164, 4940437; 472163, 
4940436; 472159, 4940437; 472152, 4940450; 472136, 4940452; 472113, 
4940447; 472102, 4940421; 472101, 4940419; 472071, 4940414; 472042, 
4940422; 472034, 4940405; 472014, 4940407; 472014, 4940392; 472010, 
4940384; 471999, 4940374; 471994, 4940367; 471993, 4940345; 471971, 
4940342; 471946, 4940345; 471939, 4940342; 471939, 4940329; 471938, 
4940303; 471930, 4940288; 471928, 4940269; 471917, 4940269; 471905, 
4940275; 471902, 4940293; 471910, 4940305; 471919, 4940326; 471922, 
4940338; 471932, 4940351; 471948, 4940354; 471966, 4940360; 471970, 
4940368; 471976, 4940385; 471993, 4940398; 472001, 4940410; 472018, 
4940418; 472024, 4940429; 472024, 4940445; 472026, 4940447; 472041, 
4940454; 472049, 4940482; 472069, 4940490; 472078, 4940515; 472072, 
4940521; 472074, 4940530; 472082, 4940534; 472085, 4940542; 472082, 
4940565; 472080, 4940574; 472072, 4940583; 472072, 4940587; 472072, 
4940587; 472072, 4940590; 472071, 4940592; 472071, 4940595; 472072, 
4940596; 472073, 4940596; 472074, 4940597; 472079, 4940597; 472079, 
4940602; 472077, 4940609; 472072, 4940612; 472070, 4940612; 472067, 
4940612; 472065, 4940611; 472061, 4940613; 472056, 4940616; 472048, 
4940615; 472046, 4940613; 472045, 4940612; 472045, 4940611; 472043, 
4940611; 472041, 4940614; 472041, 4940614.
    (ii) Unit 8 (FBB-8): 466807, 4938996; 466822, 4938987; 466857, 
4938963; 466860, 4938942; 466813, 4938811; 466811, 4938793; 466828, 
4938769; 466941, 4938694; 466944, 4938670; 467002, 4938673; 467028, 
4938645; 467029, 4938608; 467021, 4938582; 466984, 4938561; 466908, 
4938577; 466832, 4938387; 466805, 4938237; 466934, 4938170; 466973, 
4938111; 466957, 4937968; 467029, 4937886; 467194, 4937886; 467195, 
4937857; 467365, 4937876; 467379, 4937926; 467611, 4937920; 467606, 
4938003; 467523, 4938171; 467492, 4938190; 467460, 4938377; 467542, 
4938516; 467858, 4938596; 467858, 4938879; 467912, 4938876; 467912, 
4939023; 467936, 4939032; 468294, 4939023; 468330, 4939008; 468384, 
4939008; 468414, 4938891; 468339, 4938736; 468339, 4938638; 468297, 
4938551; 468324, 4938509; 468427, 4938482; 468488, 4938484; 468601, 
4938464; 468666, 4938425; 468749, 4938490; 468859, 4938476; 468989, 
4938412; 469013, 4938386; 468981, 4938369; 468949, 4938351; 468934, 
4938305; 468966, 4938282; 469004, 4938261; 469027, 4938227; 469137, 
4938256; 469181, 4938244; 469192, 4938198; 469186, 4938151; 469169, 
4938119; 469120, 4938105; 469076, 4938079; 469056, 4938041; 469013, 
4938018; 468978, 4937948; 469007, 4937940; 469100, 4937954; 469143, 
4937931; 469204, 4937919; 469276, 4937905; 469320, 4937899; 469314, 
4937864; 469256, 4937859; 469230, 4937821; 469184, 4937806; 469143, 
4937789; 469088, 4937737; 469053, 4937685; 469027, 4937656; 469050, 
4937604; 469036, 4937589; 468981, 4937569; 468946, 4937583; 468923, 
4937635; 468874, 4937633; 468853, 4937615; 468833, 4937636; 468842, 
4937659; 468819, 4937699; 468833, 4937720; 468876, 4937722; 468903, 
4937746; 468899, 4937788; 468871, 4937818; 468856, 4937864; 468824, 
4937879; 468816, 4937847; 468752, 4937824; 468723, 4937792; 468642, 
4937746; 468338, 4937844; 468259, 4937905; 468216, 4937917; 468204, 
4937864; 468112, 4937768; 468118, 4937725; 468124, 4937663; 468155, 
4937619; 468175, 4937569; 468182, 4937545; 468127, 4937546; 468085, 
4937549; 468046, 4937531; 468031, 4937507; 468007, 4937539; 467971, 
4937573; 467970, 4937597; 467920, 4937618; 467892, 4937661; 467875, 
4937662; 467845, 4937645; 467840, 4937641; 467841, 4937621; 467850, 
4937503; 467896, 4937426; 467889, 4937381; 467879, 4937358; 467844, 
4937352; 467717, 4937354; 467525, 4937362; 467217, 4937372; 467186, 
4937381; 467066, 4937388; 467055, 4937377; 467009, 4937373; 466961, 
4937380; 466915, 4937382; 466860, 4937392; 466783, 4937400; 466746, 
4937390; 466750, 4937358; 466727, 4937335; 466713, 4937308; 466667, 
4937298; 466654, 4937262; 466659, 4937211; 466686, 4937130; 466701, 
4937088; 466710, 4937034; 466703, 4937031; 466705, 4937011; 466705, 
4936978; 466695, 4936938; 466754, 4936891; 466792, 4936884; 466800, 
4936874; 466824, 4936872; 466851, 4936874; 466877, 4936883; 466901, 
4936894; 466913, 4936893; 466920, 4936885; 466932, 4936902; 466948, 
4936901; 466959, 4936896; 466985, 4936886; 467030, 4936878; 467052, 
4936866; 467075, 4936863; 467076, 4936853; 467057, 4936837; 467040, 
4936823; 467030, 4936810; 466999, 4936794; 466960, 4936800; 466949, 
4936803; 466904, 4936794; 466896, 4936793; 466884, 4936799; 466874, 
4936790; 466865, 4936778; 466862,

[[Page 408]]

4936758; 466843, 4936740; 466824, 4936734; 466791, 4936729; 466776, 
4936713; 466768, 4936726; 466742, 4936713; 466720, 4936698; 466693, 
4936682; 466671, 4936695; 466657, 4936702; 466649, 4936691; 466638, 
4936676; 466620, 4936676; 466610, 4936671; 466603, 4936645; 466602, 
4936633; 466595, 4936605; 466596, 4936586; 466601, 4936577; 466605, 
4936563; 466605, 4936539; 466601, 4936531; 466592, 4936524; 466585, 
4936518; 466579, 4936517; 466575, 4936510; 466568, 4936509; 466566, 
4936519; 466551, 4936516; 466546, 4936511; 466540, 4936478; 466543, 
4936463; 466541, 4936425; 466536, 4936391; 466542, 4936383; 466572, 
4936388; 466607, 4936392; 466634, 4936386; 466664, 4936367; 466683, 
4936337; 466699, 4936302; 466689, 4936260; 466670, 4936252; 466609, 
4936227; 466559, 4936227; 466532, 4936265; 466529, 4936290; 466509, 
4936310; 466495, 4936359; 466486, 4936405; 466488, 4936536; 466457, 
4936587; 466219, 4936726; 466211, 4936799; 466299, 4937032; 466287, 
4937049; 466323, 4937128; 466333, 4937175; 466358, 4937197; 466399, 
4937195; 466435, 4937164; 466474, 4937164; 466507, 4937181; 466535, 
4937200; 466526, 4937239; 466535, 4937294; 466551, 4937316; 466551, 
4937355; 466565, 4937408; 466585, 4937561; 466593, 4937636; 466591, 
4937692; 466591, 4937693; 466593, 4937783; 466553, 4937832; 466482, 
4937903; 466442, 4938088; 466427, 4938109; 466418, 4938183; 466379, 
4938225; 466347, 4938249; 466370, 4938285; 466376, 4938324; 466382, 
4938360; 466394, 4938393; 466415, 4938408; 466400, 4938467; 466513, 
4938413; 466551, 4938272; 466720, 4938295; 466738, 4938502; 466423, 
4938625; 466421, 4938685; 466400, 4938751; 466388, 4938802; 466367, 
4938832; 466356, 4938868; 466359, 4938882; 466370, 4938900; 466400, 
4938885; 466412, 4938891; 466427, 4938909; 466451, 4938906; 466463, 
4938891; 466487, 4938891; 466514, 4938897; 466538, 4938918; 466526, 
4938945; 466520, 4938981; 466529, 4939011; 466550, 4939035; 466586, 
4939026; 466597, 4938996; 466603, 4938990; 466657, 4939044; 466660, 
4939127; 466699, 4939163; 466753, 4939178; 466771, 4939169; 466789, 
4939157; 466801, 4939038; 466807, 4938996.
    (iii) Unit 9 (FBB-9): 472296, 4933737; 472312, 4933733; 472316, 
4933734; 472317, 4933734; 472317, 4933733; 472317, 4933732; 472317, 
4933732; 472315, 4933731; 472319, 4933730; 472325, 4933708; 472324, 
4933707; 472325, 4933685; 472276, 4933663; 472265, 4933662; 472199, 
4933648; 472192, 4933641; 472149, 4933621; 472144, 4933615; 472143, 
4933611; 472140, 4933608; 472139, 4933604; 472140, 4933601; 472139, 
4933599; 472138, 4933594; 472140, 4933589; 472140, 4933584; 472142, 
4933581; 472148, 4933580; 472145, 4933576; 472145, 4933572; 472150, 
4933570; 472159, 4933573; 472165, 4933575; 472169, 4933578; 472176, 
4933582; 472182, 4933584; 472189, 4933585; 472194, 4933582; 472198, 
4933579; 472201, 4933574; 472201, 4933571; 472201, 4933566; 472199, 
4933561; 472194, 4933558; 472189, 4933556; 472188, 4933552; 472185, 
4933550; 472184, 4933546; 472179, 4933544; 472176, 4933540; 472174, 
4933534; 472169, 4933534; 472163, 4933533; 472158, 4933532; 472154, 
4933529; 472151, 4933526; 472147, 4933525; 472146, 4933518; 472144, 
4933513; 472142, 4933509; 472146, 4933505; 472147, 4933500; 472144, 
4933496; 472144, 4933489; 472147, 4933487; 472148, 4933475; 472148, 
4933469; 472149, 4933462; 472150, 4933455; 472151, 4933448; 472146, 
4933447; 472146, 4933445; 472150, 4933441; 472156, 4933440; 472156, 
4933436; 472151, 4933437; 472147, 4933433; 472148, 4933428; 472149, 
4933421; 472146, 4933422; 472145, 4933413; 472145, 4933406; 472144, 
4933395; 472147, 4933390; 472147, 4933383; 472147, 4933378; 472150, 
4933375; 472151, 4933370; 472146, 4933370; 472146, 4933363; 472147, 
4933342; 472148, 4933340; 472149, 4933336; 472149, 4933331; 472151, 
4933321; 472151, 4933314; 472152, 4933306; 472156, 4933289; 472157, 
4933267; 472158, 4933251; 472159, 4933239; 472159, 4933225; 472160, 
4933213; 472161, 4933206; 472162, 4933195; 472163, 4933186; 472158, 
4933167; 472147, 4933161; 472144, 4933165; 472139, 4933170; 472131, 
4933175; 472127, 4933169; 472123, 4933166; 472122, 4933162; 472115, 
4933158; 472111, 4933152; 472108, 4933145; 472106, 4933139; 472104, 
4933137; 472104, 4933130; 472109, 4933128; 472112, 4933123; 472117, 
4933124; 472121, 4933124; 472122, 4933119; 472123, 4933115; 472122, 
4933112; 472118, 4933111; 472112, 4933108; 472109, 4933103; 472102, 
4933103; 472096, 4933104; 472091, 4933106; 472085, 4933106; 472079, 
4933107; 472074, 4933104; 472073, 4933097; 472069, 4933090; 472069, 
4933086; 472067, 4933081; 472068, 4933072; 472064, 4933070; 472059, 
4933071; 472053, 4933070; 472052, 4933065; 472047, 4933062; 472041, 
4933063; 472039, 4933067; 472037, 4933071; 472032, 4933071; 472030, 
4933071; 472027, 4933073; 472024, 4933074; 472020, 4933073; 472016, 
4933073; 472010, 4933074; 472005, 4933090; 472003, 4933094; 472003, 
4933101; 472007, 4933106; 472009, 4933111; 472007, 4933116; 472004, 
4933116; 472004, 4933120; 472002, 4933125; 472001, 4933128; 472002, 
4933134; 472004, 4933137; 472002, 4933140; 472002, 4933143; 472007, 
4933146; 472009, 4933153; 472010, 4933160; 472011, 4933165; 472013, 
4933170; 472016, 4933176; 472018, 4933179; 472015, 4933183; 472015, 
4933186; 472019, 4933186; 472021, 4933190; 472020, 4933195; 472016, 
4933198; 472011, 4933215; 472003, 4933221; 471996, 4933227; 471990, 
4933231; 471989, 4933240; 471983, 4933257; 471982, 4933268; 471977, 
4933277; 471976, 4933282; 471972, 4933282; 471968, 4933281; 471962, 
4933280; 471962, 4933280; 471962, 4933280; 471961, 4933278; 471960, 
4933276; 471958, 4933273; 471957, 4933271; 471957, 4933271; 471956, 
4933271; 471956, 4933268; 471956, 4933266; 471955, 4933263; 471955, 
4933260; 471955, 4933257; 471954, 4933257; 471953, 4933258; 471950, 
4933257; 471947, 4933257; 471944, 4933256; 471942, 4933255; 471939, 
4933253; 471936, 4933251; 471934, 4933251; 471929, 4933247; 471929, 
4933247; 471929, 4933247; 471929, 4933245; 471928, 4933244; 471927, 
4933242; 471925, 4933240; 471924, 4933239; 471922, 4933237; 471921, 
4933237; 471919, 4933236; 471917, 4933236; 471915, 4933235; 471913, 
4933236; 471911, 4933235; 471909, 4933235; 471908, 4933234; 471906, 
4933234; 471904, 4933233; 471904, 4933233; 471904, 4933233; 471903, 
4933233; 471902, 4933232; 471899, 4933230; 471897, 4933228; 471895, 
4933227; 471894, 4933227; 471893, 4933224; 471892, 4933222; 471888, 
4933220; 471884, 4933218; 471882, 4933217; 471876, 4933214; 471873, 
4933212; 471870, 4933211; 471868, 4933209; 471865, 4933208; 471862, 
4933207; 471859, 4933205; 471859, 4933205; 471859, 4933205; 471859, 
4933203; 471854, 4933190; 471854, 4933190; 471853, 4933188; 471851, 
4933183; 471851, 4933183; 471850, 4933182; 471850, 4933173; 471850, 
4933171; 471850, 4933170; 471850, 4933166; 471850, 4933164; 471850, 
4933162; 471850, 4933161; 471850, 4933159; 471848, 4933159; 471847, 
4933158; 471846, 4933158; 471845, 4933158; 471846,

[[Page 409]]

4933162; 471844, 4933163; 471842, 4933165; 471840, 4933167; 471839, 
4933168; 471837, 4933170; 471835, 4933172; 471832, 4933174; 471830, 
4933176; 471828, 4933178; 471826, 4933181; 471824, 4933181; 471822, 
4933181; 471820, 4933182; 471818, 4933183; 471816, 4933183; 471815, 
4933184; 471814, 4933185; 471813, 4933186; 471812, 4933187; 471811, 
4933188; 471812, 4933189; 471813, 4933189; 471814, 4933190; 471815, 
4933191; 471816, 4933191; 471818, 4933192; 471819, 4933193; 471820, 
4933194; 471821, 4933194; 471822, 4933195; 471820, 4933197; 471819, 
4933198; 471817, 4933199; 471815, 4933201; 471814, 4933202; 471812, 
4933202; 471811, 4933203; 471810, 4933203; 471808, 4933203; 471807, 
4933203; 471805, 4933203; 471804, 4933203; 471802, 4933204; 471801, 
4933204; 471799, 4933204; 471798, 4933204; 471796, 4933204; 471795, 
4933205; 471793, 4933205; 471792, 4933206; 471791, 4933207; 471790, 
4933208; 471790, 4933209; 471789, 4933210; 471788, 4933211; 471787, 
4933212; 471786, 4933212; 471785, 4933213; 471783, 4933214; 471782, 
4933214; 471782, 4933215; 471781, 4933215; 471781, 4933215; 471780, 
4933216; 471780, 4933217; 471777, 4933218; 471778, 4933219; 471778, 
4933220; 471779, 4933221; 471779, 4933222; 471779, 4933223; 471779, 
4933225; 471779, 4933226; 471779, 4933227; 471779, 4933229; 471779, 
4933230; 471780, 4933231; 471781, 4933232; 471783, 4933233; 471784, 
4933235; 471785, 4933236; 471785, 4933236; 471786, 4933237; 471786, 
4933237; 471779, 4933246; 471778, 4933249; 471776, 4933251; 471775, 
4933254; 471774, 4933256; 471773, 4933257; 471772, 4933261; 471771, 
4933264; 471769, 4933267; 471768, 4933271; 471767, 4933274; 471767, 
4933277; 471766, 4933280; 471765, 4933283; 471766, 4933284; 471763, 
4933287; 471761, 4933290; 471759, 4933294; 471757, 4933297; 471755, 
4933301; 471754, 4933303; 471754, 4933306; 471753, 4933308; 471752, 
4933311; 471752, 4933314; 471751, 4933316; 471750, 4933319; 471750, 
4933322; 471749, 4933325; 471748, 4933328; 471747, 4933331; 471746, 
4933334; 471745, 4933338; 471744, 4933341; 471743, 4933344; 471742, 
4933348; 471741, 4933352; 471740, 4933355; 471739, 4933359; 471738, 
4933363; 471738, 4933365; 471737, 4933368; 471737, 4933370; 471736, 
4933373; 471736, 4933375; 471736, 4933377; 471735, 4933378; 471735, 
4933380; 471734, 4933381; 471734, 4933383; 471733, 4933384; 471732, 
4933386; 471732, 4933387; 471731, 4933388; 471730, 4933390; 471730, 
4933391; 471729, 4933392; 471728, 4933394; 471728, 4933395; 471727, 
4933397; 471727, 4933398; 471727, 4933400; 471727, 4933401; 471726, 
4933403; 471726, 4933404; 471727, 4933406; 471727, 4933408; 471728, 
4933410; 471728, 4933413; 471729, 4933415; 471729, 4933416; 471729, 
4933418; 471730, 4933419; 471730, 4933421; 471730, 4933423; 471730, 
4933424; 471730, 4933426; 471730, 4933427; 471730, 4933429; 471730, 
4933431; 471730, 4933432; 471729, 4933434; 471729, 4933435; 471728, 
4933437; 471727, 4933438; 471727, 4933440; 471727, 4933441; 471726, 
4933443; 471726, 4933444; 471725, 4933446; 471726, 4933448; 471726, 
4933449; 471726, 4933451; 471726, 4933453; 471726, 4933455; 471727, 
4933456; 471727, 4933458; 471727, 4933459; 471728, 4933461; 471728, 
4933463; 471728, 4933464; 471729, 4933465; 471729, 4933467; 471730, 
4933468; 471730, 4933470; 471731, 4933471; 471731, 4933473; 471732, 
4933474; 471733, 4933476; 471733, 4933477; 471734, 4933478; 471734, 
4933480; 471734, 4933481; 471735, 4933482; 471735, 4933483; 471735, 
4933485; 471736, 4933486; 471736, 4933488; 471737, 4933489; 471737, 
4933491; 471738, 4933492; 471739, 4933494; 471740, 4933495; 471741, 
4933496; 471741, 4933497; 471742, 4933498; 471743, 4933500; 471743, 
4933501; 471743, 4933503; 471744, 4933505; 471744, 4933506; 471745, 
4933508; 471746, 4933510; 471747, 4933511; 471748, 4933513; 471749, 
4933515; 471749, 4933515; 471750, 4933517; 471751, 4933518; 471751, 
4933519; 471752, 4933521; 471753, 4933523; 471754, 4933524; 471755, 
4933525; 471756, 4933527; 471756, 4933528; 471757, 4933529; 471758, 
4933531; 471760, 4933532; 471761, 4933534; 471762, 4933535; 471763, 
4933537; 471764, 4933538; 471765, 4933539; 471766, 4933540; 471768, 
4933542; 471769, 4933543; 471769, 4933544; 471770, 4933545; 471771, 
4933547; 471772, 4933548; 471772, 4933548; 471771, 4933547; 471770, 
4933547; 471770, 4933547; 471767, 4933544; 471766, 4933544; 471766, 
4933545; 471765, 4933545; 471765, 4933546; 471764, 4933547; 471763, 
4933548; 471758, 4933550; 471759, 4933551; 471759, 4933551; 471759, 
4933551; 471759, 4933551; 471761, 4933552; 471763, 4933553; 471765, 
4933554; 471766, 4933555; 471768, 4933556; 471769, 4933558; 471770, 
4933560; 471771, 4933562; 471772, 4933564; 471773, 4933565; 471772, 
4933566; 471769, 4933590; 471769, 4933600; 471772, 4933604; 471777, 
4933607; 471778, 4933609; 471783, 4933613; 471808, 4933596; 471808, 
4933596; 471809, 4933595; 471809, 4933595; 471811, 4933597; 471814, 
4933598; 471816, 4933600; 471818, 4933601; 471820, 4933602; 471822, 
4933604; 471823, 4933604; 471824, 4933605; 471825, 4933606; 471826, 
4933607; 471827, 4933607; 471828, 4933607; 471842, 4933603; 471840, 
4933603; 471840, 4933603; 471840, 4933603; 471839, 4933602; 471839, 
4933602; 471839, 4933602; 471838, 4933601; 471837, 4933600; 471836, 
4933600; 471839, 4933601; 471841, 4933602; 471843, 4933603; 471846, 
4933605; 471848, 4933606; 471850, 4933607; 471853, 4933608; 471855, 
4933609; 471857, 4933610; 471859, 4933611; 471860, 4933611; 471861, 
4933611; 471863, 4933612; 471865, 4933613; 471867, 4933614; 471868, 
4933614; 471870, 4933615; 471871, 4933615; 471873, 4933616; 471874, 
4933617; 471874, 4933617; 471874, 4933617; 472080, 4933675; 472196, 
4933705; 472296, 4933737.
    (iv) Note: Map 8 (Units 7, 8, and 9 for Fender's blue butterfly 
(FBB-7, FBB-8, and FBB-9)) follows:

[[Page 410]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.008

    (13) Units 10, 11, and 12 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-10, FBB-
11, and FBB-12) in Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 10A (FBB-10A): 479362, 4883342; 479389, 4883340; 479413, 
4883340; 479442, 4883333; 479454, 4883325; 479444, 4883317; 479419, 
4883305; 479409, 4883299; 479403, 4883279; 479397, 4883259; 479385, 
4883239; 479377, 4883216; 479371, 4883204; 479373, 4883192; 479373, 
4883176; 479375, 4883162; 479371, 4883148; 479361, 4883128; 479357, 
4883120; 479353, 4883108; 479365, 4883104; 479365, 4883104; 479366, 
4883104; 479370, 4883102; 479372, 4883091; 479372, 4883083; 479371, 
4883075; 479369, 4883061; 479365, 4883041; 479361, 4883025; 479345, 
4883003; 479332, 4883007; 479332, 4883007; 479331, 4883007; 479333, 
4882993; 479321, 4882977; 479305, 4882968; 479282, 4882968; 479266, 
4882969; 479246, 4882973; 479246, 4882973; 479246, 4882973; 479226, 
4882972; 479219, 4882977; 479213, 4882991; 479211, 4883005;

[[Page 411]]

479211, 4883005; 479210, 4883009; 479204, 4883015; 479186, 4883017; 
479165, 4883013; 479149, 4883013; 479135, 4883013; 479123, 4883007; 
479093, 4883009; 479059, 4883003; 479026, 4883001; 479013, 4882998; 
479012, 4882998; 479010, 4882997; 479004, 4882995; 479006, 4882987; 
479013, 4882982; 479013, 4882980; 479010, 4882970; 478998, 4882966; 
478962, 4882964; 478931, 4882967; 478927, 4882977; 478927, 4882977; 
478926, 4882977; 478913, 4882973; 478897, 4882962; 478857, 4882952; 
478838, 4882954; 478832, 4882961; 478821, 4882979; 478819, 4882982; 
478819, 4882982; 478819, 4882982; 478819, 4882982; 478807, 4882981; 
478794, 4882977; 478778, 4882977; 478764, 4882966; 478764, 4882966; 
478764, 4882965; 478770, 4882954; 478792, 4882950; 478817, 4882940; 
478831, 4882918; 478841, 4882904; 478851, 4882900; 478863, 4882900; 
478881, 4882900; 478891, 4882876; 478891, 4882862; 478899, 4882844; 
478901, 4882831; 478893, 4882823; 478881, 4882815; 478879, 4882813; 
478873, 4882801; 478861, 4882797; 478853, 4882795; 478849, 4882783; 
478847, 4882775; 478837, 4882765; 478813, 4882761; 478794, 4882759; 
478774, 4882759; 478758, 4882759; 478744, 4882757; 478734, 4882759; 
478720, 4882759; 478700, 4882761; 478682, 4882765; 478665, 4882765; 
478641, 4882765; 478627, 4882775; 478609, 4882779; 478597, 4882793; 
478587, 4882801; 478577, 4882815; 478561, 4882825; 478555, 4882839; 
478551, 4882846; 478540, 4882852; 478530, 4882858; 478528, 4882866; 
478538, 4882876; 478543, 4882886; 478545, 4882894; 478551, 4882904; 
478563, 4882916; 478569, 4882922; 478577, 4882928; 478589, 4882936; 
478605, 4882946; 478617, 4882956; 478623, 4882964; 478623, 4882970; 
478624, 4882970; 478623, 4882973; 478627, 4882983; 478627, 4882984; 
478627, 4882983; 478619, 4882997; 478595, 4883005; 478573, 4883007; 
478555, 4883007; 478534, 4883009; 478508, 4883005; 478508, 4883005; 
478507, 4883005; 478480, 4882999; 478454, 4882997; 478442, 4882989; 
478429, 4882989; 478419, 4882997; 478419, 4882997; 478418, 4882997; 
478411, 4882989; 478403, 4882979; 478397, 4882964; 478386, 4882946; 
478382, 4882940; 478366, 4882933; 478352, 4882939; 478349, 4882940; 
478341, 4882948; 478333, 4882956; 478333, 4882956; 478333, 4882956; 
478331, 4882954; 478317, 4882944; 478296, 4882954; 478298, 4882969; 
478304, 4882985; 478322, 4883013; 478329, 4883031; 478335, 4883047; 
478339, 4883067; 478349, 4883088; 478361, 4883104; 478367, 4883118; 
478379, 4883126; 478392, 4883133; 478403, 4883134; 478406, 4883134; 
478415, 4883127; 478417, 4883117; 478417, 4883114; 478417, 4883114; 
478417, 4883114; 478420, 4883108; 478422, 4883098; 478423, 4883095; 
478428, 4883084; 478435, 4883079; 478441, 4883074; 478458, 4883069; 
478458, 4883069; 478459, 4883069; 478484, 4883066; 478496, 4883065; 
478510, 4883065; 478524, 4883065; 478536, 4883063; 478559, 4883057; 
478559, 4883057; 478561, 4883057; 478583, 4883055; 478597, 4883053; 
478619, 4883045; 478645, 4883029; 478659, 4883027; 478674, 4883027; 
478676, 4883027; 478694, 4883032; 478694, 4883032; 478697, 4883033; 
478707, 4883039; 478724, 4883031; 478728, 4883021; 478730, 4883011; 
478746, 4883005; 478746, 4883005; 478746, 4883005; 478766, 4883009; 
478772, 4883015; 478790, 4883005; 478790, 4883005; 478790, 4883005; 
478810, 4883015; 478816, 4883037; 478816, 4883053; 478814, 4883069; 
478806, 4883096; 478815, 4883107; 478859, 4883108; 478880, 4883106; 
478901, 4883104; 478921, 4883108; 479004, 4883110; 479010, 4883103; 
479010, 4883102; 479010, 4883102; 479212, 4883102; 479212, 4883104; 
479213, 4883103; 479211, 4883128; 479213, 4883156; 479211, 4883190; 
479211, 4883217; 479215, 4883247; 479211, 4883265; 479209, 4883283; 
479217, 4883313; 479219, 4883337; 479239, 4883339; 479278, 4883339; 
479320, 4883342; 479362, 4883342.
    (ii) Unit 10B (FBB-10B): 480173, 4882467; 480173, 4882393; 480173, 
4882308; 480170, 4882236; 480168, 4882173; 480168, 4882165; 480169, 
4882164; 480176, 4882152; 480191, 4882150; 480226, 4882147; 480247, 
4882138; 480243, 4882127; 480236, 4882109; 480232, 4882089; 480224, 
4882064; 480207, 4882058; 480209, 4882042; 480209, 4882024; 480185, 
4882016; 480170, 4882007; 480169, 4881966; 480191, 4881931; 480206, 
4881898; 480213, 4881847; 480219, 4881787; 480246, 4881569; 480248, 
4881544; 480247, 4881536; 480247, 4881524; 480239, 4881512; 480240, 
4881489; 480243, 4881474; 480247, 4881442; 480243, 4881433; 480239, 
4881415; 480224, 4881399; 480215, 4881399; 480210, 4881384; 480221, 
4881370; 480230, 4881360; 480254, 4881347; 480271, 4881331; 480283, 
4881333; 480297, 4881333; 480325, 4881335; 480338, 4881336; 480361, 
4881332; 480375, 4881331; 480386, 4881325; 480394, 4881312; 480398, 
4881279; 480398, 4881082; 480400, 4881032; 480399, 4881003; 480394, 
4880995; 480394, 4880984; 480394, 4880984; 480360, 4880954; 480360, 
4880954; 480350, 4880954; 480332, 4880958; 480316, 4880964; 480294, 
4880970; 480284, 4880970; 480274, 4880966; 480261, 4880960; 480239, 
4880962; 480213, 4880960; 480201, 4880950; 480179, 4880950; 480159, 
4880950; 480130, 4880950; 480094, 4880944; 480080, 4880952; 480058, 
4880954; 480052, 4880938; 480052, 4880920; 480044, 4880914; 480024, 
4880912; 480026, 4880895; 480020, 4880883; 479997, 4880879; 479975, 
4880873; 479961, 4880863; 479935, 4880849; 479917, 4880847; 479903, 
4880841; 479883, 4880837; 479874, 4880825; 479874, 4880813; 479866, 
4880803; 479848, 4880797; 479844, 4880779; 479848, 4880756; 479870, 
4880738; 479868, 4880724; 479856, 4880702; 479872, 4880690; 479870, 
4880674; 479856, 4880668; 479862, 4880650; 479876, 4880631; 479891, 
4880621; 479901, 4880615; 479909, 4880597; 479919, 4880577; 479923, 
4880559; 479927, 4880535; 479925, 4880523; 479939, 4880500; 479941, 
4880484; 479939, 4880468; 479945, 4880456; 479947, 4880442; 479943, 
4880426; 479949, 4880410; 479965, 4880400; 479975, 4880396; 479981, 
4880373; 479987, 4880361; 479999, 4880357; 479999, 4880343; 480005, 
4880319; 480005, 4880305; 480016, 4880283; 480034, 4880263; 480048, 
4880265; 480054, 4880273; 480068, 4880265; 480088, 4880271; 480098, 
4880291; 480094, 4880305; 480100, 4880315; 480118, 4880321; 480118, 
4880339; 480124, 4880359; 480134, 4880388; 480141, 4880400; 480149, 
4880412; 480163, 4880418; 480173, 4880428; 480177, 4880432; 480189, 
4880432; 480221, 4880422; 480245, 4880424; 480261, 4880422; 480280, 
4880422; 480322, 4880426; 480344, 4880432; 480378, 4880438; 480391, 
4880442; 480417, 4880444; 480411, 4880428; 480405, 4880398; 480401, 
4880371; 480401, 4880353; 480389, 4880333; 480384, 4880311; 480374, 
4880265; 480366, 4880238; 480364, 4880208; 480362, 4880184; 480358, 
4880156; 480354, 4880113; 480336, 4880109; 480300, 4880109; 480259, 
4880113; 480179, 4880115; 480116, 4880115; 480076, 4880115; 480044, 
4880117; 480044, 4880142; 480044, 4880166; 480042, 4880194; 480034, 
4880192; 480020, 4880196; 480010, 4880198; 479997, 4880190; 480001, 
4880168; 480001, 4880154; 479983, 4880156;

[[Page 412]]

479969, 4880158; 479957, 4880142; 479971, 4880133; 479983, 4880117; 
479977, 4880109; 479989, 4880085; 479993, 4880067; 479987, 4879964; 
479602, 4879960; 479606, 4879744; 479592, 4879738; 479586, 4879724; 
479584, 4879525; 479544, 4879525; 479500, 4879523; 479304, 4879519; 
479272, 4879527; 479243, 4879535; 479235, 4879557; 479245, 4879589; 
479256, 4879623; 479268, 4879654; 479288, 4879680; 479298, 4879694; 
479298, 4879732; 479278, 4879744; 479233, 4879746; 479215, 4879750; 
479195, 4879753; 479193, 4879761; 479195, 4879779; 479201, 4879811; 
479199, 4879831; 479199, 4879859; 479217, 4879861; 479245, 4879835; 
479270, 4879829; 479300, 4879867; 479308, 4879902; 479298, 4879930; 
479284, 4879974; 479290, 4880025; 479300, 4880065; 479320, 4880095; 
479328, 4880119; 479350, 4880134; 479360, 4880148; 479370, 4880180; 
479377, 4880210; 479385, 4880252; 479385, 4880303; 479383, 4880341; 
479395, 4880367; 479397, 4880392; 479403, 4880406; 479415, 4880432; 
479415, 4880450; 479411, 4880468; 479423, 4880474; 479439, 4880484; 
479447, 4880494; 479459, 4880498; 479477, 4880496; 479495, 4880502; 
479493, 4880519; 479485, 4880541; 479491, 4880551; 479500, 4880557; 
479518, 4880571; 479520, 4880567; 479526, 4880551; 479542, 4880527; 
479552, 4880537; 479576, 4880547; 479582, 4880539; 479600, 4880527; 
479620, 4880517; 479637, 4880517; 479665, 4880529; 479683, 4880543; 
479665, 4880587; 479635, 4880623; 479588, 4880672; 479540, 4880744; 
479524, 4880785; 479516, 4880801; 479510, 4880811; 479506, 4880829; 
479518, 4880831; 479546, 4880825; 479584, 4880813; 479610, 4880803; 
479639, 4880807; 479679, 4880823; 479713, 4880857; 479721, 4880879; 
479739, 4880910; 479753, 4880942; 479766, 4880956; 479782, 4880970; 
479800, 4880986; 479822, 4881000; 479840, 4881025; 479880, 4881069; 
479899, 4881093; 479915, 4881115; 479935, 4881133; 479951, 4881137; 
479979, 4881139; 480012, 4881133; 480048, 4881150; 480062, 4881170; 
480110, 4881234; 480108, 4881248; 480098, 4881272; 480084, 4881289; 
480058, 4881325; 480040, 4881351; 480020, 4881375; 479987, 4881406; 
479983, 4881410; 479953, 4881450; 479941, 4881484; 479937, 4881518; 
479937, 4881551; 479947, 4881567; 479953, 4881589; 479963, 4881607; 
479981, 4881623; 480012, 4881647; 480042, 4881666; 480052, 4881666; 
480082, 4881662; 480102, 4881658; 480134, 4881664; 480155, 4881678; 
480161, 4881700; 480163, 4881722; 480163, 4881748; 480159, 4881776; 
480159, 4881793; 480149, 4881807; 480145, 4881817; 480135, 4881825; 
480122, 4881829; 480110, 4881825; 480068, 4881829; 480046, 4881825; 
480028, 4881825; 479989, 4881845; 479965, 4881863; 479941, 4881889; 
479923, 4881924; 479921, 4881954; 479921, 4881978; 479929, 4882000; 
479947, 4882020; 479959, 4882028; 479981, 4882043; 479995, 4882057; 
480014, 4882067; 480003, 4882089; 479997, 4882111; 479997, 4882135; 
479993, 4882155; 479981, 4882180; 479980, 4882187; 479981, 4882188; 
479978, 4882213; 479980, 4882240; 479978, 4882272; 479976, 4882288; 
479968, 4882318; 479954, 4882344; 479944, 4882371; 479942, 4882401; 
479946, 4882431; 479954, 4882449; 479962, 4882455; 479980, 4882461; 
479990, 4882465; 479999, 4882463; 480017, 4882459; 480037, 4882473; 
480047, 4882494; 480063, 4882502; 480077, 4882508; 480109, 4882512; 
480134, 4882518; 480158, 4882532; 480171, 4882532; 480171, 4882524; 
480172, 4882501; 480173, 4882467.
    (iii) Unit 10C (FBB-10C): 481378, 4880648; 481378, 4880649; 481379, 
4880651; 481380, 4880651; 481386, 4880656; 481391, 4880657; 481396, 
4880658; 481398, 4880658; 481400, 4880657; 481401, 4880674; 481426, 
4880675; 481437, 4880674; 481437, 4880675; 481438, 4880675; 481438, 
4880675; 481438, 4880675; 481443, 4880679; 481448, 4880686; 481454, 
4880692; 481461, 4880697; 481466, 4880702; 481473, 4880709; 481478, 
4880715; 481481, 4880724; 481484, 4880732; 481485, 4880737; 481486, 
4880744; 481487, 4880751; 481488, 4880756; 481488, 4880762; 481488, 
4880768; 481485, 4880774; 481482, 4880779; 481480, 4880786; 481478, 
4880790; 481477, 4880795; 481475, 4880803; 481474, 4880808; 481473, 
4880813; 481473, 4880820; 481467, 4880823; 481460, 4880829; 481455, 
4880836; 481454, 4880844; 481455, 4880854; 481460, 4880864; 481464, 
4880872; 481468, 4880877; 481472, 4880882; 481476, 4880886; 481481, 
4880892; 481489, 4880897; 481495, 4880902; 481502, 4880908; 481511, 
4880912; 481515, 4880917; 481521, 4880920; 481529, 4880923; 481535, 
4880925; 481542, 4880927; 481545, 4880928; 481567, 4880927; 481580, 
4880925; 481590, 4880922; 481597, 4880918; 481602, 4880914; 481602, 
4880914; 481602, 4880913; 481609, 4880913; 481612, 4880913; 481615, 
4880820; 481611, 4880820; 481611, 4880816; 481612, 4880815; 481616, 
4880815; 481616, 4880806; 481617, 4880802; 481620, 4880797; 481622, 
4880794; 481622, 4880793; 481623, 4880790; 481623, 4880789; 481624, 
4880788; 481624, 4880786; 481816, 4880785; 481814, 4880923; 481900, 
4880926; 481912, 4880916; 481942, 4880882; 481988, 4880820; 481991, 
4880727; 481800, 4880618; 481741, 4880607; 481669, 4880604; 481667, 
4880569; 481686, 4880525; 481718, 4880494; 481780, 4880511; 481849, 
4880560; 481913, 4880614; 481964, 4880648; 482025, 4880685; 482062, 
4880698; 482079, 4880687; 482089, 4880665; 482099, 4880579; 482082, 
4880547; 481998, 4880506; 481925, 4880469; 481809, 4880408; 481760, 
4880370; 481645, 4880354; 481620, 4880380; 481618, 4880513; 481600, 
4880528; 481599, 4880529; 481598, 4880529; 481594, 4880529; 481589, 
4880526; 481587, 4880525; 481577, 4880525; 481572, 4880525; 481568, 
4880525; 481563, 4880525; 481559, 4880525; 481557, 4880525; 481553, 
4880523; 481551, 4880523; 481541, 4880523; 481540, 4880523; 481540, 
4880523; 481532, 4880524; 481525, 4880523; 481509, 4880519; 481496, 
4880519; 481494, 4880520; 481483, 4880523; 481470, 4880525; 481470, 
4880525; 481470, 4880525; 481469, 4880525; 481454, 4880526; 481448, 
4880527; 481431, 4880531; 481409, 4880530; 481409, 4880530; 481405, 
4880530; 481420, 4880517; 481445, 4880474; 481453, 4880443; 481451, 
4880421; 481452, 4880420; 481444, 4880418; 481428, 4880427; 481400, 
4880494; 481379, 4880554; 481368, 4880626; 481373, 4880640; 481374, 
4880634; 481375, 4880644; 481377, 4880648; 481378, 4880648.
    (iv) Unit 10D (FBB-10D): 482330, 4880170; 482330, 4880242; 482338, 
4880299; 482384, 4880330; 482415, 4880349; 482472, 4880382; 482531, 
4880408; 482566, 4880419; 482601, 4880426; 482638, 4880434; 482700, 
4880436; 482751, 4880435; 482832, 4880421; 482837, 4880436; 482842, 
4880441; 482846, 4880456; 482865, 4880463; 482890, 4880456; 482946, 
4880435; 482951, 4880427; 482973, 4880408; 483000, 4880395; 483014, 
4880387; 483040, 4880372; 483075, 4880346; 483131, 4880295; 483137, 
4880272; 483125, 4880251; 483125, 4880250; 483083, 4880204; 483082, 
4880205; 483069, 4880202; 483048, 4880205; 483015, 4880205; 482992, 
4880209; 482984, 4880207; 482955, 4880210; 482933, 4880217; 482866, 
4880211; 482836, 4880163;

[[Page 413]]

482839, 4880141; 482828, 4880125; 482816, 4880120; 482804, 4880120; 
482788, 4880127; 482759, 4880130; 482736, 4880121; 482713, 4880119; 
482649, 4880141; 482601, 4880164; 482567, 4880154; 482546, 4880160; 
482532, 4880142; 482511, 4880124; 482489, 4880130; 482457, 4880119; 
482423, 4880123; 482330, 4880170.
    (v) Unit 10E (FBB-10E): 483301, 4880015; 483334, 4880057; 483333, 
4880306; 483332, 4880510; 483360, 4880508; 483386, 4880503; 483421, 
4880492; 483444, 4880480; 483486, 4880443; 483541, 4880386; 483561, 
4880361; 483631, 4880258; 483671, 4880200; 483683, 4880171; 483736, 
4880004; 483767, 4879924; 483848, 4879754; 483860, 4879739; 483868, 
4879724; 483868, 4879708; 483853, 4879707; 483824, 4879707; 483765, 
4879712; 483763, 4879718; 483751, 4879724; 483751, 4879729; 483748, 
4879746; 483706, 4879749; 483693, 4879751; 483681, 4879754; 483652, 
4879767; 483614, 4879787; 483545, 4879797; 483306, 4879918; 483301, 
4880015.
    (vi) Unit 11A (FBB-11A): 482634, 4879216; 482560, 4879196; 482528, 
4879254; 482470, 4879358; 482492, 4879432; 482573, 4879516; 482592, 
4879600; 482486, 4879609; 482475, 4879701; 482527, 4879700; 482613, 
4879696; 482655, 4879694; 482634, 4879216.
    (vii) Unit 11B (FBB-11B): 482130, 4878873; 482101, 4878734; 481898, 
4878780; 481827, 4878721; 481792, 4878680; 481750, 4878676; 481734, 
4878689; 481740, 4878776; 481743, 4878847; 481771, 4878922; 481791, 
4878918; 481901, 4878886; 482130, 4878873.
    (viii) Unit 11C (FBB-11C): 482637, 4878489; 482654, 4878466; 482492, 
4878476; 482492, 4878521; 482544, 4878709; 482595, 4878851; 482687, 
4878901; 482911, 4878899; 482883, 4878825; 482792, 4878741; 482744, 
4878644; 482654, 4878599; 482625, 4878583; 482637, 4878489.
    (ix) Unit 11D (FBB-11D): 483917, 4879166; 483911, 4879133; 483895, 
4879125; 483841, 4879126; 483792, 4879136; 483800, 4879102; 483835, 
4879061; 483920, 4879021; 483949, 4879004; 483975, 4878976; 483992, 
4878953; 484027, 4878883; 484048, 4878870; 484059, 4878815; 484017, 
4878833; 483914, 4878874; 483812, 4878917; 483725, 4878961; 483698, 
4878999; 483674, 4879071; 483668, 4879377; 483703, 4879390; 483754, 
4879404; 483789, 4879412; 483849, 4879401; 483906, 4879358; 483920, 
4879301; 483923, 4879247; 483917, 4879166.
    (x) Unit 11E (FBB-11E): 484274, 4879053; 484439, 4878986; 484226, 
4878988; 484195, 4878996; 484183, 4879004; 484183, 4879189; 484193, 
4879197; 484201, 4879199; 484220, 4879148; 484239, 4879099; 484253, 
4879070; 484274, 4879053.
    (xi) Unit 11F (FBB-11F): 484856, 4878596; 484906, 4878565; 484909, 
4878412; 485192, 4878416; 485247, 4878417; 485269, 4878317; 485038, 
4878264; 484819, 4878269; 484774, 4878240; 484777, 4878237; 484743, 
4878234; 484735, 4878256; 484736, 4878340; 484731, 4878360; 484711, 
4878440; 484690, 4878493; 484646, 4878531; 484613, 4878561; 484639, 
4878590; 484639, 4878590; 484856, 4878596.
    (xii) Unit 11G (FBB-11G): 484890, 4877956; 484890, 4877986; 484893, 
4878018; 484903, 4878058; 484911, 4878082; 484908, 4878084; 484943, 
4878095; 484981, 4878028; 484993, 4877966; 484998, 4877917; 485005, 
4877890; 485003, 4877867; 484981, 4877858; 484981, 4877861; 484960, 
4877869; 484936, 4877878; 484916, 4877898; 484897, 4877925; 484890, 
4877956.
    (xiii) Unit 11H (FBB-11H): 485260, 4877580; 485260, 4877580; 485263, 
4878059; 485381, 4878067; 485486, 4878059; 485530, 4878059; 485578, 
4878058; 485595, 4878021; 485594, 4877901; 485597, 4877851; 485598, 
4877813; 485589, 4877780; 485587, 4877759; 485587, 4877759; 485586, 
4877757; 485592, 4877706; 485592, 4877705; 485589, 4877570; 485589, 
4877512; 485616, 4877499; 485716, 4877494; 485714, 4877466; 485719, 
4877374; 485716, 4877332; 485700, 4877320; 485605, 4877329; 485547, 
4877340; 485479, 4877364; 485432, 4877390; 485340, 4877458; 485304, 
4877484; 485260, 4877580.
    (xiv) Unit 11I (FBB-11I): 486042, 4877818; 486064, 4877815; 486085, 
4877816; 486097, 4877812; 486099, 4877812; 486110, 4877794; 486111, 
4877786; 486113, 4877755; 486112, 4877751; 486111, 4877741; 486112, 
4877740; 486112, 4877736; 486112, 4877735; 486110, 4877734; 486110, 
4877734; 486107, 4877713; 486106, 4877708; 486106, 4877708; 486106, 
4877708; 486067, 4877628; 486041, 4877605; 486036, 4877586; 486033, 
4877528; 486241, 4877142; 486263, 4877100; 486261, 4876700; 486057, 
4876700; 485991, 4876758; 485978, 4876930; 485986, 4877216; 485986, 
4877222; 485981, 4877497; 485981, 4877647; 485977, 4877652; 485975, 
4877692; 485976, 4877692; 485976, 4877703; 485977, 4877703; 485976, 
4877703; 485977, 4877712; 485983, 4877780; 485984, 4877781; 485987, 
4877791; 485988, 4877795; 485996, 4877809; 485999, 4877814; 486024, 
4877817; 486038, 4877818; 486042, 4877818.
    (xv) Unit 12A (FBB-12A): 486197, 4875513; 486200, 4875474; 486201, 
4875316; 486185, 4874677; 486042, 4874749; 486046, 4875014; 485875, 
4875023; 485874, 4875012; 485698, 4875023; 485695, 4875035; 485450, 
4875035; 485608, 4875144; 485702, 4875208; 485712, 4875178; 485862, 
4875211; 485889, 4875218; 485910, 4875396; 485986, 4875456; 486062, 
4875471; 486072, 4875472; 486086, 4875473; 486088, 4875478; 486096, 
4875476; 486143, 4875502; 486141, 4875516; 486141, 4875526; 486138, 
4875537; 486132, 4875540; 486115, 4875576; 486116, 4875585; 486113, 
4875587; 486113, 4875591; 486100, 4875599; 486094, 4875607; 486092, 
4875611; 486092, 4875616; 486105, 4875626; 486123, 4875643; 486143, 
4875649; 486156, 4875646; 486159, 4875643; 486163, 4875634; 486164, 
4875624; 486166, 4875609; 486169, 4875599; 486174, 4875586; 486190, 
4875560; 486193, 4875549; 486195, 4875534; 486197, 4875513.
    (xvi) Unit 12B (FBB-12B): 486793, 4876121; 486790, 4876107; 486783, 
4876064; 486783, 4876051; 486790, 4876034; 486805, 4876021; 486842, 
4875993; 486855, 4875977; 486860, 4875962; 486869, 4875946; 486883, 
4875908; 486893, 4875878; 486895, 4875857; 486896, 4875826; 486892, 
4875791; 486893, 4875754; 486886, 4875756; 486738, 4875751; 486734, 
4875744; 486731, 4875711; 486725, 4875665; 486720, 4875629; 486693, 
4875573; 486629, 4875348; 486549, 4875312; 486469, 4875220; 486477, 
4875168; 486553, 4875136; 486603, 4875021; 486608, 4875021; 486616, 
4875020; 486601, 4874935; 486577, 4874945; 486546, 4874949; 486542, 
4874941; 486522, 4874907; 486507, 4874882; 486482, 4874888; 486482, 
4874900; 486481, 4874944; 486439, 4874947; 486424, 4874957; 486426, 
4874980; 486427, 4875000; 486409, 4875006; 486398, 4875018; 486401, 
4875024; 486416, 4875027; 486422, 4875028; 486417, 4875033; 486405, 
4875292; 486421, 4875508; 486517, 4875652; 486614, 4875792; 486640, 
4875821; 486742, 4875825; 486742, 4875951; 486725, 4875983;

[[Page 414]]

486714, 4875983; 486709, 4875984; 486702, 4875993; 486694, 4876021; 
486685, 4876033; 486684, 4876035; 486680, 4876031; 486676, 4876028; 
486672, 4876025; 486660, 4876020; 486657, 4876018; 486652, 4876018; 
486639, 4876025; 486629, 4876029; 486620, 4876034; 486614, 4876044; 
486613, 4876052; 486610, 4876058; 486605, 4876068; 486594, 4876067; 
486589, 4876066; 486585, 4876068; 486581, 4876078; 486576, 4876086; 
486568, 4876093; 486565, 4876102; 486563, 4876110; 486565, 4876115; 
486573, 4876118; 486577, 4876118; 486583, 4876115; 486588, 4876113; 
486592, 4876119; 486590, 4876128; 486585, 4876137; 486580, 4876144; 
486579, 4876147; 486795, 4876145; 486793, 4876121.
    (xvii) Note: Map 9 (Units 10, 11, and 12 for Fender's blue butterfly 
(FBB-10, FBB-11, and FBB-12)) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.009


[[Page 415]]


    (14) Unit 13 for Fender's blue butterfly, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 13 (FBB-13) exterior unit perimeter: 500237, 4885879; 
500247, 4885878; 500251, 4885881; 500259, 4885886; 500266, 4885881; 
500274, 4885878; 500281, 4885875; 500294, 4885870; 500305, 4885867; 
500309, 4885860; 500312, 4885856; 500326, 4885855; 500374, 4885871; 
500388, 4885861; 500407, 4885873; 500445, 4885876; 500494, 4885861; 
500516, 4885835; 500529, 4885775; 500516, 4885744; 500461, 4885670; 
500397, 4885621; 500340, 4885608; 500322, 4885619; 500317, 4885610; 
500306, 4885597; 500302, 4885585; 500297, 4885572; 500297, 4885553; 
500301, 4885537; 500309, 4885525; 500306, 4885510; 500301, 4885500; 
500291, 4885484; 500282, 4885466; 500266, 4885451; 500242, 4885409; 
500227, 4885390; 500207, 4885373; 500198, 4885360; 500187, 4885333; 
500176, 4885307; 500174, 4885290; 500176, 4885279; 500179, 4885270; 
500184, 4885259; 500181, 4885253; 500171, 4885244; 500164, 4885234; 
500162, 4885226; 500162, 4885217; 500163, 4885206; 500168, 4885202; 
500171, 4885197; 500161, 4885192; 500160, 4885180; 500160, 4885169; 
500164, 4885163; 500178, 4885155; 500184, 4885150; 500190, 4885148; 
500193, 4885151; 500199, 4885162; 500206, 4885173; 500217, 4885177; 
500212, 4885166; 500206, 4885154; 500201, 4885146; 500209, 4885142; 
500215, 4885144; 500229, 4885144; 500239, 4885146; 500251, 4885152; 
500259, 4885155; 500279, 4885163; 500292, 4885172; 500302, 4885178; 
500314, 4885187; 500324, 4885196; 500329, 4885199; 500344, 4885203; 
500352, 4885207; 500361, 4885212; 500371, 4885215; 500400, 4885229; 
500421, 4885235; 500427, 4885243; 500433, 4885255; 500437, 4885268; 
500442, 4885275; 500444, 4885282; 500438, 4885286; 500423, 4885294; 
500426, 4885302; 500437, 4885307; 500442, 4885305; 500454, 4885296; 
500462, 4885297; 500459, 4885311; 500452, 4885318; 500449, 4885334; 
500453, 4885342; 500462, 4885352; 500467, 4885363; 500477, 4885365; 
500477, 4885376; 500485, 4885383; 500494, 4885390; 500505, 4885393; 
500521, 4885400; 500529, 4885408; 500534, 4885416; 500542, 4885422; 
500554, 4885423; 500562, 4885416; 500568, 4885412; 500579, 4885407; 
500592, 4885409; 500597, 4885417; 500596, 4885428; 500602, 4885436; 
500609, 4885439; 500622, 4885444; 500634, 4885443; 500654, 4885440; 
500673, 4885439; 500687, 4885436; 500694, 4885427; 500687, 4885407; 
500670, 4885388; 500647, 4885390; 500636, 4885394; 500621, 4885391; 
500602, 4885373; 500581, 4885365; 500549, 4885361; 500531, 4885360; 
500527, 4885349; 500530, 4885339; 500519, 4885340; 500508, 4885335; 
500504, 4885327; 500497, 4885330; 500491, 4885326; 500494, 4885317; 
500489, 4885309; 500489, 4885296; 500502, 4885288; 500514, 4885289; 
500537, 4885295; 500546, 4885294; 500558, 4885292; 500561, 4885282; 
500554, 4885275; 500544, 4885277; 500529, 4885277; 500519, 4885272; 
500513, 4885265; 500501, 4885271; 500485, 4885274; 500476, 4885264; 
500468, 4885243; 500460, 4885232; 500457, 4885210; 500452, 4885199; 
500457, 4885188; 500479, 4885175; 500486, 4885169; 500499, 4885169; 
500506, 4885155; 500517, 4885152; 500513, 4885142; 500508, 4885129; 
500512, 4885117; 500511, 4885095; 500505, 4885083; 500514, 4885068; 
500512, 4885060; 500511, 4885048; 500513, 4885042; 500520, 4885030; 
500524, 4885026; 500541, 4885018; 500541, 4885011; 500552, 4884997; 
500547, 4884989; 500532, 4884994; 500523, 4884995; 500515, 4884995; 
500507, 4884986; 500501, 4884974; 500500, 4884957; 500498, 4884940; 
500500, 4884924; 500506, 4884903; 500512, 4884889; 500526, 4884882; 
500538, 4884872; 500560, 4884867; 500558, 4884857; 500550, 4884838; 
500557, 4884822; 500554, 4884812; 500539, 4884807; 500527, 4884801; 
500520, 4884812; 500523, 4884822; 500519, 4884834; 500500, 4884839; 
500486, 4884843; 500475, 4884849; 500469, 4884862; 500464, 4884870; 
500455, 4884876; 500448, 4884874; 500444, 4884867; 500439, 4884851; 
500437, 4884837; 500426, 4884837; 500418, 4884832; 500414, 4884825; 
500401, 4884830; 500396, 4884836; 500386, 4884831; 500373, 4884819; 
500362, 4884802; 500348, 4884785; 500337, 4884770; 500322, 4884744; 
500312, 4884716; 500301, 4884704; 500292, 4884694; 500281, 4884687; 
500267, 4884682; 500256, 4884673; 500244, 4884669; 500234, 4884672; 
500222, 4884666; 500211, 4884655; 500201, 4884648; 500174, 4884630; 
500154, 4884624; 500132, 4884606; 500134, 4884582; 500125, 4884539; 
500130, 4884538; 500154, 4884536; 500166, 4884531; 500176, 4884521; 
500182, 4884512; 500190, 4884506; 500198, 4884505; 500211, 4884508; 
500219, 4884511; 500230, 4884513; 500238, 4884513; 500251, 4884513; 
500256, 4884517; 500254, 4884528; 500261, 4884531; 500269, 4884528; 
500279, 4884523; 500279, 4884506; 500281, 4884491; 500288, 4884489; 
500287, 4884479; 500286, 4884472; 500276, 4884463; 500267, 4884455; 
500258, 4884449; 500252, 4884457; 500236, 4884460; 500231, 4884449; 
500220, 4884448; 500212, 4884454; 500193, 4884456; 500186, 4884460; 
500187, 4884468; 500181, 4884474; 500149, 4884471; 500133, 4884476; 
500124, 4884444; 500114, 4884406; 500109, 4884374; 500111, 4884347; 
500121, 4884318; 500138, 4884294; 500164, 4884282; 500193, 4884273; 
500201, 4884250; 500211, 4884236; 500229, 4884215; 500235, 4884217; 
500245, 4884212; 500254, 4884199; 500251, 4884182; 500238, 4884164; 
500224, 4884159; 500204, 4884154; 500174, 4884141; 500156, 4884137; 
500145, 4884134; 500141, 4884126; 500130, 4884121; 500118, 4884114; 
500115, 4884106; 500104, 4884084; 500095, 4884081; 500086, 4884071; 
500050, 4884053; 499990, 4884044; 499956, 4884048; 499951, 4884036; 
499966, 4884029; 499976, 4884029; 500008, 4884021; 500053, 4884012; 
500169, 4883965; 500217, 4883954; 500256, 4883937; 500287, 4883928; 
500276, 4883890; 500259, 4883868; 500219, 4883809; 500181, 4883777; 
500171, 4883756; 500131, 4883708; 500125, 4883695; 500115, 4883689; 
500063, 4883635; 500046, 4883627; 499885, 4883627; 499836, 4883667; 
499804, 4883725; 499753, 4883765; 499771, 4883806; 499781, 4883829; 
499786, 4883841; 499802, 4883859; 499837, 4883920; 499839, 4883934; 
499868, 4883969; 499893, 4883998; 499921, 4884044; 499926, 4884058; 
499908, 4884095; 499908, 4884114; 499907, 4884131; 499920, 4884154; 
499926, 4884179; 499903, 4884192; 499878, 4884208; 499869, 4884224; 
499867, 4884234; 499868, 4884250; 499875, 4884256; 499886, 4884279; 
499896, 4884302; 499888, 4884318; 499844, 4884340; 499833, 4884325; 
499826, 4884336; 499804, 4884347; 499803, 4884346; 499796, 4884334; 
499799, 4884325; 499795, 4884317; 499787, 4884313; 499781, 4884298; 
499783, 4884288; 499786, 4884282; 499792, 4884272; 499796, 4884254; 
499796, 4884242; 499791, 4884232; 499779, 4884235; 499762, 4884241; 
499749, 4884250; 499746, 4884260; 499746, 4884275; 499753, 4884282; 
499756, 4884295; 499754, 4884304; 499747, 4884317; 499750, 4884327; 
499755, 4884326; 499766, 4884329; 499774, 4884335; 499781, 4884335; 
499784, 4884346; 499788, 4884351; 499793, 4884356; 499743,

[[Page 416]]

4884415; 499723, 4884425; 499678, 4884501; 499702, 4884553; 499778, 
4884603; 499794, 4884603; 499798, 4884609; 499815, 4884619; 499828, 
4884630; 499840, 4884642; 499849, 4884652; 499868, 4884659; 499884, 
4884670; 499903, 4884680; 499911, 4884685; 499923, 4884692; 499942, 
4884707; 499951, 4884718; 499961, 4884726; 499969, 4884733; 499974, 
4884745; 499979, 4884757; 499982, 4884774; 499978, 4884786; 499969, 
4884789; 499953, 4884792; 499949, 4884805; 499953, 4884820; 499954, 
4884835; 499957, 4884858; 499958, 4884880; 499965, 4884899; 499968, 
4884907; 499974, 4884922; 499980, 4884936; 499987, 4884951; 499991, 
4884964; 499996, 4884979; 500002, 4884995; 500008, 4885009; 500013, 
4885025; 500020, 4885040; 500027, 4885063; 500032, 4885073; 500048, 
4885105; 500059, 4885120; 500069, 4885128; 500084, 4885136; 500096, 
4885144; 500100, 4885153; 500107, 4885166; 500108, 4885178; 500111, 
4885195; 500122, 4885206; 500125, 4885217; 500130, 4885229; 500136, 
4885234; 500145, 4885238; 500154, 4885244; 500157, 4885255; 500155, 
4885263; 500152, 4885272; 500153, 4885285; 500157, 4885300; 500161, 
4885324; 500171, 4885342; 500179, 4885357; 500185, 4885371; 500192, 
4885383; 500206, 4885392; 500216, 4885409; 500230, 4885428; 500244, 
4885450; 500259, 4885474; 500271, 4885484; 500282, 4885506; 500284, 
4885519; 500280, 4885528; 500277, 4885551; 500274, 4885558; 500267, 
4885564; 500260, 4885567; 500256, 4885574; 500251, 4885582; 500247, 
4885589; 500247, 4885596; 500253, 4885598; 500258, 4885606; 500256, 
4885616; 500254, 4885623; 500247, 4885628; 500239, 4885635; 500247, 
4885640; 500250, 4885646; 500250, 4885653; 500254, 4885660; 500262, 
4885664; 500273, 4885675; 500279, 4885683; 500277, 4885686; 500271, 
4885694; 500267, 4885696; 500264, 4885706; 500260, 4885708; 500259, 
4885716; 500261, 4885720; 500266, 4885721; 500275, 4885723; 500287, 
4885728; 500298, 4885805; 500311, 4885825; 500303, 4885830; 500299, 
4885833; 500292, 4885833; 500288, 4885831; 500284, 4885830; 500276, 
4885833; 500271, 4885833; 500264, 4885830; 500259, 4885828; 500253, 
4885827; 500247, 4885825; 500242, 4885820; 500239, 4885820; 500234, 
4885816; 500229, 4885818; 500223, 4885814; 500220, 4885815; 500215, 
4885819; 500211, 4885825; 500205, 4885821; 500200, 4885819; 500192, 
4885818; 500185, 4885825; 500181, 4885830; 500171, 4885836; 500166, 
4885843; 500164, 4885849; 500174, 4885853; 500177, 4885857; 500183, 
4885861; 500187, 4885867; 500191, 4885870; 500199, 4885870; 500205, 
4885874; 500205, 4885881; 500214, 4885879; 500219, 4885882; 500226, 
4885882; 500232, 4885887; 500237, 4885879.
    (ii) Unit 13 (FBB-13) interior unit perimeter 500014, 4884757; 
500024, 4884754; 500039, 4884757; 500047, 4884762; 500047, 4884748; 
500048, 4884731; 500033, 4884719; 500019, 4884709; 500009, 4884696; 
499994, 4884686; 499975, 4884679; 499963, 4884672; 499939, 4884665; 
499927, 4884656; 499908, 4884648; 499899, 4884644; 499883, 4884641; 
499869, 4884634; 499896, 4884633; 499920, 4884633; 499959, 4884630; 
500010, 4884633; 500077, 4884643; 500098, 4884643; 500132, 4884671; 
500152, 4884680; 500169, 4884677; 500211, 4884696; 500232, 4884707; 
500254, 4884720; 500271, 4884714; 500280, 4884715; 500316, 4884780; 
500328, 4884808; 500349, 4884827; 500374, 4884844; 500382, 4884855; 
500387, 4884875; 500373, 4884873; 500367, 4884862; 500367, 4884883; 
500374, 4884899; 500389, 4884907; 500401, 4884915; 500393, 4884922; 
500399, 4884934; 500404, 4884947; 500414, 4884955; 500421, 4884967; 
500414, 4884984; 500407, 4884992; 500412, 4885011; 500406, 4885026; 
500392, 4885038; 500386, 4885045; 500381, 4885060; 500391, 4885076; 
500386, 4885085; 500372, 4885080; 500364, 4885083; 500362, 4885099; 
500372, 4885114; 500377, 4885133; 500385, 4885158; 500391, 4885166; 
500404, 4885165; 500424, 4885161; 500427, 4885174; 500422, 4885182; 
500387, 4885191; 500364, 4885192; 500348, 4885190; 500333, 4885182; 
500317, 4885172; 500297, 4885161; 500275, 4885150; 500261, 4885142; 
500246, 4885127; 500242, 4885106; 500246, 4885090; 500260, 4885076; 
500272, 4885079; 500283, 4885078; 500283, 4885068; 500272, 4885060; 
500268, 4885047; 500277, 4885039; 500286, 4885038; 500275, 4885024; 
500260, 4885012; 500260, 4885001; 500265, 4884987; 500264, 4884970; 
500252, 4884959; 500242, 4884954; 500226, 4884951; 500208, 4884958; 
500198, 4884965; 500191, 4884981; 500194, 4884996; 500202, 4885011; 
500212, 4885020; 500209, 4885034; 500193, 4885043; 500186, 4885049; 
500179, 4885057; 500161, 4885069; 500154, 4885086; 500166, 4885113; 
500182, 4885123; 500171, 4885137; 500162, 4885147; 500149, 4885157; 
500137, 4885168; 500128, 4885163; 500119, 4885147; 500121, 4885136; 
500101, 4885127; 500085, 4885118; 500077, 4885110; 500070, 4885099; 
500062, 4885087; 500055, 4885072; 500041, 4885045; 500034, 4885017; 
500029, 4884996; 500025, 4884978; 500016, 4884959; 500011, 4884937; 
500011, 4884921; 500004, 4884891; 500006, 4884875; 500006, 4884860; 
500014, 4884840; 500020, 4884823; 500025, 4884806; 500021, 4884789; 
500024, 4884780; 500014, 4884772; 500014, 4884757.
    (iii) Note: Map 10 (Unit 13 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-13)) 
follows:

[[Page 417]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.010


[[Page 418]]



         Oregon Silverspot Butterfly (Speyeria zerene hippolyta)

    Oregon. Lane County T. 16 S., R. 12 W. Those portions of section 15 
and of the south half of section 10 which are west of a line parallel 
to, and 1500 feet west of, the eastern section boundaries of sections 10 
and 15.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.150
    
    Constituent biological elements essential to the continued existence 
of the Oregon silverspot butterfly within the Critical Habitat include 
the larval foodplant (Viola adunca), grasses and forbs in which the 
larvae find shelter, the composite plants from which the adults obtain 
nectar, and the spruce woods in which the adults find shelter.

  Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly (Glaucopsyche lygdamus palosverdesensis)

    California. Los Angeles County.
    1. Agua Amarga Canyon Zone. Palos Verdes Estates. A square area of 
land 0.4x0.4 kilometers located at the southeast corner of the 
southernmost corporate boundary of Palos Verdes Estates.
    2. Frank Hesse Park Zone. Rancho Palos Verdes. An area enclosed by 
Hawthorne Boulevard, Locklenna Lane, and Verde Drive.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.151
    
    3. Palos Verdes Drive Zone. Rancho Palos Verdes. The Switchback area 
of Palos Verdes Drive East, bounded by a line connecting the two eastern 
curves, a line parallel to and 0.3 kilometers southwest of this line, 
and the upper and lower portions of Palos Verdes Drive East.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.152
    
Within these Critical Habitat areas, the known biological constituent 
elements essential to the conservation of this species are colonies of 
the larval foodplant, Astragalus trichopodus leucopsis.

          Quino Checkerspot Butterfly (Euphydryas editha quino)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Riverside and San Diego 
Counties, California, on the maps below.

[[Page 419]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Quino checkerspot butterfly are:
    (i) Open areas within scrublands at least 21.5 square feet (ft2) (2 
square meters (m)) in size that:
    (A) Contain no woody canopy cover; and
    (B) Contain one or more of the host plants Plantago erecta, Plantago 
patagonica, Antirrhinum coulterianum, or Collinsia concolor used for 
Quino checkerspot butterfly growth, reproduction, and feeding; or
    (C) Contain one or more of the host plants Cordylanthus rigidus or 
Castilleja exserta that are within 328 ft (100 m) of the host plants 
listed in paragraph (2)(i)(B) above; or
    (D) Contain flowering plants with a corolla tube less than or equal 
to 0.43 in (11 mm) used for Quino checkerspot butterfly feeding;
    (ii) Open scrubland areas and vegetation within 656 ft (200 m) of 
the open canopy areas (described in paragraph (2)(i) of this entry) used 
for movement and basking; and
    (iii) Hilltops or ridges within scrublands, containing an open, 
woody-canopy area at least 21.5 ft\2\ (2 m\2\) in size used for Quino 
checkerspot butterfly mating (hilltopping behavior) and are contiguous 
with (but not otherwise included in) open areas and natural vegetation 
described in paragraphs (2)(i) and (ii) above.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 1:24,000 maps, and critical habitat units were 
then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the Quino 
checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 420]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.002

    (6) Unit 2: Skinner/Johnson, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Murrieta, Bachelor Mountain, 
Winchester, Sage, and Hemet. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 499480, 3720871; 498641, 3720857; 498511, 3720856; 
498353, 3720855; 498593, 3720996; 498642, 3721009; 499082, 3721122; 
499479, 3721141; 499529, 3721143; 499731, 3721103; 499738, 3721101; 
499829, 3720955; 499918, 3720879; thence

[[Page 421]]

returning to 499480, 3720871. Continue to 497696, 3720235; 497728, 
3720291; 497832, 3720397; 498082, 3720651; 498640, 3720657; 498640, 
3720445; 498639, 3720257; 498639, 3720257; 498059, 3720244; 497833, 
3720239; 497778, 3720238; thence returning to 497696, 3720235. Continue 
to 494486, 3720445; 494486, 3720445; 494496, 3720550; 494671, 3720558; 
494796, 3720564; 495236, 3720522; 495415, 3720453; 495475, 3720430; 
495475, 3720430; 495474, 3720194; 495474, 3720033; 495470, 3719192; 
496227, 3719210; 496269, 3719211; 496291, 3719212; 496669, 3719221; 
497068, 3719231; 497401, 3719235; 497436, 3719236; 497456, 3719236; 
497636, 3719238; 497727, 3719239; 497838, 3719241; 498238, 3719245; 
498463, 3719247; 498638, 3719249; 498647, 3719249; 498648, 3719249; 
498654, 3719249; 498722, 3719250; 499106, 3719253; 499141, 3719254; 
499290, 3719254; 499723, 3719253; 499723, 3719253; 499641, 3719206; 
499612, 3719190; 499612, 3719190; 499544, 3719046; 499543, 3719044; 
499543, 3719044; 499540, 3719034; 499529, 3719035; 499526, 3719035; 
499524, 3719035; 499523, 3719035; 499523, 3719036; 499080, 3719076; 
499079, 3719074; 499065, 3719034; 499065, 3719034; 499063, 3719029; 
499059, 3719017; 498910, 3719042; 498899, 3719044; 498888, 3719047; 
498877, 3719051; 498866, 3719054; 498856, 3719059; 498845, 3719064; 
498743, 3719119; 498736, 3719121; 498733, 3719122; 498725, 3719123; 
498722, 3719123; 498718, 3719123; 498715, 3719122; 498708, 3719120; 
498704, 3719118; 498701, 3719116; 498698, 3719114; 498695, 3719112; 
498679, 3719100; 498672, 3719094; 498672, 3719094; 498641, 3719071; 
498638, 3719069; 498638, 3718868; 498638, 3718796; 498638, 3718794; 
498683, 3718804; 498683, 3718805; 498692, 3718806; 498692, 3718806; 
498694, 3718801; 498695, 3718797; 498697, 3718793; 498700, 3718789; 
498702, 3718786; 498705, 3718783; 498708, 3718780; 498711, 3718777; 
498715, 3718775; 498718, 3718773; 498730, 3718768; 498737, 3718764; 
498744, 3718759; 498750, 3718753; 498756, 3718747; 498761, 3718741; 
498766, 3718734; 498770, 3718726; 498773, 3718719; 498776, 3718711; 
498778, 3718703; 498780, 3718690; 498781, 3718687; 498782, 3718683; 
498784, 3718679; 498786, 3718676; 498788, 3718673; 498793, 3718667; 
498796, 3718664; 498802, 3718660; 498806, 3718658; 498809, 3718656; 
498817, 3718654; 498821, 3718654; 498831, 3718653; 498838, 3718652; 
498844, 3718651; 498850, 3718648; 498856, 3718646; 498862, 3718642; 
498868, 3718639; 498873, 3718634; 498877, 3718630; 498882, 3718625; 
498885, 3718619; 498889, 3718614; 498891, 3718608; 498894, 3718602; 
498895, 3718595; 498896, 3718589; 498897, 3718582; 498897, 3718571; 
498896, 3718569; 498893, 3718491; 498893, 3718487; 498892, 3718483; 
498891, 3718479; 498890, 3718476; 498888, 3718472; 498887, 3718469; 
498884, 3718466; 498882, 3718463; 498876, 3718457; 498873, 3718454; 
498871, 3718451; 498869, 3718448; 498866, 3718440; 498865, 3718436; 
498864, 3718433; 498864, 3718432; 498863, 3718429; 498863, 3718425; 
498864, 3718421; 498864, 3718417; 498866, 3718409; 498868, 3718405; 
498871, 3718401; 498873, 3718397; 498897, 3718360; 498899, 3718357; 
498902, 3718354; 498905, 3718351; 498908, 3718348; 498911, 3718346; 
498915, 3718344; 498919, 3718342; 498923, 3718341; 498931, 3718338; 
498935, 3718337; 498939, 3718335; 498942, 3718333; 498949, 3718327; 
498952, 3718324; 498954, 3718321; 498954, 3718321; 498962, 3718311; 
498969, 3718301; 498978, 3718292; 498986, 3718283; 498996, 3718275; 
499005, 3718267; 499014, 3718261; 499009, 3718254; 498845, 3718012; 
498846, 3718004; 498847, 3717997; 498849, 3717990; 498852, 3717983; 
498856, 3717977; 498860, 3717970; 498864, 3717965; 498864, 3717964; 
498869, 3717959; 498874, 3717954; 498879, 3717949; 498882, 3717945; 
498882, 3717945; 498886, 3717940; 498888, 3717935; 498891, 3717929; 
498893, 3717923; 498894, 3717917; 498895, 3717912; 498895, 3717906; 
498895, 3717900; 498894, 3717894; 498893, 3717888; 498891, 3717882; 
498889, 3717877; 498886, 3717871; 498881, 3717863; 498875, 3717854; 
498839, 3717794; 498842, 3717633; 498659, 3717635; 498659, 3717635; 
498656, 3717528; 498651, 3717303; 498651, 3717303; 498669, 3717308; 
499021, 3717392; 499247, 3717391; 499345, 3717390; 499345, 3717390; 
499349, 3717434; 499349, 3717434; 499349, 3717434; 499349, 3717434; 
499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 
499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717436; 
499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717436; 
499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 
499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 
499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 
499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 
499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 
499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 
499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717441; 
499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 
499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 
499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 
499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 
499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717444; 
499349, 3717444; 499349, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 
499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717445; 
499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 
499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 
499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 
499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 
499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 
499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 
499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717449; 
499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 
499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 
499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 
499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 
499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717452; 
499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 
499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 
499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 
499350, 3717453; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 
499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717455; 
499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 
499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717456; 
499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 
499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 3717457; 
499349,

[[Page 422]]

3717457; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 
3717457; 499349, 3717458; 499349, 3717458; 499349, 3717458; 499346, 
3717514; 499346, 3717514; 499346, 3717514; 499346, 3717514; 499346, 
3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 
3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 
3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 
3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 
3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 
3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 
3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717519; 499346, 
3717519; 499346, 3717519; 499346, 3717519; 499345, 3717519; 499345, 
3717519; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 
3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 
3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 
3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 
3717522; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 
3717522; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 
3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 
3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499345, 
3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499344, 3717524; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 
3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 
3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 
3717526; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 
3717526; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 
3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 
3717528; 499344, 3717528; 499344, 3717528; 499344, 3717528; 499344, 
3717528; 499343, 3717528; 499343, 3717528; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 
3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 
3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 
3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 
3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 3717531; 499343, 3717531; 499343, 
3717531; 499343, 3717531; 499342, 3717531; 499342, 3717531; 499342, 
3717531; 499342, 3717531; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 
3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 
3717532; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 
3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 
3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 
3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 
3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 
3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 
3717536; 499341, 3717536; 499341, 3717536; 499341, 3717536; 499340, 
3717536; 499340, 3717536; 499340, 3717536; 499340, 3717536; 499340, 
3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 
3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717538; 499340, 
3717538; 499340, 3717538; 499340, 3717538; 499339, 3717538; 499339, 
3717538; 499339, 3717538; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 
3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 
3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717540; 499339, 3717540; 499339, 
3717540; 499338, 3717540; 499338, 3717540; 499338, 3717540; 499338, 
3717540; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 
3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 
3717541; 499338, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 
3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 
3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499337, 
3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499336, 3717543; 499336, 3717543; 499336, 
3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 
3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 
3717545; 499336, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 
3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 
3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499335, 
3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499334, 3717546; 499334, 3717546; 499334, 
3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 
3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499333, 
3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 
3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 
3717548; 499333, 3717549; 499333, 3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 
3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 
3717549; 499331, 3717550; 499265, 3717629; 499269, 3717629; 499269, 
3717629; 499277, 3717716; 499284, 3717792; 499284, 3717792; 499282, 
3717803; 499282, 3717803; 499285, 3717803; 499290, 3717804; 499296, 
3717806; 499302, 3717809; 499308, 3717812; 499313, 3717815; 499318, 
3717819; 499323, 3717824; 499375, 3717877; 499551, 3718054; 499553, 
3718057; 499557, 3718060; 499560, 3718062; 499563, 3718063; 499567, 
3718065; 499571, 3718066; 499575, 3718067; 499579, 3718067; 499582, 
3718068; 499586, 3718067; 499590, 3718067; 499594, 3718066; 499598, 
3718065; 499602, 3718063; 499605, 3718061; 499612, 3718056; 499613, 
3718056; 499605, 3718049; 499605, 3718049; 499589, 3718033; 499588, 
3718026; 499588, 3718019; 499588, 3718013; 499588, 3718006; 499589, 
3718000; 499591, 3717994; 499593, 3717984; 499596, 3717974; 499600, 
3717964; 499604, 3717955; 499610, 3717946; 499612, 3717943; 499614, 
3717940; 499614, 3717940; 499623, 3717926; 499622, 3717911; 499621, 
3717907; 499622, 3717899; 499623, 3717895; 499624, 3717894; 499621, 
3717877; 499606, 3717770; 499585, 3717626; 499585, 3717626; 499615, 
3717626; 499683, 3717626; 499901, 3717624; 499903, 3717590; 499912, 
3717430; 499919, 3717323; 499919, 3717322; 499972, 3717322; 500032, 
3717321; 500350, 3717271; 500421, 3717259; 500421, 3717152; 500445, 
3717103; 500445, 3717103; 500363, 3717091; 500216, 3717069; 500178, 
3717063; 500188, 3716806; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 
3716805; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 3716804; 500188, 
3716804; 500188, 3716804; 500188, 3716804; 500188, 3716804; 500187, 
3716804; 500187, 3716804; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 
3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 
3716803; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 
3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 
3716802; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 
3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 
3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 
3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716799; 500186, 
3716799; 500186, 3716799; 500186, 3716799; 500185, 3716799; 500185, 
3716799; 500185, 3716799; 500185, 3716799; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 
3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185,

[[Page 423]]

3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 
3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 
3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716796; 500185, 
3716796; 500185, 3716796; 500184, 3716796; 500184, 3716796; 500184, 
3716796; 500184, 3716796; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 
3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 
3716795; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 
3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 
3716793; 500184, 3716793; 500184, 3716793; 500184, 3716793; 500184, 
3716793; 500183, 3716793; 500183, 3716793; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 
3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 
3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 
3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 
3716791; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 
3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716789; 500183, 
3716789; 500183, 3716789; 500182, 3716789; 500182, 3716789; 500182, 
3716789; 500182, 3716789; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 
3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 
3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 
3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 
3716787; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 
3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 
3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500182, 
3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500181, 3716785; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 
3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 
3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 
3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 
3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 
3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 
3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 
3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 
3716780; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 
3716780; 500181, 3716779; 500181, 3716779; 500181, 3716779; 500181, 
3716779; 500181, 3716779; 500180, 3716779; 500180, 3716779; 500180, 
3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 
3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 
3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 
3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 
3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 
3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 
3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 
3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 
3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 
3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 
3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 
3716772; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 
3716772; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 
3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 
3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 
3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 
3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 
3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 
3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 
3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 
3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 
3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 
3716765; 500180, 3716765; 500180, 3716765; 500180, 3716765; 500180, 
3716765; 500180, 3716453; 500180, 3716396; 500181, 3716131; 500010, 
3716115; 499920, 3716070; 499820, 3716020; 499809, 3716013; 499809, 
3716013; 499804, 3716010; 499676, 3716013; 499676, 3716013; 499675, 
3715929; 499675, 3715929; 499669, 3715926; 499560, 3715877; 499560, 
3716013; 499560, 3716013; 499417, 3716012; 499415, 3716012; 499415, 
3715832; 499252, 3715812; 499195, 3715717; 499166, 3715670; 499158, 
3715600; 499158, 3715600; 499147, 3715508; 499034, 3715357; 499025, 
3715330; 499025, 3715330; 498939, 3715072; 498844, 3715034; 498768, 
3715025; 498637, 3714966; 498637, 3714966; 498621, 3714959; 498590, 
3714804; 498564, 3714680; 498549, 3714412; 498565, 3714290; 498549, 
3714218; 498549, 3714073; 498468, 3714072; 498460, 3714072; 498284, 
3714069; 498285, 3714010; 498285, 3714005; 498119, 3714003; 498005, 
3714001; 497973, 3714001; 497909, 3714000; 497865, 3713999; 497817, 
3713999; 497762, 3713998; 497762, 3713998; 497611, 3714040; 497536, 
3714122; 497328, 3714352; 497167, 3714371; 497116, 3714377; 497116, 
3714379; 497116, 3714385; 497115, 3714483; 497118, 3714774; 497118, 
3714797; 497118, 3714799; 497114, 3714799; 497109, 3714799; 495457, 
3714793; 494866, 3714791; 494879, 3714858; 494858, 3714858; 494815, 
3714786; 494012, 3714783; 493832, 3714783; 493832, 3714783; 493831, 
3714783; 492831, 3714782; 492830, 3714782; 492635, 3714782; 492640, 
3714780; 492640, 3714780; 492548, 3714782; 492548, 3714782; 492548, 
3714782; 492530, 3714782; 492516, 3714782; 492406, 3714782; 492327, 
3714782; 492302, 3714782; 492300, 3714782; 492300, 3714921; 492300, 
3714921; 492328, 3714940; 492356, 3714959; 492687, 3715186; 492904, 
3715335; 493417, 3715698; 493428, 3715706; 493435, 3715699; 493475, 
3715656; 493525, 3715654; 493632, 3715652; 493636, 3715657; 493747, 
3715813; 493814, 3715822; 493824, 3715823; 493971, 3715842; 494048, 
3715838; 494148, 3715832; 494196, 3715830; 494280, 3715807; 494400, 
3715775; 494439, 3715774; 494489, 3715772; 494574, 3715770; 494648, 
3715751; 494705, 3715736; 494797, 3715672; 494849, 3715635; 494888, 
3715590; 494926, 3715546; 495057, 3715609; 495261, 3715609; 495324, 
3715562; 495350, 3715588; 495396, 3715635; 495445, 3715692; 495465, 
3715715; 495473, 3715724; 495513, 3715731; 495617, 3715749; 495720, 
3715760; 495740, 3715762; 495901, 3715758; 495942, 3715754; 495999, 
3715749; 496083, 3715728; 496245, 3715719; 496295, 3715753; 496295, 
3715753; 496389, 3715711; 496401, 3715711; 496473, 3715708; 496482, 
3715708; 496516, 3715707; 496572, 3715731; 496630, 3715758; 496723, 
3715865; 496828, 3715931; 496851, 3715946; 496901, 3715996; 497000, 
3716094; 497018, 3716113; 497075, 3716169; 497087, 3716217; 497138, 
3716403; 497179, 3716557; 497164, 3716735; 497079, 3716780; 496941, 
3716855; 496702, 3717093; 496840, 3717214; 496911, 3717221; 496923, 
3717212; 496973, 3717159; 496989, 3717131; 497050, 3717075; 497075, 
3717034; 497077, 3716950; 497077, 3716930; 497098, 3716915; 497184, 
3716884; 497316, 3716877; 497377,

[[Page 424]]

3716851; 497413, 3716861; 497426, 3716905; 497385, 3716966; 497359, 
3716994; 497230, 3717067; 497197, 3717111; 497182, 3717179; 497182, 
3717281; 497151, 3717314; 497129, 3717352; 497131, 3717380; 497139, 
3717394; 497140, 3717394; 497196, 3717418; 497258, 3717442; 497268, 
3717443; 497284, 3717456; 497322, 3717527; 497350, 3717552; 497380, 
3717606; 497380, 3717611; 497380, 3717611; 497380, 3717644; 497230, 
3717728; 497213, 3717720; 497207, 3717714; 497177, 3717720; 497124, 
3717711; 497074, 3717682; 497067, 3717693; 497060, 3717703; 496479, 
3717674; 496121, 3717689; 496063, 3717606; 495943, 3717435; 495885, 
3717410; 495808, 3717461; 495722, 3717442; 495693, 3717365; 495626, 
3717331; 495492, 3717331; 495452, 3717314; 495452, 3717314; 495449, 
3717312; 495352, 3717269; 495117, 3717216; 495046, 3717218; 494959, 
3717221; 494805, 3717221; 494694, 3717187; 494522, 3717154; 494358, 
3717139; 494243, 3717144; 494123, 3717183; 494070, 3717178; 493993, 
3717149; 493878, 3717197; 493869, 3717202; 493840, 3717218; 493734, 
3717279; 493633, 3717346; 493652, 3717379; 493604, 3717408; 493571, 
3717375; 493446, 3717447; 493364, 3717557; 493246, 3717610; 493072, 
3717688; 493044, 3717692; 492709, 3717744; 492583, 3717876; 492569, 
3718009; 492737, 3718239; 492694, 3718421; 492681, 3718477; 492625, 
3718567; 492597, 3718686; 492618, 3718685; 492618, 3718685; 492622, 
3718670; 492647, 3718567; 492647, 3718564; 492648, 3718561; 492649, 
3718557; 492650, 3718554; 492651, 3718551; 492652, 3718550; 492653, 
3718548; 492654, 3718547; 492655, 3718545; 492657, 3718543; 492659, 
3718541; 492660, 3718540; 492662, 3718538; 492669, 3718531; 492680, 
3718519; 492684, 3718516; 492687, 3718513; 492689, 3718510; 492693, 
3718505; 492698, 3718498; 492699, 3718498; 492703, 3718490; 492705, 
3718485; 492707, 3718481; 492709, 3718472; 492711, 3718462; 492711, 
3718462; 492756, 3718473; 492756, 3718473; 492767, 3718421; 492802, 
3718251; 492803, 3718244; 492806, 3718228; 492806, 3718215; 492804, 
3718205; 492802, 3718197; 492801, 3718193; 492799, 3718187; 492797, 
3718181; 492792, 3718170; 492785, 3718159; 492778, 3718149; 492778, 
3718149; 492768, 3718137; 492762, 3718129; 492671, 3718014; 492938, 
3718015; 493045, 3718015; 493543, 3718017; 493845, 3718018; 493849, 
3717608; 493849, 3717608; 494138, 3717605; 494643, 3717601; 495049, 
3717603; 495453, 3717605; 495453, 3717607; 495455, 3717771; 495461, 
3718399; 494976, 3718407; 494783, 3718411; 494656, 3718413; 494628, 
3718414; 494621, 3718414; 494602, 3718414; 494417, 3718417; 494345, 
3718419; 494296, 3718419; 494217, 3718421; 494103, 3718423; 493928, 
3718426; 493840, 3718428; 493840, 3718428; 493848, 3718672; 493858, 
3719011; 493861, 3719091; 493864, 3719200; 493864, 3719210; 493864, 
3719210; 493864, 3719210; 493864, 3719210; 493979, 3719209; 494214, 
3719206; 494526, 3719203; 494667, 3719201; 494667, 3719201; 494667, 
3719210; 494668, 3719409; 494668, 3719617; 494669, 3719801; 494670, 
3720032; 494671, 3720447; 494671, 3720447; thence returning to 494486, 
3720445. Excluding land bounded by 499546, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 
499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 
499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 
499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 
499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 
499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 
499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 
499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 
499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 
499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 
499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499539, 3716748; 
499539, 3716748; 499539, 3716748; 499539, 3716749; 499539, 3716749; 
499539, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 
499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 
499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 
499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 
499536, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 
499536, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 
499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 
499534, 3716749; 499534, 3716749; 499534, 3716750; 499534, 3716750; 
499534, 3716750; 499534, 3716750; 499534, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 
499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 
499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 
499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 
499532, 3716750; 499531, 3716750; 499531, 3716750; 499531, 3716750; 
499531, 3716750; 499531, 3716751; 499531, 3716751; 499531, 3716751; 
499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 
499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 
499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 
499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 499528, 3716751; 499528, 3716751; 
499528, 3716752; 499528, 3716752; 499528, 3716752; 499528, 3716752; 
499528, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 
499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 
499526, 3716752; 499526, 3716752; 499526, 3716752; 499526, 3716752; 
499526, 3716753; 499526, 3716753; 499526, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 
499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 
499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499524, 3716753; 
499524, 3716753; 499524, 3716753; 499524, 3716754; 499524, 3716754; 
499524, 3716754; 499524, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 
499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 
499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499522, 3716754; 499522, 3716755; 
499522, 3716755; 499522, 3716755; 499522, 3716755; 499522, 3716755; 
499522, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 
499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 
499521, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 
499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 
499520, 3716756; 499519, 3716756; 499519, 3716756; 499519, 3716757; 
499519, 3716757; 499519, 3716757; 499519, 3716757; 499519, 3716757; 
499519, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 
499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716758; 499518, 3716758; 
499518, 3716758; 499518, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 
499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 
499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 
499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 
499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499515, 3716760; 
499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 
499515, 3716760;

[[Page 425]]

499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 499514, 3716760; 499514, 3716760; 
499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 
499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 
499513, 3716761; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 
499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 
499513, 3716762; 499512, 3716762; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 
499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 
499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499511, 3716764; 
499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 
499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 
499511, 3716765; 499511, 3716765; 499510, 3716765; 499508, 3716768; 
499493, 3716786; 499493, 3716786; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 
499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 
499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716788; 499492, 3716788; 
499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 
499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716789; 
499491, 3716789; 499491, 3716789; 499491, 3716789; 499490, 3716789; 
499490, 3716789; 499490, 3716789; 499490, 3716789; 499490, 3716790; 
499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 
499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 499489, 3716790; 499489, 3716791; 
499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 
499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716792; 
499489, 3716792; 499489, 3716792; 499489, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 
499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 
499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 
499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 499487, 3716793; 
499487, 3716793; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 
499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 
499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716795; 499487, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 
499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 
499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 
499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 
499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 
499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 
499485, 3716798; 499485, 3716798; 499485, 3716798; 499485, 3716798; 
499485, 3716798; 499484, 3716798; 499484, 3716798; 499484, 3716799; 
499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 
499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716800; 
499484, 3716800; 499484, 3716800; 499484, 3716800; 499483, 3716800; 
499483, 3716800; 499483, 3716800; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 
499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 
499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716802; 499483, 3716802; 
499483, 3716802; 499482, 3716802; 499482, 3716802; 499482, 3716802; 
499482, 3716802; 499482, 3716803; 499482, 3716803; 499477, 3716812; 
499477, 3716813; 499453, 3716862; 499453, 3716862; 499453, 3716862; 
499444, 3716871; 499353, 3716944; 499347, 3716948; 499248, 3717028; 
499067, 3716918; 498635, 3716657; 498635, 3716657; 498634, 3716602; 
498629, 3716418; 498795, 3716421; 499116, 3716425; 499299, 3716427; 
499334, 3716428; 499415, 3716429; 499415, 3716429; 499806, 3716412; 
499810, 3716412; 499814, 3716412; 499816, 3716856; 499816, 3716856; 
499809, 3716855; 499684, 3716831; 499675, 3716825; 499659, 3716812; 
499602, 3716769; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 
499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 
499563, 3716752; 499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 
499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 
499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 
499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 
499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 
499561, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 
499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 
499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 
499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 
499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 
499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 
499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 
499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 
499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 
499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 
499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 
499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 
499554, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 
499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499552, 3716748; 
499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 
499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 
499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 
499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 
499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 
499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 
499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 
499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 
499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 
499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; thence returning to 
499546, 3716748. Continuing to include as Critical Habitat lands bounded 
by 500357, 3718083; 500349, 3718085; 500340, 3718087; 500331, 3718087; 
500321, 3718087; 500315, 3718086; 500311, 3718086; 500302, 3718083; 
500296, 3718082; 500293, 3718081; 500288, 3718079; 500288, 3718079; 
500274, 3718074; 500274, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 
500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 
500273, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 
500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500271, 3718074; 
500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 
500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 
500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 
500270, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 
500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 
500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 
500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 
500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 
500267, 3718073; 500266, 3718073; 500266, 3718073; 500266, 3718073; 
500266, 3718073; 500251, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072;

[[Page 426]]

500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 
500250, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 
500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 
500248, 3718072; 500248, 3718072; 500248, 3718071; 500248, 3718071; 
500248, 3718071; 500248, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 
500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 
500247, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 
500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 
500245, 3718071; 500245, 3718071; 500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 
500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 
500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 
500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500243, 3718070; 
500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 
500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500242, 3718069; 
500242, 3718069; 500242, 3718069; 500242, 3718069; 500242, 3718068; 
500242, 3718068; 500242, 3718068; 500242, 3718068; 500242, 3718068; 
500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718068; 
500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718067; 500241, 3718067; 500241, 3718067; 
500241, 3718067; 500240, 3718067; 500240, 3718067; 500240, 3718067; 
500240, 3718067; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 
500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 
500239, 3718066; 500239, 3718066; 500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 
500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 
500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718064; 500239, 3718064; 500239, 3718064; 
500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718064; 
500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 
500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 
500238, 3718062; 500238, 3718062; 500238, 3718062; 500238, 3718062; 
500238, 3718062; 500237, 3718062; 500237, 3718062; 500237, 3718061; 
500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 
500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718060; 500232, 3718060; 
500227, 3718060; 500226, 3718060; 500224, 3718060; 500222, 3718060; 
500222, 3718060; 500222, 3718050; 500222, 3718050; 500222, 3718050; 
500222, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 
500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 
500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 
500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 
500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 
500219, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 
500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 
500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 
500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 
500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 
500216, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 
500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 
500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 
500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 
500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 
500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 
500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 
500211, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 
500211, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 
500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 
500209, 3718050; 500209, 3718050; 500209, 3718049; 500209, 3718049; 
500209, 3718049; 500209, 3718049; 500209, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 
500208, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 
500208, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 
500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 
500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 
500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 
500205, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 
500205, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 
500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 
500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 
500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 500202, 3718049; 500202, 3718049; 
500202, 3718048; 500202, 3718048; 500202, 3718048; 500202, 3718048; 
500202, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 
500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 
500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 
500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 
500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 
500199, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 
500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 
500197, 3718048; 500197, 3718048; 500197, 3718047; 500197, 3718047; 
500197, 3718047; 500197, 3718047; 500197, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 
500196, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 
500196, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 
500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 
500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 
500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500193, 3718047; 
500193, 3718047; 500193, 3718047; 500193, 3718047; 500193, 3718046; 
500193, 3718046; 500193, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 
500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 
500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 
500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 
500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 
500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 
500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 
500189, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 
500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 
500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718045; 
500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718044; 500187, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 
500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 
500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 
500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 
500185, 3718044; 500184, 3718044; 500184, 3718044; 500184, 3718043; 
500184, 3718043; 500184, 3718043; 500184, 3718043; 500184, 3718043; 
500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 
500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500182, 3718043; 
500182, 3718043; 500182, 3718045; 500180, 3718050; 500178, 3718056; 
500178, 3718062; 500177, 3718067;

[[Page 427]]

500178, 3718073; 500178, 3718079; 500179, 3718084; 500181, 3718090; 
500185, 3718099; 500186, 3718102; 500187, 3718105; 500187, 3718109; 
500188, 3718115; 500187, 3718119; 500186, 3718125; 500185, 3718129; 
500182, 3718135; 500136, 3718206; 500132, 3718212; 500127, 3718218; 
500121, 3718223; 500115, 3718228; 500109, 3718232; 500102, 3718236; 
500096, 3718239; 500088, 3718242; 500085, 3718242; 500087, 3718268; 
500087, 3718276; 500086, 3718284; 500084, 3718292; 500081, 3718299; 
500078, 3718310; 500074, 3718322; 500071, 3718333; 500070, 3718345; 
500068, 3718357; 500068, 3718369; 500068, 3718381; 500069, 3718398; 
500069, 3718404; 500069, 3718409; 500068, 3718415; 500067, 3718421; 
500065, 3718426; 500062, 3718431; 500033, 3718490; 500031, 3718495; 
500029, 3718500; 500026, 3718504; 500023, 3718508; 500020, 3718512; 
500016, 3718516; 500006, 3718524; 500003, 3718526; 499999, 3718530; 
499995, 3718535; 499992, 3718540; 499989, 3718545; 499987, 3718551; 
499985, 3718557; 499983, 3718563; 499982, 3718568; 499980, 3718578; 
499977, 3718587; 499973, 3718596; 499967, 3718607; 499961, 3718619; 
499955, 3718631; 499954, 3718631; 499952, 3718637; 499949, 3718644; 
499947, 3718651; 499946, 3718658; 499931, 3718759; 499931, 3718765; 
499931, 3718771; 499932, 3718776; 499933, 3718782; 499934, 3718788; 
499937, 3718795; 499940, 3718800; 499941, 3718803; 499942, 3718804; 
499946, 3718813; 499949, 3718821; 499951, 3718829; 499953, 3718837; 
499954, 3718845; 499954, 3718853; 499953, 3718862; 499952, 3718870; 
499936, 3718933; 499926, 3718951; 499944, 3718947; 499944, 3718947; 
499960, 3718944; 500049, 3718925; 500207, 3718936; 500207, 3718934; 
500208, 3718913; 500210, 3718777; 500212, 3718650; 500213, 3718633; 
500213, 3718619; 500214, 3718536; 500366, 3718536; 500366, 3718536; 
500369, 3718517; 500378, 3718435; 500422, 3718059; 500422, 3718059; 
500403, 3718058; 500403, 3718058; 500400, 3718060; 500400, 3718060; 
500400, 3718061; 500393, 3718066; 500385, 3718072; 500376, 3718076; 
500368, 3718080; 500368, 3718080; 500360, 3718083; 500359, 3718083; 
thence returning to 500357, 3718083. Continue to 500187, 3717622; 
500000, 3717623; 499967, 3717713; 499917, 3717846; 499917, 3717857; 
499923, 3717858; 499927, 3717859; 499931, 3717860; 499938, 3717863; 
499942, 3717865; 499945, 3717868; 499948, 3717870; 499953, 3717876; 
499955, 3717880; 499957, 3717883; 499960, 3717891; 499962, 3717895; 
499964, 3717898; 499967, 3717901; 499969, 3717904; 499972, 3717907; 
499976, 3717910; 499979, 3717912; 499983, 3717914; 499986, 3717916; 
499990, 3717917; 499994, 3717918; 499998, 3717918; 500002, 3717919; 
500026, 3717919; 500026, 3717919; 500213, 3717924; 500224, 3717924; 
500224, 3717922; 500225, 3717921; 500225, 3717921; 500230, 3717622; 
500230, 3717622; thence returning to 500187, 3717622. Continue to 
491502, 3714828; 491542, 3714827; 491542, 3714827; 491506, 3714754; 
491500, 3714742; 491398, 3714534; 491396, 3714529; 491376, 3714490; 
491306, 3714347; 491302, 3714339; 491302, 3714339; 491303, 3714339; 
490908, 3713519; 490764, 3713221; 490740, 3713172; 490622, 3712839; 
490613, 3712849; 490573, 3712746; 490564, 3712723; 490542, 3712723; 
490550, 3712747; 490611, 3712919; 490620, 3712944; 490707, 3713186; 
490720, 3713214; 491262, 3714337; 491261, 3714337; 491267, 3714350; 
491267, 3714350; 491335, 3714489; 491336, 3714492; 491409, 3714641; 
491463, 3714749; 491500, 3714824; thence returning to 491502, 3714828. 
Continue to 493853, 3712379; 493853, 3712254; 493776, 3712306; 493776, 
3712403; 493853, 3712388; thence returning to 493853, 3712379.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2, Skinner/Johnson follows:

[[Page 428]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.003

    (7) Unit 3: Sage Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle Sage. Land bounded by the 
following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 505035, 3716405; 505035, 3716405; 
505175, 3716404; 505175, 3716404; 505245, 3716403; 505267, 3716403; 
505380, 3716402; 505427, 3716402; 505429, 3716017; 505429, 3715985; 
505432, 3715985; 505727, 3715975; 505831, 3715971; 505831, 3715971; 
505831, 3715774; 505831, 3715547; 505025, 3715591; 505025, 3715611;

[[Page 429]]

505026, 3715641; 505027, 3715789; 505027, 3715789; 505029, 3715890; 
505030, 3715988; 505032, 3716141; 505032, 3716189; 505032, 3716189; 
thence returning to 505035, 3716405.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Sage Unit), Unit 4 (Wilson Valley Unit), 
and Unit 5 (Vail Lake/Oak Mountain Unit) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.004


[[Page 430]]


    (8) Unit 4: Wilson Valley Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Cahuilla Mountain, Sage, and Vail 
Lake. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 510234, 
3707784; 510234, 3707785; 510234, 3707800; 510234, 3707808; 509911, 
3707810; 509378, 3707813; 509357, 3707813; 509356, 3707812; 509356, 
3707812; 509094, 3707816; 509094, 3707816; 509094, 3707816; 509092, 
3707833; 509092, 3707835; 509064, 3708174; 509061, 3708213; 509060, 
3708216; 509060, 3708217; 509311, 3708214; 509360, 3708214; 509412, 
3708213; 509447, 3708213; 509447, 3708213; 509535, 3708212; 509558, 
3708212; 509712, 3708211; 509854, 3708209; 509870, 3708209; 509870, 
3708209; 509870, 3708209; 509935, 3708209; 510386, 3708205; 510689, 
3708203; 511420, 3708197; 511480, 3708197; 511507, 3708197; 511507, 
3708197; 511507, 3708172; 511507, 3708066; 511507, 3708066; 511506, 
3707959; 511506, 3707934; 511505, 3707784; 511504, 3707636; 511504, 
3707594; 511503, 3707514; 511503, 3707503; 511503, 3707503; 511503, 
3707375; 511502, 3707375; 511087, 3707383; 510706, 3707390; 510706, 
3707390; 510706, 3707390; 510706, 3707424; 510704, 3707599; 510702, 
3707780; 510680, 3707780; 510595, 3707781; thence returning to 510234, 
3707784. Continue to 510706, 3707390; 510707, 3707301; 510715, 3706625; 
510715, 3706625; 510035, 3706610; 510035, 3706610; 510025, 3706704; 
510024, 3706709; 510024, 3706712; 510015, 3706798; 509994, 3707007; 
509994, 3707007; 509973, 3707206; 509973, 3707206; 509963, 3707305; 
509953, 3707404; 509953, 3707404; 510609, 3707392; 510678, 3707390; 
thence returning to 510706, 3707390.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 (Wilson Valley) for the Quino checkerspot 
butterfly is depicted on the map in paragraph (7)(ii) of this entry.
    (8) Unit 5: Vail Lake/Oak Mountain Unit, Riverside County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Bachelor Mountain, Sage, 
Pechanga, and Vail Lake. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 501858, 3709596; 501858, 3709596; 502139, 3709646; 
502615, 3709631; 502626, 3709625; 502643, 3709615; 502643, 3709609; 
502642, 3709465; 502642, 3709465; 502641, 3709286; 502641, 3709256; 
502640, 3709087; 502640, 3709074; 502640, 3709046; 503036, 3709037; 
503036, 3709037; 503174, 3709034; 503340, 3709031; 503433, 3709028; 
503434, 3708993; 503434, 3708987; 503434, 3708987; 503434, 3708899; 
503435, 3708725; 503435, 3708713; 503435, 3708707; 503435, 3708707; 
503437, 3708213; 503437, 3708213; 503437, 3708213; 501828, 3708226; 
501828, 3708226; 501828, 3708226; 501829, 3708245; 501829, 3708258; 
501841, 3708792; 501844, 3708936; 501849, 3709192; 501853, 3709344; 
501853, 3709354; 501853, 3709364; thence returning to 501858, 3709596. 
Continue to 500229, 3708250; 500085, 3708249; 499766, 3708247; 499671, 
3708246; 499671, 3708246; 499668, 3708295; 499768, 3708331; 499694, 
3708419; 499652, 3708468; 499727, 3708495; 499768, 3708510; 499887, 
3708558; 499915, 3708657; 499987, 3708725; 500070, 3708773; 500134, 
3708820; 500154, 3708832; 500220, 3708869; 500220, 3708868; thence 
returning to 500229, 3708250. Continue to 501828, 3708226; 501830, 
3708001; 501831, 3707844; 501833, 3707599; 501834, 3707442; 501835, 
3707394; 501835, 3707318; 501835, 3707318; 501550, 3707363; 501429, 
3707383; 501022, 3707448; 500616, 3707513; 500397, 3707548; 500210, 
3707578; 500210, 3707578; 500210, 3707582; 500214, 3707723; 500226, 
3708156; 500229, 3708250; 500229, 3708250; 500229, 3708250; 500719, 
3708249; 501023, 3708249; 501441, 3708237; 501466, 3708236; 501737, 
3708229; 501801, 3708227; 501817, 3708226; thence returning to 501828, 
3708226. Continue to 507529, 3701874; 507531, 3701777; 507532, 3701729; 
507532, 3701729; 507513, 3701663; 507489, 3701583; 507470, 3701544; 
507352, 3701469; 507350, 3701469; 507350, 3701467; 507271, 3701434; 
507218, 3701448; 507155, 3701416; 507129, 3701371; 507113, 3701304; 
507071, 3701262; 506993, 3701239; 506916, 3701235; 506865, 3701235; 
506805, 3701244; 506703, 3701200; 506640, 3701170; 506568, 3701135; 
506494, 3701063; 506399, 3701047; 506264, 3701054; 506246, 3701061; 
506242, 3701061; 506242, 3701072; 505840, 3701071; 505840, 3701071; 
505840, 3701068; 505840, 3701068; 505833, 3701068; 505723, 3701058; 
505713, 3701052; 505415, 3701052; 505035, 3701052; 505013, 3701052; 
504656, 3701290; 504313, 3701648; 504171, 3701886; 503985, 3702199; 
503837, 3702780; 503528, 3702954; 503528, 3702954; 503494, 3702973; 
503477, 3702981; 503477, 3702981; 503417, 3703009; 503271, 3703077; 
503258, 3703095; 503250, 3703106; 503340, 3703114; 503415, 3703121; 
503866, 3703163; 503873, 3703164; 503946, 3703171; 503953, 3703172; 
505023, 3703271; 505023, 3703271; 505026, 3703040; 505026, 3703040; 
505029, 3702852; 505029, 3702852; 505030, 3702776; 505031, 3702723; 
505031, 3702702; 505039, 3702145; 505043, 3701881; 505043, 3701881; 
505266, 3701880; 505443, 3701879; 505443, 3701879; 505722, 3701878; 
505843, 3701877; 505848, 3701877; 506242, 3701875; 506242, 3701875; 
506242, 3702278; 506244, 3702278; 506643, 3702274; 506643, 3702106; 
506642, 3702087; 506642, 3701873; 506642, 3701873; 506657, 3701873; 
506684, 3701873; 507103, 3701873; 507282, 3701874; thence returning to 
507529, 3701874.
    (ii) Note: Unit 5 (Vail Lake/Oak Mountain) for the Quino checkerspot 
butterfly is depicted on the map in paragraph (7)(ii) of this entry.
    (10) Unit 6: Tule Peak Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Aguanga, Beauty Mountain, and 
Anza. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 527628, 
3703575; 527233, 3703541; 527233, 3703541; 527232, 3703658; 527230, 
3703925; 527230, 3703934; 527229, 3704074; 527228, 3704118; 527226, 
3704307; 526831, 3704287; 526824, 3704287; 526813, 3704286; 526813, 
3704286; 526811, 3704467; 526806, 3704812; 526803, 3705067; 527305, 
3705070; 527625, 3705073; 527626, 3704522; 527626, 3704231; 527627, 
3703961; 527627, 3703809; 527627, 3703725; 527627, 3703709; 527628, 
3703696; 527628, 3703575; thence returning to 527628, 3703575. Continue 
to 526311, 3703859; 526400, 3703866; 526403, 3703470; 526403, 3703470; 
526365, 3703467; 526040, 3703439; 525983, 3703434; 525980, 3703823; 
525980, 3703835; thence returning to 526311, 3703859. Continue to

[[Page 431]]

528328, 3703573; 528328, 3703573; 528310, 3703558; 528208, 3703471; 
528051, 3703364; 527873, 3703263; 527737, 3703197; 527631, 3703161; 
527630, 3703161; 527630, 3703161; 527628, 3703575; 527628, 3703575; 
528134, 3703574; 528153, 3703574; thence returning to 528328, 3703573. 
Continue to 526412, 3702730; 526363, 3702718; 525995, 3702627; 525987, 
3702626; 525605, 3702584; 525588, 3702582; 525588, 3702582; 525588, 
3702696; 525588, 3702696; 525854, 3702707; 525986, 3702713; 526140, 
3702719; 526368, 3702728; thence returning to 526412, 3702730.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 6 (Tule Peak) and Unit 7 (Bautista) follows:

[[Page 432]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.005

    (8) Unit 7: Bautista Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Anza, Butterfly Peak, Blackburn 
Canyon, and Idyllwild. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 524940, 3714398; 524927, 3714405; 524915, 3714413; 
524912, 3714415; 524909, 3714416; 524891, 3714427; 524867, 3714442; 
524861, 3714445; 524843, 3714457; 524824, 3714470; 524819, 3714473; 
524796, 3714488; 524773, 3714505; 524750, 3714521; 524727,

[[Page 433]]

3714538; 524704, 3714555; 524702, 3714557; 524687, 3714568; 524679, 
3714573; 524654, 3714586; 524629, 3714600; 524617, 3714607; 524605, 
3714614; 524580, 3714629; 524556, 3714644; 524532, 3714659; 524513, 
3714671; 524509, 3714674; 524492, 3714686; 524485, 3714690; 524480, 
3714693; 524481, 3714769; 524482, 3715168; 524477, 3716096; 524477, 
3716098; 524477, 3716098; 524477, 3716100; 524471, 3716251; 524469, 
3716299; 524465, 3716399; 524461, 3716501; 524460, 3716518; 524266, 
3716521; 524066, 3716524; 524027, 3716524; 523864, 3716521; 523861, 
3716521; 523854, 3716740; 523656, 3716816; 523633, 3716826; 523462, 
3716890; 523431, 3716902; 523428, 3716906; 523360, 3717007; 523341, 
3717034; 523361, 3717047; 523540, 3717157; 523666, 3717226; 523707, 
3717229; 523748, 3717231; 523775, 3717233; 523867, 3717239; 523874, 
3717240; 523880, 3717246; 523937, 3717306; 523947, 3717323; 523947, 
3717323; 523970, 3717369; 523961, 3717692; 523961, 3717716; 523961, 
3717716; 523960, 3717730; 523983, 3717727; 524035, 3717723; 524048, 
3717721; 524066, 3717720; 524069, 3717725; 524206, 3717824; 524277, 
3717924; 524258, 3717981; 524258, 3718099; 524324, 3718142; 524348, 
3718208; 524249, 3718307; 524196, 3718411; 524225, 3718430; 524431, 
3718538; 524632, 3718643; 524731, 3718695; 524845, 3718714; 524902, 
3718643; 524906, 3718567; 524864, 3718525; 524797, 3718482; 524741, 
3718468; 524807, 3718373; 524873, 3718312; 524925, 3718302; 524982, 
3718350; 525058, 3718397; 525081, 3718405; 525131, 3718553; 525220, 
3718672; 525468, 3718851; 525745, 3719098; 525416, 3719350; 525111, 
3719584; 524566, 3719376; 524430, 3719396; 524239, 3719425; 523912, 
3719713; 523615, 3719822; 523367, 3719822; 523190, 3720727; 523182, 
3720746; 523189, 3720781; 523152, 3720828; 523144, 3720939; 523142, 
3720964; 522899, 3721091; 522836, 3721107; 522744, 3721130; 522579, 
3721130; 522394, 3721100; 522200, 3721091; 521967, 3721149; 521734, 
3721139; 521510, 3721159; 521365, 3721149; 521205, 3721194; 521190, 
3721198; 520928, 3721236; 520850, 3721100; 520626, 3721120; 520374, 
3721275; 520189, 3721304; 519995, 3721343; 519791, 3721460; 519582, 
3721532; 519574, 3721535; 519479, 3721553; 519098, 3721695; 518771, 
3721772; 518561, 3721822; 518505, 3721878; 518487, 3721892; 518467, 
3721909; 518364, 3721991; 518293, 3722048; 518329, 3722089; 518346, 
3722109; 518477, 3722260; 518335, 3722443; 518113, 3722392; 517968, 
3722358; 517956, 3722392; 517925, 3722480; 517918, 3722500; 517913, 
3722512; 517756, 3722952; 517601, 3723163; 517479, 3723317; 517374, 
3723450; 517333, 3723502; 517919, 3723509; 517950, 3723509; 518230, 
3723509; 518526, 3723509; 518809, 3723538; 519119, 3723580; 519345, 
3723580; 519570, 3723641; 519712, 3723679; 520150, 3723679; 520362, 
3723622; 520419, 3723354; 520334, 3723156; 520673, 3723086; 521194, 
3723178; 521273, 3723192; 521570, 3723192; 521824, 3723135; 521993, 
3722895; 522318, 3722881; 522445, 3722881; 522700, 3722796; 522826, 
3722686; 522926, 3722599; 522949, 3722552; 523039, 3722373; 523180, 
3722147; 523392, 3722118; 523674, 3722203; 523858, 3722132; 524070, 
3721836; 524211, 3721511; 524310, 3721158; 524427, 3721017; 524485, 
3720947; 524487, 3720945; 524515, 3720927; 524945, 3720678; 525609, 
3720409; 526076, 3720080; 526329, 3719901; 526492, 3719823; 526491, 
3719804; 526480, 3719413; 526509, 3719413; 526519, 3719413; 526520, 
3719365; 526884, 3719367; 526885, 3719348; 526890, 3719196; 526912, 
3718594; 526923, 3718593; 526923, 3718516; 527300, 3718525; 527316, 
3718184; 527316, 3718184; 527316, 3718184; 527343, 3718185; 527345, 
3718115; 527707, 3718119; 528111, 3718123; 528117, 3717769; 528144, 
3717769; 528505, 3717777; 528510, 3717777; 528913, 3717788; 528913, 
3717618; 528912, 3717449; 528914, 3717449; 528915, 3717385; 529317, 
3717395; 529323, 3717396; 529719, 3717401; 529719, 3717427; 529720, 
3717427; 529718, 3717640; 529717, 3717803; 529716, 3717803; 529716, 
3717836; 529714, 3718072; 529749, 3718072; 529839, 3718072; 530135, 
3718199; 530263, 3718411; 530503, 3718693; 530573, 3718891; 530644, 
3719188; 530921, 3719188; 530969, 3719188; 531294, 3718934; 531322, 
3718679; 531322, 3718439; 531251, 3718143; 531491, 3717888; 531627, 
3717821; 531717, 3717775; 532000, 3717790; 532155, 3717719; 532141, 
3717521; 531957, 3717366; 531816, 3717083; 532000, 3717055; 532212, 
3717069; 532593, 3717069; 532664, 3717394; 532732, 3717483; 532861, 
3717648; 533144, 3717451; 533341, 3717239; 533666, 3716999; 533920, 
3716759; 534274, 3716603; 534347, 3716608; 534683, 3716631; 534881, 
3716815; 535149, 3716928; 535516, 3716857; 535534, 3716835; 535542, 
3716823; 535700, 3716617; 535815, 3716473; 535971, 3716278; 535982, 
3716264; 536051, 3716216; 536103, 3716180; 536178, 3716127; 536251, 
3716077; 536265, 3716067; 536326, 3716031; 536404, 3715985; 536513, 
3715922; 536527, 3715914; 536604, 3715869; 536705, 3715667; 536725, 
3715627; 536731, 3715615; 536731, 3715614; 537028, 3715276; 537338, 
3715276; 537391, 3715260; 537443, 3715246; 537505, 3715228; 537525, 
3715222; 537635, 3715191; 537925, 3715191; 538016, 3715191; 538100, 
3715186; 538120, 3715185; 538203, 3715180; 538482, 3715163; 538580, 
3715082; 538722, 3714964; 538737, 3714952; 538892, 3714824; 539038, 
3714870; 539245, 3714937; 539434, 3714891; 539515, 3714872; 539528, 
3714869; 539717, 3714824; 539895, 3714781; 539895, 3714777; 539923, 
3714762; 539922, 3714300; 539919, 3713604; 539919, 3713579; 539917, 
3713220; 539923, 3712426; 539923, 3712307; 539524, 3712228; 539368, 
3712239; 539033, 3712239; 538609, 3712253; 538328, 3712372; 538242, 
3712409; 538327, 3712634; 538327, 3712635; 538369, 3712974; 538324, 
3713016; 538322, 3713018; 538214, 3713120; 538143, 3713185; 537939, 
3713208; 537928, 3713209; 537922, 3713209; 537890, 3713213; 537621, 
3713242; 537084, 3713242; 537024, 3713218; 537002, 3713210; 536999, 
3713209; 536973, 3713209; 536963, 3713209; 536732, 3713207; 536712, 
3713207; 536326, 3713211; 536104, 3713213; 536087, 3713214; 536086, 
3713214; 536072, 3713200; 536030, 3713158; 535993, 3713121; 535965, 
3713119; 535889, 3713112; 535844, 3713108; 535753, 3713089; 535577, 
3713167; 535565, 3713177; 535543, 3713196; 535461, 3713264; 535419, 
3713298; 535402, 3713313; 535343, 3713362; 535202, 3713459; 535132, 
3713508; 535090, 3713537; 534887, 3713657; 534804, 3713706; 534693, 
3713771; 534677, 3713790; 534649, 3713822; 534550, 3713934; 534375, 
3714083; 534261, 3714142; 534173, 3714187; 534056, 3714213; 533907, 
3714343; 533857, 3714382; 533725, 3714486; 533690, 3714520; 533523, 
3714681; 533348, 3714837; 533192, 3714909; 533165, 3714935; 533114, 
3714987; 533075, 3715344; 532860, 3715448; 532735, 3715539; 532672, 
3715585; 532528, 3715650; 532423, 3715698; 532386, 3715715; 532326, 
3715725; 532237, 3715740; 532230, 3715741; 532149, 3715797; 532106, 
3716045; 532030, 3716121; 532029, 3716122; 532010, 3716141; 531908, 
3716243; 531589, 3716251; 531547,

[[Page 434]]

3716135; 531543, 3716125; 531541, 3716120; 531525, 3716075; 531609, 
3715995; 531878, 3715737; 531878, 3715737; 531712, 3715735; 531577, 
3715733; 531511, 3715732; 531321, 3715730; 531309, 3715732; 531302, 
3715733; 531207, 3715747; 531107, 3715762; 531087, 3715765; 530947, 
3715786; 530698, 3715760; 530680, 3715758; 530607, 3715727; 530454, 
3715659; 530329, 3715726; 530289, 3715748; 530257, 3715765; 530080, 
3715751; 529885, 3715735; 529820, 3715730; 529736, 3715723; 529608, 
3715714; 529480, 3715720; 529473, 3715720; 529402, 3715723; 529304, 
3715728; 529281, 3715775; 529226, 3715884; 529078, 3715890; 529069, 
3715890; 529064, 3715891; 529065, 3715917; 529069, 3715977; 529070, 
3716008; 529049, 3716018; 528908, 3716092; 528869, 3716112; 528776, 
3716112; 528684, 3716112; 528446, 3716112; 528446, 3716120; 528433, 
3716352; 528421, 3716352; 528320, 3716352; 528303, 3716352; 528297, 
3716138; 528199, 3716131; 528199, 3716119; 528198, 3716105; 528193, 
3715962; 528093, 3715970; 527969, 3715979; 527770, 3715995; 527770, 
3716116; 527771, 3716519; 527771, 3716525; 527766, 3716525; 527558, 
3716535; 527558, 3716519; 527560, 3716315; 527560, 3716221; 527561, 
3716130; 527561, 3716125; 527155, 3716125; 527153, 3716125; 526959, 
3716125; 526853, 3716124; 526753, 3716124; 526621, 3716124; 526539, 
3716123; 526540, 3716116; 526549, 3715911; 526549, 3715911; 526648, 
3715908; 526751, 3715906; 526886, 3715902; 526932, 3715901; 526939, 
3715690; 526946, 3715476; 526760, 3715480; 526655, 3715482; 526551, 
3715483; 526550, 3715483; 526547, 3715571; 526543, 3715682; 526543, 
3715689; 526439, 3715689; 526343, 3715689; 526343, 3715678; 526342, 
3715569; 526341, 3715534; 526340, 3715474; 526237, 3715468; 526138, 
3715462; 526138, 3715449; 526138, 3715227; 526138, 3715029; 526138, 
3714927; 526138, 3714911; 526139, 3714828; 526139, 3714627; 526139, 
3714428; 526139, 3714417; 526136, 3714417; 526124, 3714417; 526125, 
3714112; 526121, 3714112; 526052, 3714115; 526036, 3714116; 526017, 
3714118; 525989, 3714122; 525972, 3714124; 525961, 3714125; 525933, 
3714129; 525929, 3714130; 525905, 3714133; 525878, 3714138; 525857, 
3714139; 525828, 3714140; 525800, 3714142; 525791, 3714142; 525772, 
3714144; 525744, 3714146; 525725, 3714148; 525716, 3714149; 525687, 
3714152; 525670, 3714154; 525659, 3714156; 525631, 3714160; 525603, 
3714164; 525576, 3714169; 525549, 3714174; 525548, 3714174; 525520, 
3714179; 525516, 3714180; 525492, 3714185; 525465, 3714192; 525437, 
3714198; 525410, 3714206; 525403, 3714207; 525383, 3714213; 525355, 
3714221; 525328, 3714229; 525301, 3714238; 525297, 3714239; 525287, 
3714243; 525286, 3714243; 525275, 3714247; 525248, 3714256; 525243, 
3714258; 525221, 3714266; 525195, 3714276; 525172, 3714286; 525169, 
3714287; 525143, 3714298; 525117, 3714309; 525091, 3714321; 525065, 
3714333; 525040, 3714345; 525035, 3714348; 525014, 3714358; 524989, 
3714371; 524964, 3714385; thence returning to 524940, 3714398. Excluding 
land bounded by 525336, 3717346; 525538, 3717338; 525526, 3717651; 
525245, 3717656; 525259, 3717478; 525275, 3717451; and excluding land 
bounded by 525483, 3717132; 525482, 3717132; 525478, 3717134; 525478, 
3717134; 525473, 3717137; 525473, 3717137; 525468, 3717139; 525468, 
3717139; 525463, 3717142; 525463, 3717142; 525459, 3717145; 525458, 
3717145; 525454, 3717148; 525454, 3717148; 525449, 3717151; 525449, 
3717151; 525445, 3717154; 525445, 3717154; 525440, 3717157; 525440, 
3717157; 525436, 3717160; 525436, 3717160; 525431, 3717164; 525431, 
3717164; 525427, 3717167; 525427, 3717167; 525423, 3717170; 525423, 
3717171; 525419, 3717174; 525418, 3717174; 525414, 3717178; 525414, 
3717178; 525410, 3717181; 525410, 3717181; 525406, 3717185; 525406, 
3717185; 525402, 3717189; 525402, 3717189; 525398, 3717193; 525398, 
3717193; 525395, 3717197; 525394, 3717197; 525391, 3717201; 525391, 
3717201; 525387, 3717205; 525387, 3717205; 525384, 3717209; 525383, 
3717209; 525380, 3717213; 525380, 3717213; 525377, 3717217; 525376, 
3717218; 525373, 3717222; 525373, 3717222; 525370, 3717226; 525370, 
3717226; 525367, 3717231; 525366, 3717231; 525363, 3717235; 525363, 
3717235; 525360, 3717240; 525360, 3717240; 525357, 3717244; 525357, 
3717244; 525354, 3717249; 525354, 3717249; 525351, 3717254; 525255, 
3717419; 525269, 3717240; 525299, 3716874; 525328, 3716873; 525366, 
3716908; 525367, 3716909; 525367, 3716909; 525368, 3716910; 525368, 
3716910; 525369, 3716911; 525369, 3716911; 525370, 3716911; 525370, 
3716912; 525371, 3716912; 525371, 3716913; 525372, 3716913; 525372, 
3716914; 525372, 3716914; 525373, 3716914; 525373, 3716915; 525374, 
3716915; 525374, 3716916; 525375, 3716916; 525375, 3716917; 525376, 
3716917; 525376, 3716917; 525377, 3716918; 525377, 3716918; 525378, 
3716919; 525378, 3716919; 525379, 3716919; 525379, 3716920; 525380, 
3716920; 525380, 3716921; 525381, 3716921; 525381, 3716921; 525382, 
3716922; 525382, 3716922; 525383, 3716923; 525383, 3716923; 525384, 
3716923; 525384, 3716924; 525385, 3716924; 525385, 3716925; 525386, 
3716925; 525386, 3716925; 525387, 3716926; 525387, 3716926; 525388, 
3716927; 525388, 3716927; 525389, 3716927; 525389, 3716928; 525390, 
3716928; 525390, 3716929; 525391, 3716929; 525392, 3716929; 525392, 
3716930; 525393, 3716930; 525393, 3716930; 525394, 3716931; 525394, 
3716931; 525395, 3716932; 525395, 3716932; 525396, 3716932; 525396, 
3716933; 525397, 3716933; 525397, 3716933; 525398, 3716934; 525398, 
3716934; 525399, 3716935; 525399, 3716935; 525400, 3716935; 525400, 
3716936; 525401, 3716936; 525402, 3716936; 525402, 3716937; 525403, 
3716937; 525403, 3716937; 525404, 3716938; 525404, 3716938; 525405, 
3716938; 525405, 3716939; 525406, 3716939; 525406, 3716939; 525407, 
3716940; 525408, 3716940; 525408, 3716940; 525409, 3716941; 525409, 
3716941; 525410, 3716941; 525410, 3716942; 525411, 3716942; 525411, 
3716942; 525412, 3716943; 525412, 3716943; 525413, 3716943; 525414, 
3716944; 525414, 3716944; 525415, 3716944; 525415, 3716945; 525416, 
3716945; 525416, 3716945; 525417, 3716946; 525418, 3716946; 525418, 
3716946; 525419, 3716947; 525419, 3716947; 525420, 3716947; 525420, 
3716948; 525421, 3716948; 525421, 3716948; 525422, 3716948; 525423, 
3716949; 525423, 3716949; 525424, 3716949; 525424, 3716950; 525425, 
3716950; 525425, 3716950; 525426, 3716950; 525427, 3716951; 525427, 
3716951; 525428, 3716951; 525428, 3716952; 525429, 3716952; 525430, 
3716952; 525430, 3716952; 525431, 3716953; 525431, 3716953; 525432, 
3716953; 525432, 3716954; 525433, 3716954; 525434, 3716954; 525434, 
3716954; 525435, 3716955; 525435, 3716955; 525436, 3716955; 525436, 
3716955; 525437, 3716956; 525438, 3716956; 525438, 3716956; 525439, 
3716957; 525439, 3716957; 525440, 3716957; 525441, 3716957; 525441, 
3716958; 525442, 3716958; 525442, 3716958; 525443, 3716958; 525444, 
3716959; 525444, 3716959; 525445, 3716959; 525445, 3716959; 525446,

[[Page 435]]

3716960; 525447, 3716960; 525447, 3716960; 525448, 3716960; 525448, 
3716960; 525449, 3716961; 525449, 3716961; 525450, 3716961; 525450, 
3716961; 525451, 3716961; 525451, 3716962; 525452, 3716962; 525452, 
3716962; 525453, 3716962; 525453, 3716962; 525454, 3716963; 525455, 
3716963; 525455, 3716963; 525456, 3716963; 525456, 3716963; 525457, 
3716964; 525457, 3716964; 525458, 3716964; 525458, 3716964; 525459, 
3716965; 525459, 3716965; 525460, 3716965; 525460, 3716965; 525461, 
3716965; 525461, 3716966; 525462, 3716966; 525462, 3716966; 525463, 
3716966; 525463, 3716967; 525464, 3716967; 525464, 3716967; 525465, 
3716967; 525466, 3716968; 525466, 3716968; 525467, 3716968; 525467, 
3716968; 525468, 3716969; 525468, 3716969; 525469, 3716969; 525469, 
3716969; 525470, 3716970; 525470, 3716970; 525471, 3716970; 525471, 
3716970; 525472, 3716971; 525472, 3716971; 525473, 3716971; 525473, 
3716971; 525474, 3716972; 525474, 3716972; 525475, 3716972; 525475, 
3716972; 525476, 3716973; 525476, 3716973; 525477, 3716973; 525477, 
3716974; 525478, 3716974; 525478, 3716974; 525479, 3716974; 525479, 
3716975; 525480, 3716975; 525480, 3716975; 525481, 3716976; 525481, 
3716976; 525482, 3716976; 525482, 3716976; 525483, 3716977; 525483, 
3716977; 525484, 3716977; 525484, 3716978; 525485, 3716978; 525485, 
3716978; 525486, 3716979; 525486, 3716979; 525487, 3716979; 525487, 
3716979; 525487, 3716980; 525488, 3716980; 525488, 3716980; 525489, 
3716981; 525489, 3716981; 525490, 3716981; 525490, 3716982; 525491, 
3716982; 525491, 3716982; 525492, 3716983; 525492, 3716983; 525493, 
3716983; 525493, 3716984; 525494, 3716984; 525494, 3716984; 525495, 
3716984; 525495, 3716985; 525496, 3716985; 525496, 3716985; 525496, 
3716986; 525497, 3716986; 525497, 3716986; 525498, 3716987; 525498, 
3716987; 525499, 3716987; 525499, 3716988; 525500, 3716988; 525500, 
3716989; 525501, 3716989; 525501, 3716989; 525502, 3716990; 525502, 
3716990; 525502, 3716990; 525503, 3716991; 525503, 3716991; 525504, 
3716991; 525504, 3716992; 525505, 3716992; 525505, 3716992; 525506, 
3716993; 525506, 3716993; 525506, 3716993; 525507, 3716994; 525507, 
3716994; 525508, 3716995; 525508, 3716995; 525509, 3716995; 525509, 
3716996; 525510, 3716996; 525510, 3716996; 525510, 3716997; 525511, 
3716997; 525511, 3716997; 525512, 3716998; 525512, 3716998; 525513, 
3716999; 525513, 3716999; 525513, 3716999; 525514, 3717000; 525514, 
3717000; 525515, 3717001; 525515, 3717001; 525516, 3717001; 525516, 
3717002; 525516, 3717002; 525517, 3717002; 525517, 3717003; 525518, 
3717003; 525518, 3717004; 525518, 3717004; 525519, 3717004; 525519, 
3717005; 525520, 3717005; 525520, 3717006; 525520, 3717006; 525521, 
3717006; 525521, 3717007; 525522, 3717007; 525522, 3717008; 525522, 
3717008; 525523, 3717008; 525523, 3717009; 525524, 3717009; 525524, 
3717010; 525524, 3717010; 525525, 3717011; 525525, 3717011; 525526, 
3717011; 525526, 3717012; 525526, 3717012; 525527, 3717013; 525527, 
3717013; 525528, 3717013; 525528, 3717014; 525528, 3717014; 525529, 
3717015; 525529, 3717015; 525530, 3717016; 525530, 3717016; 525530, 
3717016; 525531, 3717017; 525531, 3717017; 525531, 3717018; 525532, 
3717018; 525532, 3717019; 525533, 3717019; 525533, 3717019; 525533, 
3717020; 525534, 3717020; 525534, 3717021; 525534, 3717021; 525535, 
3717022; 525535, 3717022; 525535, 3717023; 525536, 3717023; 525536, 
3717023; 525536, 3717024; 525537, 3717024; 525537, 3717025; 525538, 
3717025; 525538, 3717026; 525538, 3717026; 525539, 3717027; 525539, 
3717027; 525539, 3717027; 525540, 3717028; 525540, 3717028; 525540, 
3717029; 525541, 3717029; 525541, 3717030; 525541, 3717030; 525542, 
3717031; 525542, 3717031; 525542, 3717032; 525543, 3717032; 525543, 
3717033; 525543, 3717033; 525544, 3717033; 525544, 3717034; 525544, 
3717034; 525545, 3717035; 525545, 3717035; 525545, 3717036; 525546, 
3717036; 525546, 3717037; 525546, 3717037; 525547, 3717038; 525547, 
3717038; 525547, 3717039; 525548, 3717039; 525548, 3717040; 525548, 
3717040; 525548, 3717041; 525549, 3717041; 525549, 3717042; 525549, 
3717042; 525550, 3717043; 525550, 3717043; 525550, 3717043; 525551, 
3717044; 525551, 3717044; 525551, 3717045; 525551, 3717045; 525552, 
3717046; 525552, 3717046; 525552, 3717047; 525553, 3717047; 525553, 
3717048; 525553, 3717048; 525553, 3717049; 525554, 3717049; 525554, 
3717050; 525554, 3717050; 525555, 3717051; 525555, 3717051; 525555, 
3717052; 525555, 3717052; 525556, 3717053; 525556, 3717053; 525556, 
3717054; 525557, 3717054; 525557, 3717055; 525557, 3717055; 525557, 
3717056; 525558, 3717056; 525558, 3717057; 525558, 3717057; 525558, 
3717058; 525559, 3717058; 525559, 3717059; 525559, 3717059; 525559, 
3717060; 525560, 3717060; 525560, 3717061; 525560, 3717061; 525560, 
3717062; 525561, 3717063; 525561, 3717063; 525561, 3717064; 525561, 
3717064; 525562, 3717065; 525562, 3717065; 525562, 3717066; 525562, 
3717066; 525563, 3717067; 525563, 3717067; 525563, 3717068; 525563, 
3717068; 525564, 3717069; 525564, 3717069; 525564, 3717070; 525564, 
3717070; 525564, 3717071; 525565, 3717071; 525565, 3717072; 525565, 
3717072; 525565, 3717073; 525565, 3717074; 525566, 3717074; 525566, 
3717075; 525566, 3717075; 525566, 3717076; 525567, 3717076; 525567, 
3717077; 525567, 3717077; 525567, 3717078; 525567, 3717078; 525568, 
3717079; 525568, 3717079; 525568, 3717080; 525568, 3717080; 525568, 
3717081; 525569, 3717082; 525569, 3717082; 525570, 3717091; 525560, 
3717105; 525560, 3717105; 525555, 3717106; 525555, 3717106; 525550, 
3717107; 525550, 3717107; 525544, 3717109; 525544, 3717109; 525539, 
3717110; 525539, 3717110; 525534, 3717111; 525534, 3717111; 525529, 
3717113; 525528, 3717113; 525523, 3717115; 525523, 3717115; 525518, 
3717117; 525518, 3717117; 525513, 3717118; 525513, 3717118; 525508, 
3717120; 525508, 3717120; 525503, 3717122; 525503, 3717123; 525498, 
3717125; 525497, 3717125; 525493, 3717127; 525492, 3717127; 525488, 
3717129; 525487, 3717129; and excluding land bounded by 525380, 3716871; 
525388, 3716870; 525389, 3716878; 525375, 3716878; 525372, 3716871; and 
excluding land bounded by 525434, 3716924; 525433, 3716924; 525433, 
3716924; 525432, 3716923; 525432, 3716923; 525431, 3716923; 525431, 
3716923; 525430, 3716922; 525430, 3716922; 525429, 3716922; 525429, 
3716921; 525428, 3716921; 525428, 3716921; 525427, 3716921; 525427, 
3716920; 525426, 3716920; 525426, 3716920; 525425, 3716919; 525425, 
3716919; 525424, 3716919; 525424, 3716918; 525423, 3716918; 525423, 
3716918; 525422, 3716918; 525422, 3716917; 525421, 3716917; 525421, 
3716917; 525420, 3716916; 525420, 3716916; 525419, 3716916; 525419, 
3716915; 525418, 3716915; 525418, 3716915; 525417, 3716915; 525417, 
3716914; 525416, 3716914; 525416, 3716914; 525415, 3716913; 525415, 
3716913; 525414, 3716913; 525414, 3716912; 525413, 3716912; 525413, 
3716912; 525412, 3716911; 525412, 3716911; 525412, 3716911; 525411,

[[Page 436]]

3716910; 525411, 3716910; 525410, 3716910; 525410, 3716909; 525409, 
3716909; 525409, 3716909; 525408, 3716908; 525408, 3716908; 525407, 
3716908; 525407, 3716907; 525406, 3716907; 525406, 3716907; 525405, 
3716906; 525405, 3716906; 525405, 3716906; 525404, 3716905; 525404, 
3716905; 525403, 3716905; 525403, 3716904; 525402, 3716904; 525402, 
3716904; 525402, 3716885; 525419, 3716876; 525435, 3716876; 525471, 
3716881; 525472, 3716881; 525473, 3716881; 525473, 3716881; 525474, 
3716881; 525474, 3716881; 525475, 3716881; 525476, 3716880; 525476, 
3716880; 525477, 3716880; 525477, 3716880; 525478, 3716879; 525478, 
3716879; 525479, 3716879; 525479, 3716879; 525480, 3716878; 525480, 
3716878; 525481, 3716877; 525481, 3716877; 525482, 3716877; 525482, 
3716876; 525483, 3716876; 525483, 3716875; 525483, 3716875; 525484, 
3716874; 525484, 3716874; 525485, 3716873; 525485, 3716873; 525485, 
3716872; 525486, 3716872; 525486, 3716871; 525486, 3716871; 525486, 
3716870; 525487, 3716870; 525487, 3716869; 525487, 3716868; 525487, 
3716868; 525487, 3716867; 525487, 3716867; 525715, 3716858; 526066, 
3716845; 526065, 3716845; 526061, 3716847; 526061, 3716847; 526057, 
3716849; 526057, 3716849; 526052, 3716850; 526052, 3716850; 526048, 
3716852; 526048, 3716852; 526044, 3716854; 526044, 3716854; 526039, 
3716856; 526039, 3716856; 526035, 3716858; 526035, 3716858; 526031, 
3716860; 526031, 3716860; 526027, 3716862; 526027, 3716863; 526023, 
3716865; 526022, 3716865; 526019, 3716867; 526018, 3716867; 526014, 
3716869; 526014, 3716870; 526010, 3716872; 526010, 3716872; 526007, 
3716875; 526006, 3716875; 526003, 3716877; 526002, 3716877; 525999, 
3716880; 525999, 3716880; 525995, 3716883; 525995, 3716883; 525991, 
3716885; 525991, 3716886; 525987, 3716888; 525987, 3716888; 525984, 
3716891; 525984, 3716891; 525980, 3716894; 525980, 3716894; 525977, 
3716897; 525976, 3716897; 525973, 3716901; 525973, 3716901; 525970, 
3716904; 525969, 3716904; 525966, 3716907; 525966, 3716907; 525963, 
3716910; 525963, 3716910; 525960, 3716914; 525959, 3716914; 525956, 
3716917; 525956, 3716917; 525953, 3716921; 525953, 3716921; 525950, 
3716924; 525950, 3716924; 525947, 3716928; 525947, 3716928; 525944, 
3716931; 525944, 3716932; 525941, 3716935; 525941, 3716935; 525938, 
3716939; 525938, 3716939; 525935, 3716943; 525935, 3716943; 525933, 
3716947; 525933, 3716947; 525930, 3716951; 525930, 3716951; 525927, 
3716954; 525927, 3716955; 525925, 3716958; 525925, 3716959; 525923, 
3716962; 525922, 3716963; 525920, 3716967; 525920, 3716967; 525918, 
3716971; 525918, 3716971; 525916, 3716975; 525916, 3716975; 525914, 
3716978; 525912, 3716981; 525909, 3716985; 525906, 3716989; 525902, 
3716992; 525899, 3716996; 525896, 3716999; 525892, 3717003; 525889, 
3717006; 525886, 3717010; 525882, 3717013; 525878, 3717016; 525875, 
3717019; 525871, 3717023; 525867, 3717026; 525863, 3717029; 525860, 
3717031; 525856, 3717034; 525852, 3717037; 525848, 3717040; 525844, 
3717042; 525840, 3717045; 525835, 3717047; 525831, 3717050; 525827, 
3717052; 525823, 3717055; 525818, 3717057; 525814, 3717059; 525810, 
3717061; 525805, 3717063; 525801, 3717065; 525796, 3717067; 525792, 
3717068; 525787, 3717070; 525783, 3717072; 525778, 3717073; 525773, 
3717074; 525769, 3717076; 525764, 3717077; 525759, 3717078; 525755, 
3717079; 525750, 3717080; 525745, 3717081; 525740, 3717082; 525736, 
3717083; 525731, 3717083; 525724, 3717084; 525612, 3717098; 525596, 
3717085; 525595, 3717076; 525595, 3717075; 525594, 3717074; 525594, 
3717073; 525594, 3717073; 525594, 3717072; 525593, 3717071; 525593, 
3717071; 525593, 3717070; 525593, 3717069; 525592, 3717069; 525592, 
3717068; 525592, 3717068; 525592, 3717067; 525592, 3717066; 525591, 
3717066; 525591, 3717065; 525591, 3717065; 525591, 3717064; 525590, 
3717063; 525590, 3717063; 525590, 3717062; 525590, 3717062; 525589, 
3717061; 525589, 3717060; 525589, 3717060; 525589, 3717059; 525588, 
3717059; 525588, 3717058; 525588, 3717057; 525588, 3717057; 525587, 
3717056; 525587, 3717056; 525587, 3717055; 525587, 3717055; 525586, 
3717054; 525586, 3717053; 525586, 3717053; 525585, 3717052; 525585, 
3717052; 525585, 3717051; 525585, 3717050; 525584, 3717050; 525584, 
3717049; 525584, 3717049; 525583, 3717048; 525583, 3717047; 525583, 
3717047; 525583, 3717046; 525582, 3717046; 525582, 3717045; 525582, 
3717045; 525581, 3717044; 525581, 3717043; 525581, 3717043; 525581, 
3717042; 525580, 3717042; 525580, 3717041; 525580, 3717041; 525579, 
3717040; 525579, 3717039; 525579, 3717039; 525578, 3717038; 525578, 
3717038; 525578, 3717037; 525577, 3717037; 525577, 3717036; 525577, 
3717036; 525576, 3717035; 525576, 3717034; 525576, 3717034; 525575, 
3717033; 525575, 3717033; 525575, 3717032; 525574, 3717032; 525574, 
3717031; 525574, 3717031; 525573, 3717030; 525573, 3717029; 525573, 
3717029; 525572, 3717028; 525572, 3717028; 525572, 3717027; 525571, 
3717027; 525571, 3717026; 525571, 3717026; 525570, 3717025; 525570, 
3717024; 525570, 3717024; 525569, 3717023; 525569, 3717023; 525569, 
3717022; 525568, 3717022; 525568, 3717021; 525567, 3717021; 525567, 
3717020; 525567, 3717020; 525566, 3717019; 525566, 3717019; 525566, 
3717018; 525565, 3717018; 525565, 3717017; 525564, 3717016; 525564, 
3717016; 525564, 3717015; 525563, 3717015; 525563, 3717014; 525563, 
3717014; 525562, 3717013; 525562, 3717013; 525561, 3717012; 525561, 
3717012; 525561, 3717011; 525560, 3717011; 525560, 3717010; 525559, 
3717010; 525559, 3717009; 525559, 3717009; 525558, 3717008; 525558, 
3717008; 525557, 3717007; 525557, 3717007; 525557, 3717006; 525556, 
3717006; 525556, 3717005; 525555, 3717005; 525555, 3717004; 525555, 
3717004; 525554, 3717003; 525554, 3717003; 525553, 3717002; 525553, 
3717002; 525553, 3717001; 525552, 3717001; 525552, 3717000; 525551, 
3717000; 525551, 3716999; 525550, 3716999; 525550, 3716998; 525550, 
3716998; 525549, 3716997; 525549, 3716997; 525548, 3716996; 525548, 
3716996; 525547, 3716995; 525547, 3716995; 525547, 3716994; 525546, 
3716994; 525546, 3716993; 525545, 3716993; 525545, 3716992; 525544, 
3716992; 525544, 3716992; 525543, 3716991; 525543, 3716991; 525542, 
3716990; 525542, 3716990; 525542, 3716989; 525541, 3716989; 525541, 
3716988; 525540, 3716988; 525540, 3716987; 525539, 3716987; 525539, 
3716986; 525538, 3716986; 525538, 3716986; 525537, 3716985; 525537, 
3716985; 525537, 3716984; 525536, 3716984; 525536, 3716983; 525535, 
3716983; 525535, 3716982; 525534, 3716982; 525534, 3716982; 525533, 
3716981; 525533, 3716981; 525532, 3716980; 525532, 3716980; 525531, 
3716979; 525531, 3716979; 525530, 3716979; 525530, 3716978; 525529, 
3716978; 525529, 3716977; 525528, 3716977; 525528, 3716976; 525527, 
3716976; 525527, 3716976; 525526, 3716975; 525526, 3716975; 525525, 
3716974; 525525, 3716974; 525524, 3716974; 525524, 3716973; 525523, 
3716973; 525523, 3716972; 525522, 3716972; 525522, 3716971; 525521, 
3716971; 525521, 3716971; 525520,

[[Page 437]]

3716970; 525520, 3716970; 525519, 3716969; 525519, 3716969; 525518, 
3716969; 525518, 3716968; 525517, 3716968; 525517, 3716967; 525516, 
3716967; 525516, 3716967; 525515, 3716966; 525515, 3716966; 525514, 
3716966; 525514, 3716965; 525513, 3716965; 525513, 3716964; 525512, 
3716964; 525512, 3716964; 525511, 3716963; 525510, 3716963; 525510, 
3716963; 525509, 3716962; 525509, 3716962; 525508, 3716961; 525508, 
3716961; 525507, 3716961; 525507, 3716960; 525506, 3716960; 525506, 
3716960; 525505, 3716959; 525505, 3716959; 525504, 3716959; 525504, 
3716958; 525503, 3716958; 525502, 3716957; 525502, 3716957; 525501, 
3716957; 525501, 3716956; 525500, 3716956; 525500, 3716956; 525499, 
3716955; 525499, 3716955; 525498, 3716955; 525498, 3716954; 525497, 
3716954; 525496, 3716954; 525496, 3716953; 525495, 3716953; 525495, 
3716953; 525494, 3716952; 525494, 3716952; 525493, 3716952; 525492, 
3716951; 525492, 3716951; 525491, 3716951; 525491, 3716950; 525490, 
3716950; 525490, 3716950; 525489, 3716950; 525489, 3716949; 525488, 
3716949; 525487, 3716949; 525487, 3716948; 525486, 3716948; 525486, 
3716948; 525485, 3716947; 525485, 3716947; 525484, 3716947; 525483, 
3716946; 525483, 3716946; 525482, 3716946; 525482, 3716946; 525481, 
3716945; 525480, 3716945; 525480, 3716945; 525479, 3716944; 525479, 
3716944; 525478, 3716944; 525478, 3716944; 525477, 3716943; 525476, 
3716943; 525476, 3716943; 525475, 3716943; 525475, 3716942; 525474, 
3716942; 525473, 3716942; 525473, 3716941; 525472, 3716941; 525472, 
3716941; 525471, 3716941; 525471, 3716940; 525470, 3716940; 525469, 
3716940; 525469, 3716940; 525468, 3716939; 525468, 3716939; 525467, 
3716939; 525466, 3716939; 525466, 3716938; 525465, 3716938; 525465, 
3716938; 525464, 3716938; 525463, 3716937; 525463, 3716937; 525462, 
3716937; 525462, 3716937; 525461, 3716936; 525460, 3716936; 525460, 
3716936; 525459, 3716936; 525458, 3716936; 525458, 3716935; 525457, 
3716935; 525457, 3716935; 525456, 3716935; 525456, 3716935; 525455, 
3716934; 525455, 3716934; 525454, 3716934; 525454, 3716934; 525453, 
3716934; 525453, 3716933; 525452, 3716933; 525452, 3716933; 525451, 
3716933; 525451, 3716932; 525450, 3716932; 525450, 3716932; 525449, 
3716932; 525449, 3716931; 525448, 3716931; 525448, 3716931; 525447, 
3716931; 525446, 3716931; 525446, 3716930; 525445, 3716930; 525445, 
3716930; 525444, 3716930; 525444, 3716929; 525443, 3716929; 525443, 
3716929; 525442, 3716929; 525442, 3716928; 525441, 3716928; 525441, 
3716928; 525440, 3716928; 525440, 3716927; 525439, 3716927; 525439, 
3716927; 525438, 3716927; 525438, 3716926; 525437, 3716926; 525437, 
3716926; 525436, 3716926; 525436, 3716925; 525435, 3716925; 525435, 
3716925; and excluding land bounded by 526091, 3716237; 526123, 3716234; 
526132, 3716233; 526136, 3716233; 526136, 3716292; 526136, 3716423; 
526136, 3716548; 526166, 3716550; 526362, 3716559; 526366, 3716559; 
526374, 3716741; 526380, 3716866; 526386, 3716992; 526278, 3716986; 
526183, 3717080; 526131, 3717037; 526131, 3717037; 526125, 3717031; 
526122, 3716959; 526119, 3716866; 526118, 3716843; 526104, 3716453; 
525716, 3716463; 525596, 3716466; 525300, 3716473; 525291, 3716474; 
525289, 3716474; 525223, 3716474; 525115, 3716474; 525115, 3716382; 
525115, 3716378; 525076, 3716378; 525084, 3716279; 524986, 3716282; 
524885, 3716286; 524875, 3716286; 524875, 3716101; 524875, 3716084; 
524875, 3716082; 525714, 3716048; 525704, 3716201; 525927, 3716254; and 
excluding land bounded by 525777, 3717434; 526121, 3717419; 526120, 
3717641; 525770, 3717647.
    (ii) Note: Unit 7 (Bautista) for the Quino checkerspot butterfly is 
depicted on the map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (8) Unit 8: Otay Unit, San Diego County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Jamul Mountains, Dulzura, Otay 
Mesa, Otay Mountain, and Tecate. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 505693, 3606447; 505703, 3606427; 505702, 3606427; 
505702, 3606426; 505693, 3606046; 505691, 3605963; 505687, 3605768; 
505677, 3605363; 505668, 3604969; 505635, 3604959; 505560, 3604935; 
505239, 3604836; 505150, 3604808; 505147, 3604807; 505125, 3604572; 
505124, 3604564; 504912, 3604574; 504650, 3604587; 504549, 3604707; 
504464, 3604807; 503596, 3604788; 503441, 3604784; 503423, 3604784; 
502983, 3604518; 502810, 3604205; 502732, 3604207; 502715, 3605000; 
502151, 3605003; 502141, 3605216; 502141, 3605222; 502335, 3605289; 
502913, 3605488; 502919, 3605481; 502922, 3605478; 503260, 3605591; 
503260, 3605593; 503257, 3605604; 503255, 3605606; 503274, 3605613; 
503537, 3605704; 503545, 3605706; 503856, 3605814; 503909, 3605832; 
503935, 3605840; 504176, 3605924; 504337, 3605979; 504546, 3606052; 
504617, 3606076; 504799, 3606141; 505139, 3606262; 505378, 3606338; 
505594, 3606413; 505692, 3606446; 505693, 3606447; thence returning to 
505693, 3606447. Continue to 506421, 3607499; 506490, 3607502; 506512, 
3607503; 506510, 3607549; 506510, 3607549; 506489, 3607885; 506564, 
3607917; 506564, 3607917; 506776, 3608010; 506859, 3608047; 506976, 
3608221; 507010, 3608271; 507025, 3608294; 507168, 3608518; 507452, 
3608739; 507453, 3608758; 507569, 3608830; 507852, 3608932; 507977, 
3608971; 508040, 3609097; 508040, 3609363; 508199, 3609449; 508324, 
3609517; 508518, 3609622; 508714, 3609755; 508740, 3609897; 508745, 
3609928; 508824, 3610006; 508996, 3610006; 509114, 3610061; 509177, 
3610137; 509190, 3610152; 509192, 3610155; 509333, 3610179; 509420, 
3610202; 509490, 3610163; 509537, 3610108; 509537, 3610202; 509553, 
3610351; 509725, 3610390; 509984, 3610508; 510011, 3610531; 510039, 
3610555; 510149, 3610563; 510305, 3610500; 510517, 3610469; 510666, 
3610508; 510713, 3610641; 510792, 3610822; 510828, 3610885; 510909, 
3611025; 510930, 3611061; 511066, 3611284; 511301, 3611402; 511497, 
3611417; 511497, 3611226; 511497, 3611221; 511676, 3611260; 511787, 
3611284; 512102, 3611553; 512218, 3611653; 512210, 3611672; 512171, 
3611755; 512265, 3612060; 512273, 3612311; 512352, 3612421; 512508, 
3612507; 512610, 3612531; 512691, 3612505; 512759, 3612484; 512785, 
3612488; 512844, 3612496; 512872, 3612501; 512916, 3612507; 513018, 
3612593; 513049, 3612664; 513144, 3612719; 513261, 3612742; 513266, 
3612803; 513267, 3612819; 513269, 3612844; 513295, 3612845; 513313, 
3612846; 513418, 3612851; 513457, 3612852; 513567, 3612758; 513567, 
3612664; 513567, 3612523; 513620, 3612383; 513653, 3612295; 513880, 
3612084; 513953, 3612024; 514096, 3611906; 514147, 3611864; 514249, 
3611966; 514177, 3611992; 514163, 3611998; 514139, 3612068; 513990, 
3612209; 513888, 3612217; 513786, 3612350; 513763, 3612499; 513810, 
3612617;

[[Page 438]]

513833, 3612627; 513935, 3612672; 514006, 3612774; 514147, 3612876; 
514148, 3612877; 514232, 3612971; 514280, 3613025; 514335, 3613158; 
514406, 3613236; 514471, 3613282; 514539, 3613330; 514546, 3613351; 
514552, 3613367; 514610, 3613526; 514798, 3613636; 514939, 3613730; 
515036, 3613762; 515127, 3613793; 515179, 3613793; 515192, 3613793; 
515292, 3613793; 515354, 3613848; 515235, 3613960; 515225, 3613970; 
515221, 3613973; 515228, 3613982; 515252, 3614011; 515292, 3614059; 
515297, 3614078; 515307, 3614110; 515322, 3614162; 515331, 3614193; 
515389, 3614212; 515410, 3614219; 515519, 3614255; 515707, 3614342; 
515935, 3614420; 516107, 3614428; 516264, 3614420; 516405, 3614420; 
516562, 3614420; 516686, 3614366; 516687, 3614365; 516716, 3614316; 
516746, 3614265; 516797, 3614177; 516837, 3614113; 516853, 3614086; 
516860, 3614075; 516861, 3614075; 516945, 3614047; 516977, 3614036; 
517103, 3614036; 517346, 3614028; 517487, 3613942; 517491, 3613951; 
517496, 3613962; 517496, 3613962; 517498, 3613967; 517565, 3614114; 
517565, 3614271; 517518, 3614451; 517377, 3614436; 517197, 3614451; 
517024, 3614404; 516899, 3614467; 516711, 3614530; 516687, 3614544; 
516475, 3614671; 516409, 3614712; 516391, 3614722; 516370, 3614735; 
516347, 3614749; 516309, 3614772; 516281, 3614789; 516256, 3614804; 
515982, 3614812; 515903, 3614828; 515793, 3614867; 515648, 3614946; 
515605, 3614969; 515480, 3615118; 515413, 3615147; 515370, 3615165; 
515369, 3615155; 515354, 3615024; 515322, 3614927; 515315, 3614906; 
515221, 3614843; 515237, 3614734; 515307, 3614593; 515323, 3614451; 
515252, 3614279; 515158, 3614224; 515043, 3614170; 515041, 3614169; 
515020, 3614135; 514994, 3614091; 514923, 3614005; 514839, 3613953; 
514781, 3613916; 514759, 3613903; 514737, 3613812; 514737, 3613811; 
514727, 3613769; 514637, 3613726; 514580, 3613699; 514563, 3613691; 
514536, 3613673; 514414, 3613589; 514312, 3613495; 514218, 3613370; 
514188, 3613266; 514177, 3613225; 514163, 3613174; 514100, 3613056; 
514022, 3613017; 513928, 3612938; 513818, 3612821; 513801, 3612835; 
513783, 3612852; 513747, 3612883; 513637, 3613025; 513583, 3613059; 
513490, 3613118; 513488, 3613119; 513421, 3613141; 513371, 3613158; 
513366, 3613135; 513347, 3613056; 513285, 3612993; 513120, 3613072; 
513034, 3612931; 512900, 3612907; 512806, 3612852; 512704, 3612695; 
512553, 3612659; 512540, 3612656; 512391, 3612570; 512226, 3612531; 
512140, 3612413; 512124, 3612295; 512148, 3612123; 512116, 3611958; 
512044, 3611864; 512038, 3611856; 512037, 3611856; 511981, 3611841; 
511930, 3611826; 511842, 3611802; 511764, 3611668; 511682, 3611550; 
511677, 3611543; 511513, 3611551; 511262, 3611512; 511121, 3611425; 
510870, 3611253; 510827, 3611065; 510827, 3611062; 510815, 3611010; 
510799, 3610997; 510643, 3610869; 510509, 3610845; 510376, 3610900; 
510334, 3610910; 510236, 3610934; 510180, 3610947; 510101, 3610938; 
509976, 3610924; 509929, 3610918; 509906, 3610916; 509608, 3610767; 
509563, 3610759; 509562, 3610759; 509294, 3610712; 508996, 3610712; 
508800, 3610775; 508773, 3610776; 508675, 3610783; 508637, 3610786; 
508581, 3610790; 508564, 3610802; 508385, 3610931; 508369, 3611080; 
508361, 3611159; 508354, 3611160; 508344, 3611162; 508226, 3611186; 
508126, 3611206; 508079, 3611300; 508094, 3611508; 508095, 3611512; 
507961, 3611676; 507679, 3611786; 507350, 3611778; 507136, 3611739; 
507067, 3611726; 507052, 3611723; 506926, 3611943; 506853, 3612078; 
506774, 3612225; 506770, 3612233; 506683, 3612319; 506527, 3612374; 
506370, 3612609; 506363, 3612643; 506357, 3612669; 506346, 3612719; 
506354, 3612797; 506383, 3612873; 506346, 3612867; 506269, 3612995; 
506217, 3613021; 506166, 3613008; 506094, 3613153; 506050, 3613240; 
506054, 3613375; 506054, 3613388; 506058, 3613539; 506063, 3613717; 
506075, 3613744; 506153, 3613914; 506176, 3613964; 506269, 3614165; 
506282, 3614194; 506326, 3614368; 506360, 3614505; 506427, 3614773; 
506437, 3614812; 506449, 3615804; 506449, 3615986; 506449, 3615998; 
506617, 3616036; 506765, 3616066; 507068, 3616127; 507175, 3616245; 
507215, 3616290; 507300, 3616384; 507442, 3616642; 507472, 3616667; 
507738, 3616887; 507686, 3617093; 507738, 3617389; 507825, 3617489; 
507918, 3617596; 507934, 3617618; 508086, 3617840; 508315, 3617902; 
508421, 3617931; 508726, 3617837; 508923, 3617776; 509132, 3617601; 
509478, 3617312; 509563, 3617128; 509748, 3616732; 509779, 3616310; 
509813, 3615856; 509392, 3615485; 509271, 3615379; 509234, 3615102; 
509184, 3614742; 509155, 3614529; 509236, 3614331; 509401, 3613929; 
509461, 3613782; 509571, 3613835; 509579, 3613838; 509813, 3613727; 
509982, 3613676; 510097, 3613641; 510615, 3613752; 510972, 3613542; 
511465, 3613197; 511580, 3613165; 511711, 3613129; 511838, 3613094; 
511884, 3613081; 511909, 3613074; 511954, 3613137; 512144, 3613407; 
512183, 3613549; 512214, 3613664; 512279, 3613900; 512345, 3613974; 
512575, 3614233; 512579, 3614376; 512588, 3614689; 512574, 3614758; 
512501, 3615146; 512378, 3615158; 512588, 3615441; 512711, 3615565; 
512945, 3615799; 513026, 3615830; 513204, 3615898; 513401, 3615676; 
513447, 3615669; 513512, 3615659; 513765, 3615620; 513871, 3615620; 
513890, 3615620; 513907, 3615634; 514157, 3615839; 514190, 3615994; 
514215, 3616189; 514286, 3616328; 514299, 3616355; 514300, 3616356; 
514188, 3616418; 514111, 3616472; 514046, 3616517; 513875, 3616716; 
513840, 3616758; 513526, 3617123; 513365, 3617321; 513236, 3617480; 
513229, 3617488; 513293, 3617543; 513417, 3617650; 513458, 3617686; 
513526, 3617695; 513786, 3617729; 513897, 3617788; 513928, 3617804; 
513945, 3617803; 514207, 3617798; 514893, 3617785; 514900, 3617785; 
515006, 3617796; 515058, 3617801; 515165, 3617812; 515236, 3617819; 
515478, 3617844; 515630, 3617859; 515611, 3618107; 515481, 3618107; 
515438, 3618107; 515482, 3618290; 515544, 3618554; 515611, 3618837; 
515605, 3618955; 515593, 3619214; 515528, 3619360; 515478, 3619473; 
515450, 3619536; 515478, 3619550; 515541, 3619583; 515679, 3619654; 
515772, 3619658; 515872, 3619662; 516094, 3619672; 516178, 3619572; 
516230, 3619510; 516354, 3619363; 516425, 3619358; 516661, 3619344; 
516663, 3619344; 517047, 3619350; 517124, 3619367; 517210, 3619385; 
517337, 3619412; 517334, 3619334; 517329, 3619217; 517319, 3618961; 
517571, 3618934; 517757, 3618937; 517982, 3618940; 518000, 3618925; 
518000, 3618875; 518012, 3618865; 518045, 3618837; 518090, 3618817; 
518100, 3618795; 518108, 3618778; 518121, 3618751; 518169, 3618720; 
518234, 3618738; 518243, 3618756; 518252, 3618771; 518306, 3618751; 
518445, 3618664; 518451, 3618660; 518458, 3618544; 518463, 3618469; 
518231, 3618151; 518231, 3618151; 518187, 3618129; 518103, 3617942; 
518229, 3617848; 518229, 3617766; 518232, 3617753; 518303, 3617445; 
518430, 3617371; 518451, 3617359; 518685, 3617100; 518661, 3616792; 
518661, 3616582; 518664, 3616578; 518833, 3616360; 519129, 3616225; 
519232, 3616173; 519425, 3616077;

[[Page 439]]

519610, 3616089; 519795, 3616184; 519850, 3616212; 520042, 3616311; 
520216, 3616298; 520237, 3616289; 520308, 3616194; 520313, 3616187; 
520364, 3616142; 520422, 3616027; 520537, 3615912; 520556, 3615822; 
520556, 3615804; 520556, 3615669; 520563, 3615490; 520581, 3615472; 
520646, 3615406; 520646, 3615406; 520665, 3615323; 520627, 3615272; 
520590, 3615249; 520544, 3615221; 520460, 3615112; 520358, 3615080; 
520269, 3614984; 520246, 3614963; 520166, 3614888; 520083, 3614735; 
519981, 3614619; 519891, 3614543; 519880, 3614539; 519821, 3614517; 
519674, 3614524; 519610, 3614485; 519622, 3614402; 519712, 3614319; 
519643, 3614219; 519642, 3614216; 519386, 3614216; 519386, 3614219; 
519405, 3614383; 519285, 3614385; 519148, 3614387; 519034, 3614389; 
519028, 3614285; 519027, 3614262; 519021, 3614159; 519122, 3614154; 
519149, 3614152; 519148, 3614093; 519143, 3613551; 519166, 3613553; 
519253, 3613560; 519349, 3613567; 519392, 3613570; 519447, 3613531; 
519501, 3613493; 519532, 3613370; 519539, 3613340; 519533, 3613270; 
519528, 3613264; 519469, 3613193; 519398, 3613116; 519290, 3613026; 
519304, 3613009; 519315, 3612994; 519374, 3612994; 519386, 3612994; 
519394, 3612990; 519437, 3612969; 519522, 3612849; 519533, 3612835; 
519622, 3612822; 519680, 3612854; 519744, 3612879; 519750, 3612869; 
519802, 3612777; 519816, 3612712; 519827, 3612662; 519895, 3612614; 
519921, 3612595; 519947, 3612552; 519962, 3612526; 519999, 3612465; 
520035, 3612405; 520085, 3612322; 520188, 3612073; 520193, 3612060; 
520233, 3611964; 520277, 3611901; 520294, 3611876; 520360, 3611781; 
520392, 3611736; 520405, 3611716; 520430, 3611680; 520455, 3611471; 
520559, 3611311; 520640, 3611187; 520686, 3611192; 520899, 3611212; 
521086, 3611255; 521219, 3611286; 521276, 3611358; 521332, 3611382; 
521379, 3611376; 521427, 3611360; 521473, 3611356; 521502, 3611354; 
521619, 3611301; 521669, 3611290; 521760, 3611257; 521773, 3611251; 
521827, 3611224; 521833, 3611173; 521869, 3611162; 521933, 3611109; 
521952, 3611059; 521950, 3611026; 521983, 3611026; 522008, 3610962; 
522002, 3610909; 521922, 3610915; 521925, 3610905; 521938, 3610856; 
521994, 3610865; 521992, 3610842; 521983, 3610767; 522005, 3610678; 
522066, 3610623; 522089, 3610542; 522086, 3610499; 522086, 3610489; 
522032, 3610498; 522005, 3610503; 522000, 3610498; 521983, 3610481; 
521938, 3610489; 521937, 3610478; 521933, 3610425; 521899, 3610436; 
521714, 3610428; 521710, 3610428; 521699, 3610219; 521713, 3610183; 
521728, 3610183; 521778, 3610181; 521801, 3610181; 521813, 3610180; 
521809, 3610177; 521766, 3610133; 521705, 3610125; 521676, 3610087; 
521632, 3610030; 521524, 3609777; 521505, 3609759; 521488, 3609744; 
521477, 3609719; 521469, 3609701; 521454, 3609669; 521452, 3609613; 
521463, 3609521; 521463, 3609396; 521457, 3609341; 521452, 3609293; 
521470, 3609254; 521474, 3609246; 521478, 3608968; 521480, 3608854; 
521447, 3608850; 521393, 3608843; 521393, 3608793; 521413, 3608717; 
521418, 3608695; 521454, 3608676; 521491, 3608590; 521499, 3608523; 
521500, 3608522; 521559, 3608438; 521566, 3608428; 521619, 3608395; 
521691, 3608348; 521752, 3608309; 521758, 3608306; 521759, 3608301; 
521769, 3608247; 521776, 3608196; 521777, 3608189; 521777, 3608181; 
521774, 3608092; 521758, 3608019; 521713, 3607983; 521660, 3607967; 
521566, 3607975; 521557, 3608025; 521613, 3608092; 521474, 3608122; 
521491, 3608067; 521418, 3607914; 521251, 3607978; 521229, 3607922; 
521146, 3607936; 521137, 3607903; 521087, 3607908; 521086, 3607904; 
521073, 3607852; 521123, 3607833; 521146, 3607823; 521193, 3607802; 
521257, 3607772; 521327, 3607752; 521368, 3607752; 521385, 3607722; 
521407, 3607702; 521482, 3607691; 521482, 3607585; 521515, 3607583; 
521533, 3607581; 521552, 3607580; 521557, 3607700; 521558, 3607701; 
521577, 3607789; 521584, 3607796; 521645, 3607867; 521652, 3607875; 
521678, 3607895; 521730, 3607936; 521730, 3607936; 521797, 3607928; 
521866, 3607944; 521911, 3607967; 521914, 3607966; 521944, 3607961; 
522005, 3607947; 522083, 3607925; 522125, 3607916; 522161, 3607903; 
522208, 3607900; 522269, 3607894; 522320, 3607894; 522322, 3607894; 
522406, 3607889; 522500, 3607908; 522561, 3607883; 522586, 3607862; 
522600, 3607850; 522659, 3607844; 522728, 3607844; 522756, 3607847; 
522762, 3607853; 522765, 3607857; 522790, 3607883; 522842, 3607894; 
522887, 3607880; 522910, 3607879; 523001, 3607872; 523011, 3607872; 
523020, 3607872; 523077, 3607872; 523082, 3607872; 523122, 3607900; 
523146, 3607916; 523184, 3607935; 523213, 3607936; 523482, 3607950; 
523517, 3607944; 523877, 3607876; 523877, 3607682; 523877, 3607679; 
523766, 3607383; 523766, 3607278; 523766, 3607136; 523824, 3606885; 
523852, 3606766; 523803, 3606520; 523921, 3606493; 524081, 3606456; 
524234, 3606421; 524481, 3606347; 524690, 3606220; 524765, 3606175; 
524765, 3606016; 524765, 3605928; 524683, 3605828; 524543, 3605657; 
524530, 3605361; 524650, 3605138; 524671, 3605101; 524777, 3604904; 
525282, 3604806; 525578, 3604806; 526035, 3604695; 526230, 3604670; 
526516, 3604633; 526910, 3604411; 527231, 3604029; 527255, 3603647; 
526225, 3603542; 524690, 3603385; 524297, 3603345; 523949, 3603310; 
523903, 3603328; 523826, 3603359; 523716, 3603410; 523605, 3603418; 
523436, 3603359; 523266, 3603322; 523106, 3603322; 523097, 3603322; 
522942, 3603314; 522817, 3603233; 522669, 3603241; 522603, 3603263; 
522456, 3603300; 522213, 3603336; 522043, 3603359; 521851, 3603329; 
521586, 3603373; 521484, 3603416; 521409, 3603447; 521345, 3603523; 
521328, 3603543; 521122, 3603565; 520975, 3603646; 520739, 3603720; 
520709, 3603808; 520677, 3603808; 520628, 3603808; 520540, 3603712; 
520400, 3603543; 520334, 3603432; 520334, 3603410; 520334, 3603300; 
520385, 3603115; 520385, 3603114; 520385, 3603113; 520464, 3603111; 
520464, 3603113; 520474, 3603233; 520584, 3603292; 520761, 3603381; 
520953, 3603432; 521100, 3603395; 521196, 3603336; 521321, 3603189; 
521439, 3603138; 521490, 3603117; 521606, 3603071; 521491, 3603059; 
520456, 3602953; 520365, 3602944; 520029, 3602910; 519965, 3602946; 
519875, 3602981; 519759, 3603027; 519509, 3603020; 519398, 3603049; 
519317, 3603182; 519221, 3603292; 519182, 3603349; 519155, 3603388; 
519140, 3603491; 519133, 3603587; 519079, 3603707; 519185, 3603751; 
519567, 3603838; 519740, 3604109; 519866, 3604132; 520085, 3604171; 
520274, 3604282; 520295, 3604294; 520295, 3604553; 520272, 3604567; 
520011, 3604726; 519849, 3604862; 519616, 3605059; 519843, 3605118; 
520085, 3605182; 520086, 3605197; 520140, 3605842; 520155, 3605855; 
520275, 3606158; 520282, 3606387; 520231, 3606578; 520105, 3606689; 
519958, 3606814; 519910, 3606867; 519828, 3606956; 519789, 3606998; 
519663, 3607212; 519612, 3607448; 519612, 3607683; 519634, 3607809; 
519744, 3608030; 519832, 3608198; 519847, 3608229; 519870, 3608347; 
519865, 3608495; 519862, 3608604; 519833, 3608645; 519796, 3608697; 
519783, 3608702; 519441, 3608846;

[[Page 440]]

519253, 3608924; 519089, 3608934; 519050, 3609038; 518903, 3609193; 
518903, 3609321; 518903, 3609331; 518920, 3609478; 518936, 3609609; 
518830, 3609666; 518749, 3609690; 518724, 3609690; 518664, 3609617; 
518651, 3609601; 518561, 3609584; 518504, 3609690; 518439, 3609764; 
518341, 3609837; 518264, 3609849; 518178, 3609861; 518047, 3609764; 
517933, 3609698; 517786, 3609723; 517705, 3609804; 517566, 3609861; 
517509, 3609919; 517436, 3609992; 517370, 3610049; 517352, 3610083; 
517305, 3610171; 517150, 3610277; 516946, 3610343; 516710, 3610326; 
516660, 3610326; 516555, 3610326; 516473, 3610351; 516482, 3610473; 
516473, 3610579; 516514, 3610734; 516596, 3610791; 516571, 3610864; 
516490, 3611028; 516433, 3611240; 516433, 3611313; 516367, 3611427; 
516270, 3611460; 516188, 3611460; 516074, 3611525; 515878, 3611533; 
515826, 3611533; 515770, 3611533; 515584, 3611582; 515263, 3611582; 
515167, 3611555; 515092, 3611611; 515087, 3611615; 514997, 3611634; 
514932, 3611647; 514810, 3611696; 514688, 3611753; 514590, 3611770; 
514508, 3611639; 514440, 3611602; 514418, 3611590; 514263, 3611566; 
514141, 3611419; 513970, 3611354; 513774, 3611174; 513766, 3611052; 
513766, 3610954; 513760, 3610898; 513660, 3610830; 513636, 3610721; 
513574, 3610447; 513417, 3610447; 513216, 3610447; 512859, 3610238; 
512575, 3609966; 512608, 3609861; 512723, 3609486; 512255, 3609486; 
512057, 3609424; 511687, 3609288; 511661, 3609247; 511515, 3609017; 
511515, 3608758; 511626, 3608413; 511665, 3608355; 511733, 3608254; 
511835, 3608104; 511659, 3607857; 511589, 3607759; 511239, 3607768; 
511108, 3607771; 510454, 3607845; 510023, 3608043; 509996, 3608030; 
509560, 3607827; 509708, 3607543; 509814, 3607452; 509979, 3607309; 
510004, 3607259; 510115, 3607038; 510312, 3606766; 510300, 3606629; 
510288, 3606483; 510522, 3606199; 510732, 3606027; 510584, 3605755; 
510670, 3605484; 510769, 3605213; 510892, 3605077; 510898, 3605077; 
510933, 3605028; 511000, 3604987; 511089, 3604934; 511191, 3604871; 
511191, 3604777; 511207, 3604746; 511325, 3604730; 511427, 3604691; 
511591, 3604542; 511623, 3604416; 511656, 3604360; 511595, 3604177; 
511690, 3604061; 511829, 3603893; 511989, 3603560; 512187, 3603474; 
512433, 3603412; 512483, 3603178; 512483, 3602808; 512544, 3602549; 
512882, 3602163; 511729, 3602052; 511703, 3602049; 511655, 3602045; 
510059, 3601876; 509854, 3601854; 509239, 3601789; 509184, 3601783; 
509184, 3601818; 509184, 3601962; 509153, 3602049; 509148, 3602120; 
509145, 3602158; 509145, 3602237; 509011, 3602455; 509012, 3602480; 
508989, 3602528; 508918, 3602676; 508894, 3602699; 508810, 3602802; 
508785, 3602833; 508696, 3602926; 508636, 3602989; 508447, 3603021; 
508392, 3603076; 508361, 3603107; 508306, 3603201; 508328, 3603322; 
508330, 3603334; 508377, 3603515; 508377, 3603544; 508377, 3603571; 
508377, 3603732; 508377, 3603742; 508397, 3603792; 508413, 3603831; 
508494, 3604032; 508491, 3604051; 508476, 3604148; 508471, 3604181; 
508314, 3604244; 508110, 3604424; 508043, 3604558; 508024, 3604597; 
508061, 3604667; 508087, 3604714; 508133, 3604841; 508162, 3604919; 
508173, 3604949; 508162, 3604969; 508118, 3605051; 508157, 3605263; 
508094, 3605379; 508071, 3605420; 508173, 3605530; 508165, 3605694; 
508165, 3605993; 508165, 3606000; 508146, 3606094; 508126, 3606196; 
508118, 3606197; 508024, 3606209; 507875, 3606227; 507577, 3606220; 
507415, 3606091; 507391, 3606108; 507277, 3606189; 507137, 3606288; 
507023, 3606407; 506982, 3606450; 506870, 3606566; 506836, 3606600; 
506834, 3606602; 506825, 3606607; 506777, 3606635; 506582, 3606751; 
506581, 3606753; 506641, 3606774; 506671, 3606784; 506619, 3606934; 
506589, 3607018; 506430, 3607474; thence returning to 506421, 3607499.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 8 (Otay) follows:

[[Page 441]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.006

    (13) Unit 9: La Posta/Campo Unit, San Diego County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Cameron Corners, Live Oak 
Springs, Campo, Tierra Del Sol. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 555235, 3612703; 555266, 3612642; 555282, 3612538; 
555299, 3612347; 555299, 3612204; 555289, 3612185; 555286, 3612179; 
555258, 3612122; 555255, 3612116; 555250, 3612113; 555196, 3612065; 
555167, 3612040; 555141, 3612041; 554992, 3612051; 554790, 3612076; 
554773, 3612078; 554750, 3612088; 554644, 3612135; 554616, 3612172; 
555239,

[[Page 442]]

3612178; thence returning to 555235, 3612703. Continue to 556851, 
3611831; 556851, 3611792; 556854, 3611388; 556857, 3610862; 556857, 
3610859; 556859, 3610589; 556859, 3610438; 556861, 3609806; 556861, 
3609643; 556862, 3608972; 556862, 3608918; 556767, 3608971; 556662, 
3609029; 556154, 3609661; 556051, 3609942; 555876, 3610417; 555985, 
3610583; 556046, 3610677; 556107, 3610771; 556044, 3611140; 556015, 
3611311; 556008, 3611382; 555969, 3611769; 556037, 3611820; 556037, 
3611884; 556041, 3611885; 556101, 3611901; 556214, 3611905; 556239, 
3611937; 556313, 3611993; 556440, 3612043; 556442, 3612043; 556511, 
3612053; 556578, 3611968; 556613, 3611912; 556684, 3611841; 556758, 
3611806; 556815, 3611806; 556832, 3611806; thence returning to 556851, 
3611831. Continue to 559269, 3608184; 559129, 3608366; 558512, 3608706; 
557788, 3608752; 557674, 3608729; 557672, 3608729; 557672, 3608979; 
557672, 3608979; 557793, 3608980; 558433, 3608985; 559266, 3608992; 
559267, 3608896; 559267, 3608810; 559267, 3608809; 559268, 3608585; 
559268, 3608448; 559268, 3608441; thence returning to 559269, 3608184. 
Continue to 551183, 3617445; 551182, 3617374; 550771, 3617373; 550851, 
3617445; 551067, 3617445; thence returning to 551183, 3617445. Continue 
to 551992, 3617445; 552177, 3617445; 552670, 3617384; 552673, 3617382; 
552808, 3617319; 552870, 3617290; 552901, 3617276; 552934, 3617205; 
552977, 3617113; 553009, 3617045; 553009, 3617022; 553009, 3616930; 
553009, 3616705; 553009, 3616544; 553009, 3616397; 553101, 3616282; 
553194, 3616166; 553285, 3616149; 553340, 3616138; 553348, 3616137; 
553528, 3615859; 553528, 3615738; 553210, 3615735; 553209, 3616137; 
553101, 3616137; 552875, 3616135; 552874, 3616544; 552873, 3616927; 
552873, 3616929; 552873, 3616929; 552872, 3616985; 552810, 3616984; 
552398, 3616983; 552252, 3616983; 551991, 3616983; thence returning to 
551992, 3617445. Continue to 556827, 3615793; 556828, 3615737; 556830, 
3615408; 556831, 3614590; 556831, 3614555; 556816, 3614517; 556830, 
3614504; 556831, 3614197; 556833, 3613792; 556834, 3613792; 556835, 
3613521; 556835, 3613453; 556837, 3613299; 556840, 3612986; 556840, 
3612930; 556842, 3612930; 556843, 3612929; 556844, 3612929; 556844, 
3612927; 556844, 3612927; 556802, 3612921; 556740, 3612911; 556636, 
3612867; 556619, 3612703; 556553, 3612654; 556515, 3612626; 556479, 
3612608; 556444, 3612590; 556423, 3612580; 556416, 3612577; 556521, 
3612314; 556400, 3612275; 556307, 3612263; 556206, 3612250; 556186, 
3612248; 556121, 3612242; 556039, 3612202; 556022, 3612193; 556018, 
3612187; 555967, 3612111; 555748, 3612067; 555710, 3612089; 555707, 
3612183; 555704, 3612270; 555660, 3612423; 555647, 3612445; 555602, 
3612514; 555590, 3612533; 555584, 3612544; 555577, 3612572; 555545, 
3612703; 555507, 3612900; 555458, 3613294; 555375, 3613607; 555290, 
3613781; 555280, 3613802; 555260, 3614054; 555275, 3614501; 555306, 
3614948; 555310, 3614990; 555337, 3615287; 555386, 3615398; 555506, 
3615673; 555626, 3615927; 555679, 3616039; 555707, 3616099; 555753, 
3616197; 556016, 3616272; 556184, 3616320; 556215, 3616306; 556416, 
3616218; 556437, 3616209; 556570, 3616151; thence returning to 556827, 
3615793. Continue to 551599, 3614195; 551570, 3614263; 551570, 3614263; 
551526, 3614370; 551520, 3614383; 551521, 3614511; 551527, 3615370; 
551528, 3615536; 551160, 3615550; 551160, 3615696; 551159, 3616111; 
551186, 3616112; 551566, 3616122; 551567, 3615699; 551568, 3615371; 
551570, 3614568; 551600, 3614567; 551600, 3614481; 551600, 3614370; 
551599, 3614263; thence returning to 551599, 3614195. Continue to 
554425, 3615730; 554441, 3615730; 554522, 3615639; 554643, 3615503; 
554669, 3615392; 554705, 3615241; 554703, 3615200; 554693, 3614945; 
554663, 3614637; 554666, 3614487; 554669, 3614396; 554795, 3614111; 
554836, 3614027; 554844, 3614011; 554957, 3613779; 555058, 3613574; 
555093, 3613469; 555125, 3613372; 554837, 3613372; 554834, 3613779; 
554437, 3613777; 554435, 3613777; 554434, 3613580; 554432, 3613580; 
554433, 3613380; 554434, 3613175; 554435, 3613041; 554435, 3612974; 
554436, 3612795; 554436, 3612774; 554437, 3612565; 554439, 3612565; 
554440, 3612406; 554440, 3612406; 554408, 3612449; 554411, 3612565; 
554418, 3612773; 554419, 3612804; 554427, 3613038; 554432, 3613175; 
554433, 3613218; 554175, 3613196; 554175, 3613378; 554175, 3613578; 
554175, 3613771; 554102, 3613775; 554103, 3613775; 554432, 3613777; 
554433, 3613777; 554429, 3614501; 554429, 3614578; 554425, 3615390; 
554421, 3615720; 554425, 3615720; thence returning to 554425, 3615730. 
Continue to 551780, 3613764; 551611, 3614166; 552008, 3614166; 552272, 
3614167; 552418, 3614167; 552419, 3613766; 552275, 3613766; 552008, 
3613765; thence returning to 551780, 3613764. Continue to 553772, 
3613773; 553780, 3613744; 553775, 3613536; 553615, 3613536; 553617, 
3613402; 553617, 3613401; 553617, 3613344; 553549, 3613376; 553194, 
3613222; 552815, 3613352; 552815, 3613352; 552819, 3613767; 553417, 
3613772; 553612, 3613773; 553772, 3613774; thence returning to 553772, 
3613773.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 9 (La Posta/Campo) follows:

[[Page 443]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.007

    (14) Unit 10: Jacumba Unit, San Diego County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Jacumba, and Jacumba OE S. Land 
bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 573863, 3613297; 
574023, 3613274; 574161, 3613286; 574253, 3613292; 574396, 3613303; 
574510, 3613303; 574638, 3613245; 574759, 3613218; 574955, 3613176; 
575272, 3612817; 575656, 3612485; 575643, 3612410; 575643, 3612410; 
575586, 3612080; 575458, 3612014; 575458, 3612014; 575439, 3612004; 
575439, 3612004; 575245, 3611903; 575131, 3611815; 575017, 3611638; 
575017, 3611608;

[[Page 444]]

575017, 3611608; 575017, 3611404; 574935, 3611182; 575207, 3610803; 
575428, 3610462; 575453, 3610310; 575637, 3610253; 575798, 3610029; 
575798, 3610029; 575801, 3610025; 575696, 3609704; 575637, 3609610; 
575634, 3609606; 575431, 3609284; 575322, 3609111; 575204, 3608925; 
575204, 3608842; 575204, 3608780; 575204, 3608757; 575204, 3608606; 
575204, 3608573; 575204, 3608558; 575172, 3608561; 574790, 3608586; 
574711, 3608610; 574601, 3608645; 574490, 3608679; 574390, 3608710; 
574377, 3608716; 574203, 3608800; 574198, 3608803; 574018, 3608889; 
573950, 3608954; 573770, 3609124; 573586, 3609379; 573412, 3609620; 
573227, 3609838; 573109, 3609978; 573149, 3610253; 573259, 3610819; 
573038, 3611122; 573002, 3611221; 572980, 3611281; 572926, 3611429; 
572872, 3611577; 572831, 3611688; 572824, 3611763; 572807, 3611925; 
572803, 3611958; 572762, 3612351; 572770, 3612391; 572850, 3612772; 
572860, 3612821; 573028, 3613163; 573037, 3613182; 573049, 3613205; 
573238, 3613440; 573433, 3613566; 573668, 3613480; 573731, 3613440; 
573737, 3613337; thence returning to 573863, 3613297.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 (Jacumba) for the Quino checkerspot butterfly is 
depicted on the map in paragraph (13)(ii) of this entry.

             Hine's Emerald Dragonfly (Somatochlora hineana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Cook, DuPage, and Will 
Counties in Illinois; Alpena, Mackinac, and Presque Isle Counties in 
Michigan; Crawford, Dent, Iron, Phelps, Reynolds, Ripley, Washington, 
and Wayne Counties in Missouri; and Door and Ozaukee Counties in 
Wisconsin, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Hine's emerald dragonfly are:
    (i) For egg deposition and larval growth and development:
    (A) Organic soils (histosols, or with organic surface horizon) 
overlying calcareous substrate (predominantly dolomite and limestone 
bedrock);
    (B) Calcareous water from intermittent seeps and springs and 
associated shallow, small, slow-flowing streamlet channels, rivulets, 
and/or sheet flow within fens;
    (C) Emergent herbaceous and woody vegetation for emergence 
facilitation and refugia;
    (D) Occupied burrows maintained by crayfish for refugia; and
    (E) Prey base of aquatic macroinvertebrates, including mayflies, 
aquatic isopods, caddisflies, midge larvae, and aquatic worms.
    (ii) For adult foraging, reproduction, dispersal, and refugia 
necessary for roosting, for resting, for adult females to escape from 
male harassment, and for predator avoidance (especially during the 
vulnerable teneral stage):
    (A) Natural plant communities near the breeding/larval habitat which 
may include fen, marsh, sedge meadow, dolomite prairie, and the fringe 
(up to 328 ft (100 m)) of bordering shrubby and forested areas with open 
corridors for movement and dispersal; and
    (B) Prey base of small, flying insect species (e.g., dipterans).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include human-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, lawns, old fields, hay 
meadows, fallow crop fields, manicured lawns, pastures, piers and docks, 
aqueducts, airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures 
are located. We define ``old field'' here as cleared areas that were 
formerly forested and may have been used as crop or pasture land that 
currently support a mixture of native and nonnative herbs and low 
shrubs. ``Fallow field'' is defined as a formerly plowed field that has 
been left unseeded for a season or more and is presently uncultivated. 
In addition, critical habitat does not include open-water areas (i.e., 
areas beyond the zone of emergent vegetation) of lakes and ponds.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5' quadrangles, and critical habitat units 
were then mapped using Geographical Information Systems, Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates. Critical habitat units are 
described using the public land survey system (township (T), range (R) 
and section (Sec.)).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units (Index map) follows:

[[Page 445]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.000

    (6) Illinois Units 1 through 7, Cook, DuPage, and Will Counties, 
                                Illinois.

    (i) Illinois Unit 1: Will County. Located in T36N, R10E, Sec. 22, 
Sec. 27, SE1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 28, NE1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 28, NW1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 34 
of the Joliet 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Land south of Illinois 
State Route 7, east of Illinois State Route 53, and west of the Des 
Plaines River.

[[Page 446]]

    (ii) Illinois Unit 2: Will County. Located in T36N, R10E, Sec. 3, 
NW1/4 E1/2 Sec. 10, E1/2 Sec. 15 of the Romeoville and Joliet 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. Land east of Illinois State Route 53, and west 
of the Des Plaines River.
    (iii) Illinois Unit 3: Will County. Located in T37N, R10E, SW1/4 
Sec. 26, NW1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 26, E1/2 Sec. 34, W1/2 NW 1/4 Sec. 35 of the 
Romeoville 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Land west and north of the 
Des Plaines River and north of East Romeoville Road.
    (iv) Illinois Unit 4: Will and Cook Counties. Located in T37N, R10E, 
S1/2 NE1/4 Sec. 24, W1/2 SW1/4 Sec. 24, SE1/4 Sec. 24 and T37N, R11E, 
SW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 17, Sec. 19, NW1/4 Sec. 20 of the Romeoville 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle. Land to the south of Bluff Road, west of Lemont 
Road, and north of the Des Plaines River.
    (v) Illinois Unit 5: DuPage County. Located in T37N, R11E, NW1/4 
Sec. 15, NW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 15, S1/2 NE1/4 Sec. 16, SW1/4 Sec. 16, N1/2 
SE1/4 Sec. 16, SE1/4 Sec. 17 of the Sag Bridge 7.5' USGS topographic 
quadrangle. Land to the north of the Des Plaines River.
    (vi) Illinois Unit 6: Cook County. Located in T37N, R12E, S1/2 Sec. 
16, S1/2 NE1/4 Sec. 17, N1/2 SE1/4 Sec. 17, N1/2 Sec. 21 of the Sag 
Bridge and Palos Park 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Land to the 
north of the Calumet Sag Channel, south of 107th Street, and east of 
U.S. Route 45.
    (vii) Illinois Unit 7: Will County. Located in T36N, R10E, W1/2 Sec. 
1, Sec. 2, N1/2 Sec. 11 of the Romeoville and Joliet 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. Land east of the Illinois and Michigan Canal.
    (viii) Note: Map of Illinois Units 1 through 7 (Illinois Map 1) 
follows:

[[Page 447]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.001

         (7) Michigan Units 1 and 2, Mackinac County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 1: Mackinac County. The unit is located 
approximately 2 miles north of the village of St. Ignace. The unit 
contains all of T41N, R4W, Secs. 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 23; 
portions of T41N, R4W, Secs. 4, 7, 17, 18, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27; and T41N, 
R5W, Secs. 1 and 12 of the Moran and Evergreen Shores 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. The unit is west of I-75, east of Brevort Lake, 
and north of Castle Rock Road.
    (ii) Michigan Unit 2: Mackinac County. The unit is located 
approximately 2 miles north of the village of St. Ignace. The unit 
contains all of T41N, R3W, Sec. 6; portions of

[[Page 448]]

T41N, R4W, Secs. 1, 12, 13, 24; portions of T41N, R3W, Secs. 4, 5, 7; 
and portions of T42N, R3W, Sec. 31 of the Evergreen Shores 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle. The unit is west of Lake Huron and east of I-75.

   (iii) Note: Map of Michigan Units 1 and 2 (Michigan Map 1) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.002


[[Page 449]]



             (8) Michigan Unit 3, Mackinac County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 3: Mackinac County. Located on the east end of 
Bois Blanc Island. Bois Blanc Island has not adopted an addressing 
system using the public land survey system. The unit is located in 
Government Lots 25 and 26 of the Cheboygan and McRae Bay 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. The unit extends from approximately Walker's 
Point south to Rosie Point on the west side of Bob-Lo Drive. It extends 
from the road approximately 328 ft (100 m) to the west.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 3 (Michigan Map 2) follows:

[[Page 450]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.003

           (9) Michigan Unit 4, Presque Isle County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 4: Presque Isle County. Located approximately 12 
miles southeast of the village of Rogers City. The unit contains all of 
T34N, R7E, SW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 14, SW1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 15, NE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 
15, NW1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 15, NW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 15, SE1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 15, NW1/4 
NE1/4 Sec. 16, NE1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 16, SE1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 16, and NW1/4 NW1/4 
Sec. 23. It also contains portions of T34N, R7E, all 1/4 sections in 
Secs. 15, all 1/4 sections in Sec. 16, SE1/4 and SW1/4 Sec. 9, SW1/

[[Page 451]]

4 Sec. 10, SW1/4 Sec. 14, NE1/4 Sec. 22, NW1/4 and NE1/4 Sec. 23 of the 
Thompson's Harbor 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. The northern 
boundary of the unit is Lake Huron and the southern boundary is north of 
M-23.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 4 (Michigan Map 3) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.004


[[Page 452]]



             (10) Michigan Unit 5, Alpena County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 5: Alpena County. Located approximately 9 miles 
northeast of the village of Alpena. The unit contains all of T31N, R9E, 
SE1/4 SW1/4 Sec 9. It also contains portions of T31N, R9E, NW1/4 SW1/4 
Sec. 9, NE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 9, SW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 9, SW1/4 SE1/4 Sec 9; and 
portions of T31N, R9E, NE1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 16, NW1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 16, NW1/4 
NW1/4 Sec. 16 of the 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle North Point 
7.5[min] USGS topographic quadrangle. North Point Road is east of the 
area.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 5 (Michigan Map 4) follows:

[[Page 453]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.005

             (11) Michigan Unit 6, Alpena County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 6: Alpena County. Located approximately 5 miles 
east of the village of Alpena. The unit contains all of T31N, R9E, SW1/4 
SE1/4 Sec. 27. It also contains portions of T31N, R9E, NW1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 
27, NE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 27, SE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 27, SE1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 27; 
portions of T31N, R9E, NE1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 34, NW1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 34, NE1/4 
NE1/4 Sec. 34; and portions of T31N, R9E, NW1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 35, NE1/4 
NW1/4, NW1/4 NE1/

[[Page 454]]

4 Sec. 35 of the North Point 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lake 
Huron is the east boundary of the unit.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 6 (Michigan Map 5) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.006


[[Page 455]]



            (12) Missouri Unit 1, Crawford County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 1: Crawford County. Located in T35N, R3W, Secs. 22 
and 23 of the Viburnum West 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri 
Unit 1 is associated with James Creek and is located approximately 1.5 
miles west of Billard, Missouri.

       (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 1 (Missouri Map 1) follows:

[[Page 456]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.007

          (13) Missouri Units 2a and 4, Dent County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 2a: Dent County. Located in T34N, R3W, Secs. 3 and 
4 of the Howes Mill Spring 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri 
Unit 2a is associated with an unnamed tributary to West Fork Huzzah 
Creek and is located approximately 2.5 air

[[Page 457]]

miles north of the village of Howes Mill, Missouri adjacent to county 
road 438.
    (ii) Missouri Unit 4: Dent County. Located in T34N, R4W, Secs. 15 
and 22 of the Howes Mill Spring 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Missouri Unit 4 is associated with a tributary of Hutchins Creek in 
Fortune Hollow and is located approximately 1 mile east of the juncture 
of Highway 72 and Route MM.

  (iii) Note: Map of Missouri Units 2a and 4 (Missouri Map 2) follows:

[[Page 458]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.008


[[Page 459]]



              (14) Missouri Unit 5, Iron County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 5: Iron County. Located in T34N, R1W, Sec. 17of 
the Viburnum East 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 5 is 
located adjacent to Neals Creek and Neals Creek Road, approximately 2.5 
miles southeast of Bixby.

       (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 5 (Missouri Map 3) follows:

[[Page 460]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.009

             (15) Missouri Unit 7, Phelps County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 7: Phelps County. Located in T36N, R9W, Sec. 9 of 
the Kaintuck Hollow 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 7 is 
associated with Kaintuck Hollow and a tributary of Mill Creek, and is 
located

[[Page 461]]

approximately 4 miles south southwest of the town of Newburg.

       (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 7 (Missouri Map 4) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.010


[[Page 462]]



        (16) Missouri Units 8and 11a, Reynolds County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 8: Reynolds County. Located in T32N, R2W, Sec. 22, 
southeast 1/4, southwest 1/4 of the Bunker 7.5' USGS topographic 
quadrangle. Missouri Unit 8 is adjacent to Bee Fork Creek and is located 
approximately 3 miles east of Bunker.
    (ii) Missouri Unit 11a: Reynolds County. Located in T32N, R1W, Sec. 
30 of the Corridon 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 11 is 
located approximately 1 mile east of the intersection of Route TT and 
Highway 72, extending north to the Bee Fork Church on County Road 854.

  (iii) Note: Map of Missouri Units 8 and 11a (Missouri Map 5) follows:

[[Page 463]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.011


[[Page 464]]



             (17) Missouri Unit 21, Ripley County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 21: Ripley County. Located in T23N, R1W, Sec. 23 
of the Bardley 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 21 is 
associated with an unnamed tributary of Fourche Creek and is located 
approximately 12 miles west of Doniphan.

      (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 21 (Missouri Map 6) follows:

[[Page 465]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.012

     (18) Missouri Units 23 through 25, Washington County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Units 23 and 24: Washington County. Located in T36N, 
R1W, Sec. 13 of the Palmer 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri 
Units 23 and 24 comprise the Towns Branch and Welker Fen complex and are 
located near the town of Palmer.

[[Page 466]]

    (ii) Missouri Unit 25: Washington County. Located in T36N, R1W, 
Secs. 2 and 11 of the Courtois 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Missouri Unit 25 is associated with a tributary of Hazel Creek and is 
located approximately 1.5 miles northwest of the town of Palmer.

    (iii) Note: Map of Missouri Units 23 through 25 (Missouri Map 7) 
                                follows:

[[Page 467]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.013


[[Page 468]]



              (19) Missouri Unit 26, Wayne County, Missouri

    (i) Missouri Unit 26: Wayne County. Located in T27N, R4E, Sec. 33 of 
the Ellsinore 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 26 is 
located near Williamsville and is associated with Brushy Creek.

      (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 26 (Missouri Map 8) follows:

[[Page 469]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.014


[[Page 470]]



            (20) Missouri Unit 27, Crawford County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 27: Crawford County. Located on the Courtois 
quadrangle in Township 36 north, Range 2 west, section 14, northeast 1/
4, southwest 1/4, northwest 1/4.

      (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 27 (Missouri Map 9) follows:

[[Page 471]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.015

             (21) Wisconsin Unit 1, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 1: Washington Island, Door County. Located in 
T33N, R30E, W1/2 and NE1/4 Sec. 4, SE1/4 Sec. 5 of Washington Island SE 
and Washington Island NE 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Lands 
included are located adjacent to and west of

[[Page 472]]

Wickman Road, south of Town Line Road, East of Deer Lane and East Side 
Roads, north of Lake View Road and include Big Marsh and Little Marsh.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 1 (Wisconsin Map 1) follows
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.016


[[Page 473]]



             (22) Wisconsin Unit 2, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 2: Door County. Located in T32N, R28E, SE 1/4 
Sec. 11, NW 1/4 Sec. 13, NE1/4 Sec. 14 of the Ellison Bay 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle, and in T32N, R28E, W1/2 Sec. 13, E 1/2 Sec. 14, 
NE1/4 Sec. 23, portions of each 1/4 of Sec. 24, N1/2 Sec. 25, and T32N, 
R29E, S1/2 Sec. 19, W1/2 Sec. 29, NE1/4 Sec. 30 of Sister Bay 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle. Lands included are located east of the Village 
of Ellison Bay, south of Garrett Bay Road and Mink River Roads, North of 
County Road ZZ, west of Badger Road, County Road NP and Juice Mill Road, 
and includes the Mink River.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 2 (Wisconsin Map 2) follows:

[[Page 474]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.017

        (23) Wisconsin Units 3 through 7, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 3: Door County. Located in T31N R28E, S 1/2 S10, 
NE 1/4 S15 of Sister Bay 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands 
included are located south of County Road ZZ, north of North Bay (Lake 
Michigan), west of North Bay Road, east of Old Stage Road and about two 
miles east of the

[[Page 475]]

Village of Sister Bay and include a portion of Three-Springs Creek.
    (ii) Wisconsin Unit 4: Door County. Located in T31N, R28E, SW1/4 and 
S1/2 Sec. 15, portions of each 1/4 of Sec. 22, and N1/2 of Sec. 23 of 
the Sister Bay 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands are located along 
the north and northwest sides of North Bay (Lake Michigan).
    (iii) Wisconsin Unit 5: Door County. Located in T31N, R28E, S1/2 
Sec. 20, E1/2 Sec. 29, NW1/4 and S1/2 Sec. 28, N1/2 and SE1/4 Sec. 33, 
and W1/2 Sec. 34. It also is located in T30N, R28E, W1/2 Sec. 3, E1/2 
and SW1/4 Sec. 4, SE1/4 Sec. 8, Sec. 9, N1/2 Sec. 10, W1/2 and SE 1/4 
Sec.15, Sec. 16, and Sec. 17 of the Baileys Harbor East, and Sister Bay 
7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Lands located south of German Road, 
east of State Highway 57, west of North Bay Drive, Sunset Drive and 
Moonlight Bay (Lake Michigan), north of Ridges Road and Point Drive and 
include Mud Lake and Reiboldt Creek.
    (iv) Wisconsin Unit 6: Door County. Located in T30N, R28E, portions 
of each 1/4 of Sec. 5 of the Baileys Harbor East 7.5' USGS topographic 
quadrangle and Baileys Harbor West 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Lands are located about 2 1/4 miles north of the Town of Baileys Harbor, 
east of State Highway 57, south of Meadow Road and are associated with 
an unnamed stream.
    (v) Wisconsin Unit 7: Door County. Located in T30N, R27E, Sec. 11, 
SW1/4 Sec. 13, and N1/2 and SE 1/4 Sec. 14 of the Baileys Harbor West 
7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands are located north of County Road 
EE, east of County Road A and west of South Highland and High Plateau 
Roads, about two miles northeast of Town of Baileys Harbor and are 
associated with the headwaters of Piel Creek.

(vi) Note: Map of Wisconsin Units 3 through 7 (Wisconsin Map 3) follows:

[[Page 476]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.018


[[Page 477]]



             (24) Wisconsin Unit 8, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 8: Door County. Located in T28N, R27E, S1/2 Sec. 
16, N1/2 Sec. 21 of the Jacksonport 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Lands are located east of Bechtel Road, South of Whitefish Bay Road, 
west of Glidden Drive and include Arbter Lake.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 8 (Wisconsin Map 4) follows:

[[Page 478]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.019

             (25) Wisconsin Unit 9, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 9: Door County, Wisconsin. Located in T27N, R24E, 
SE1/4 Sec.16, E1/2 Sec. 20, portions of each 1/4 of Secs. 21, 28 and 33, 
NW1/4 and S1/2 Sec. 34. Also located in T26N, R24E, NW1/4 Sec. 3 of the 
Little Sturgeon 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle.

[[Page 479]]

Lands are located west of Pickeral Road and Cedar Lane, north of State 
Highway 57, east of Hilly Ridge Road and County Road C, south of Fox 
Lane Road, about 1.5 miles southwest of Little Sturgeon Bay (Lake 
Michigan) and include portions of Keyes Creek and associated wetlands.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 9 (Wisconsin Map 5) follows:

[[Page 480]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.020

           (26) Wisconsin Unit 10, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 10: Ozaukee County. Located in T11N, R21E, E1/2 
of Sec. 20, portions of each 1/4 of Sec. 21, W1/2 Sec. 28, Sec. 29, E1/2 
Sec. 30, E1/2 and portions of NW1/4 and SW1/4 Sec. 31, Sec. 32, and W1/2 
Sec. 33 of the Cedarburg, Five Corners, Newburg, and Port

[[Page 481]]

Washington West 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Lands are located 
south of State Highway 33, east of County Road Y and Birchwood Road, 
north of Cedar Sauk Road about 2 miles west of Saukville, and includes 
the majority of Cedarburg Bog.

     (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 10 (Wisconsin Map 6) follows:

[[Page 482]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.021

             (27) Wisconsin Unit 11, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 11: Door County. Located in T27N, R26E, SE 1/4 
Sec. 11, Sec. 12, NW 1/4 Sec. 13, and NE 1/4 Sec. 14 of the Sturgeon Bay 
East 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands are located south of County

[[Page 483]]

Road TT, east of Mathey Road, north of Buffalo Ridge Trail, west of Lake 
Forest Park Road (also County Road TT), about 11/2 miles west of the 
City of Sturgeon Bay, and include portions of Kellner's Fen.

     (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 11 (Wisconsin Map 7) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.022


[[Page 484]]



              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila aglaia)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila aglaia are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, Diospyros sp., ohia and koa forest 
between the elevations of 1,865-2,985 ft (568-910 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Urera glabra, which exhibits one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila aglaia 
follows:

[[Page 485]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.000

    (6) Drosophila aglaia--Unit 1--Palikea, City and County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 486]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila aglaia--Unit 1--Palikea follows:

[[Page 487]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.001

    (7) Drosophila aglaia--Unit 2--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 488]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila aglaia--Unit 2--Puu Kaua follows:

[[Page 489]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.002


[[Page 490]]



            Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila differens)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Maui, island of 
Molokai, Hawaii, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila differens are:
    (i) Wet, montane, ohia forest between the elevations of 3,645-4,495 
ft (1,111-1,370 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Clermontia arborescens ssp. waihiae, C. 
granidiflora ssp. munroi, C. oblongifolia ssp. brevipes, C. kakeana, and 
C. pallida, which exhibit one or more life stages (from seedlings to 
senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Drosophila differens--Unit 1--Puu Kolekole, Maui County, island 
of Molokai, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 718527, 2337536; 
718533, 2337451; 718538, 2337370; 718543, 2337298; 718547, 2337236; 
718551, 2337182; 718555, 2337138; 718560, 2337098; 718571, 2337055; 
718586, 2337010; 718607, 2336962; 718632, 2336912; 718662, 2336860; 
718698, 2336807; 718739, 2336754; 718784, 2336700; 718835, 2336646; 
718892, 2336593; 718958, 2336551; 719034, 2336520; 719119, 2336502; 
719215, 2336497; 719320, 2336503; 719420, 2336509; 719506, 2336508; 
719579, 2336500; 719639, 2336484; 719685, 2336462; 719675, 2336394; 
719613, 2336327; 718980, 2335781; 718332, 2335236; 718002, 2334953; 
717930, 2334932; 717877, 2334988; 717855, 2335060; 717846, 2335123; 
717848, 2335175; 717862, 2335217; 717888, 2335249; 717921, 2335272; 
717946, 2335291; 717961, 2335308; 717965, 2335322; 717958, 2335333; 
717942, 2335342; 717928, 2335356; 717919, 2335377; 717915, 2335404; 
717916, 2335438; 717923, 2335478; 717935, 2335515; 717952, 2335542; 
717974, 2335558; 718001, 2335564; 718034, 2335559; 718070, 2335550; 
718107, 2335553; 718144, 2335567; 718182, 2335593; 718221, 2335630; 
718257, 2335675; 718280, 2335710; 718286, 2335733; 718277, 2335745; 
718253, 2335744; 718213, 2335731; 718166, 2335721; 718115, 2335717; 
718060, 2335719; 718001, 2335728; 717937, 2335742; 717873, 2335764; 
717812, 2335793; 717753, 2335829; 717697, 2335873; 717643, 2335924; 
717591, 2335977; 717543, 2336020; 717499, 2336052; 717458, 2336073; 
717420, 2336083; 717385, 2336085; 717351, 2336089; 717319, 2336098; 
717288, 2336110; 717258, 2336127; 717230, 2336148; 717204, 2336180; 
717183, 2336223; 717165, 2336280; 717151, 2336348; 717140, 2336429; 
717130, 2336510; 717118, 2336579; 717103, 2336636; 717085, 2336680; 
717065, 2336713; 717041, 2336739; 717009, 2336769; 716968, 2336806; 
716919, 2336847; 716862, 2336894; 716800, 2336946; 716745, 2337000; 
716702, 2337055; 716669, 2337112; 716647, 2337171; 716635, 2337231; 
716632, 2337289; 716634, 2337341; 716644, 2337388; 716660, 2337430; 
716683, 2337468; 716713, 2337497; 716751, 2337516; 716797, 2337523; 
716850, 2337520; 716912, 2337507; 716976, 2337488; 717031, 2337481; 
717077, 2337486; 717126, 2337542; 717183, 2337585; 718403, 2337817; 
718484, 2337833; 718487, 2337824; 718499, 2337760; 718510, 2337691; 
718519, 2337616.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila differens--Unit 1--Puu Kolekole 
follows:

[[Page 491]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.003


[[Page 492]]



             Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila hemipeza)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila hemipeza are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,720-3,005 ft (524-916 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cyanea angustifolia, C. calycina, C. 
grimesiana ssp. grimesiana, C. grimesiana ssp. obatae, C. membranacea, 
C. pinnatifida, C. superba ssp. superba, Lobelia hypoleuca, L. 
niihauensis, L. yuccoides, and Urera kaalae, which exhibit one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
hemipeza follows:

[[Page 493]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.004

    (6) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593240, 2374436; 
593231, 2374371; 593281, 2374410; 593315, 2374385; 593612, 2374173; 
593656, 2374138; 593621, 2374096; 593641, 2374077; 593676,

[[Page 494]]

2374072; 593703, 2374057; 593734, 2374039; 593758, 2374058; 593793, 
2374029; 593779, 2373964; 593731, 2373894; 593660, 2373784; 593609, 
2373702; 593592, 2373648; 593592, 2373594; 593598, 2373553; 593657, 
2373561; 593770, 2373549; 593792, 2373496; 593797, 2373417; 593842, 
2373411; 593842, 2373326; 593905, 2373404; 594053, 2373383; 594103, 
2373292; 594134, 2373228; 594156, 2373250; 594194, 2373256; 594178, 
2373323; 594196, 2373386; 594229, 2373390; 594312, 2373340; 594341, 
2373350; 594339, 2373421; 594383, 2373487; 594381, 2373513; 594460, 
2373552; 594496, 2373553; 594497, 2373518; 594526, 2373509; 594572, 
2373460; 594632, 2373519; 594649, 2373523; 594699, 2373475; 594728, 
2373476; 594762, 2373532; 594791, 2373529; 594828, 2373501; 594852, 
2373465; 594903, 2373501; 594933, 2373500; 594952, 2373489; 594974, 
2373334; 594800, 2373150; 594718, 2373120; 594718, 2373102; 594744, 
2373091; 594710, 2372721; 594720, 2372686; 594716, 2372633; 594678, 
2372623; 594566, 2372651; 594536, 2372666; 594506, 2372663; 594467, 
2372672; 594395, 2372663; 594406, 2372650; 594546, 2372567; 594558, 
2372553; 594551, 2372535; 594389, 2372452; 594395, 2372434; 594415, 
2372428; 594511, 2372449; 594603, 2372437; 594614, 2372421; 594607, 
2372385; 594593, 2372353; 594591, 2372317; 594618, 2372322; 594661, 
2372357; 594700, 2372384; 594696, 2372334; 594697, 2372333; 594697, 
2372283; 594652, 2372257; 594541, 2372266; 594454, 2372294; 594400, 
2372294; 594293, 2372267; 594231, 2372261; 594168, 2372241; 594126, 
2372258; 594075, 2372267; 594030, 2372303; 593999, 2372354; 593948, 
2372388; 593889, 2372397; 593812, 2372413; 593781, 2372425; 593756, 
2372442; 593742, 2372467; 593742, 2372490; 593736, 2372521; 593736, 
2372560; 593757, 2372587; 593790, 2372662; 593663, 2372772; 593543, 
2372859; 593558, 2372894; 593555, 2372910; 593526, 2372928; 593476, 
2372912; 593422, 2372953; 593420, 2372976; 593403, 2372997; 593400, 
2373025; 593373, 2373016; 593352, 2373044; 593328, 2373025; 593215, 
2373118; 593230, 2373171; 593214, 2373176; 593163, 2373154; 593095, 
2373213; 593091, 2373238; 593064, 2373243; 593019, 2373295; 592937, 
2373388; 592889, 2373462; 592897, 2373535; 592908, 2373597; 592923, 
2373668; 592914, 2373772; 592889, 2373866; 592868, 2373941; 592867, 
2373950; 592894, 2374029; 592908, 2374120; 592894, 2374162; 592860, 
2374213; 592854, 2374216; 593151, 2374494.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch follows:

[[Page 495]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.005

    (7) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 2--Makaha Valley, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 586712, 2378108; 
586877, 2378091; 587049, 2378091; 587173, 2378087; 587333, 2378079; 
587506, 2378079; 587592, 2378075; 587641, 2378046; 587641,

[[Page 496]]

2378038; 587666, 2377980; 587543, 2377935; 587399, 2377931; 587243, 
2377919; 587090, 2377906; 586794, 2377943; 586696, 2377943; 586597, 
2377869; 586507, 2377767; 586449, 2377684; 586449, 2377458; 586408, 
2377397; 586305, 2377368; 586206, 2377405; 586054, 2377643; 585968, 
2377726; 585869, 2377775; 585803, 2377849; 585803, 2377915; 585869, 
2377952; 585894, 2377956; 585956, 2377952; 586050, 2377923; 586120, 
2377869; 586194, 2377824; 586317, 2377828; 586383, 2377878; 586391, 
2377956; 586420, 2378034; 586461, 2378116; 586482, 2378174; 586552, 
2378190; 586630, 2378149; 586655, 2378128.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 2--Makaha Valley 
follows:

[[Page 497]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.006

    (8) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 3--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 498]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 3--Palikea follows:

[[Page 499]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.007

    (9) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 4--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 500]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 4--Puu Kaua follows:

[[Page 501]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.008


[[Page 502]]



           Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila heteroneura)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Hawaii, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila heteroneura are:
    (i) Mesic to wet, montane, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 2,908-5,755 ft (908-1,754 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cheirodendron trigynum ssp. trigynum, 
Clermontia clermontioides, C. clermontioides ssp. rockiana, C. 
hawaiiensis, C. kohalae, C. lindseyana, C. montis-loa, C. parviflora, C. 
peleana, C. pyrularia, and Delissea parviflora, which exhibit one or 
more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
heteroneura follows:

[[Page 503]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.009

    (6) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 1--Kau Forest, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 859357, 2130685; 
859117, 2130401; 858810, 2130412; 858577, 2130667; 858596, 2130918; 
858800, 2131167; 858976, 2131240; 859117, 2131196; 859416, 2130970.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 1--Kau Forest 
follows:

[[Page 504]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.010

    (7) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 2--Kona Refuge, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 836880, 2145492; 
836927, 2144316; 836473, 2144373; 835378, 2144516; 831663, 2144980; 
31685, 2145029; 831718, 2145184; 831669, 2145289; 831669,

[[Page 505]]

2145387; 831694, 2145557; 31685, 2145727; 831685, 2145882; 831677, 
2146020; 831710, 2146149; 831767, 2146247; 31685, 2146482; 831572, 
2146766; 831572, 2146953; 831515, 2147156; 831442, 2147391; 31438, 
2147486; 837419, 2147183.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 2--Kona Refuge 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.011


[[Page 506]]


    (8) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 3--Lower Kahuku, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 849578, 2119874; 
849925, 2117860; 849842, 2117726; 849716, 2117636; 849492, 2117618; 
49240, 2117726; 849114, 2118058; 848962, 2118723; 848953, 2119065; 
848845, 2119720; 48728, 2120187; 848701, 2120646; 848638, 2120870; 
848620, 2121095; 848692, 2121194; 48782, 2121292; 849007, 2121310; 
849177, 2121319; 849350, 2121233; 849475, 2120505; 49474, 2120484; 
849447, 2120250; 849528, 2120044.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 3--Lower Kahuku 
follows:

[[Page 507]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.012

    (9) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 4--Pit Crater, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 821660, 2184453; 
821670, 2184348; 821617, 2184279; 821490, 2184191; 821428, 2184164; 
821304, 2184150; 821131, 2184187; 821052, 2184187; 821012, 2184150; 
820889, 2184086; 820850, 2184076; 820824, 2184102; 820778, 2184164; 
820705, 2184193; 820626,

[[Page 508]]

2184233; 820610, 2184289; 820657, 2184318; 820673, 2184316; 820707, 
2184310; 820723, 2184306; 820747, 2184293; 820790, 2184269; 820818, 
2184247; 820832, 2184215; 820861, 2184180; 820905, 2184168; 820929, 
2184191; 820939, 2184221; 820974, 2184255; 821024, 2184261; 821109, 
2184261; 821206, 2184261; 821264, 2184269; 821282, 2184285; 821292, 
2184322; 821254, 2184360; 821232, 2184396; 821276, 2184404; 821341, 
2184400; 821369, 2184431; 821363, 2184463; 821333, 2184499; 821345, 
2184528; 821426, 2184550; 821531, 2184554; 821619, 2184513.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 4--Pit Crater 
follows:

[[Page 509]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.013

    (10) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 5--Waihaka Gulch, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 868924, 2138585; 
868686, 2138463; 868564, 2138464; 868434, 2138482; 868325, 2138598; 
868350, 2138841; 868378, 2138886; 868503, 2139088; 868720,

[[Page 510]]

2139220; 868946, 2139193; 869076, 2139167; 869160, 2139055; 869238, 
2139018; 869248, 2138892.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 5--Waihaka Gulch 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.014


[[Page 511]]



           Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila montgomeryi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila montgomeryi are:
    (i) Mesic, lowland, diverse ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,720-2,985 ft (524-910 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Urera kaalae, which exhibits one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
montgomeryi follows:

[[Page 512]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.015

    (6) Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593240, 2374436; 
593231, 2374371; 593281, 2374410; 593315, 2374385; 593612, 2374173; 
593656, 2374138; 593621, 2374096; 593641, 2374077; 593676,

[[Page 513]]

2374072; 593703, 2374057; 593734, 2374039; 593758, 2374058; 593793, 
2374029; 593779, 2373964; 593731, 2373894; 593660, 2373784; 593609, 
2373702; 593592, 2373648; 593592, 2373594; 593598, 2373553; 593657, 
2373561; 593770, 2373549; 593792, 2373496; 593797, 2373417; 593842, 
2373411; 593842, 2373326; 593905, 2373404; 594053, 2373383; 594103, 
2373292; 594134, 2373228; 594156, 2373250; 594194, 2373256; 594178, 
2373323; 594196, 2373386; 594229, 2373390; 594312, 2373340; 594341, 
2373350; 594339, 2373421; 594383, 2373487; 594381, 2373513; 594460, 
2373552; 594496, 2373553; 594497, 2373518; 594526, 2373509; 594572, 
2373460; 594632, 2373519; 594649, 2373523; 594699, 2373475; 594728, 
2373476; 594762, 2373532; 594791, 2373529; 594828, 2373501; 594852, 
2373465; 594903, 2373501; 594933, 2373500; 594952, 2373489; 594974, 
2373334; 594800, 2373150; 594718, 2373120; 594718, 2373102; 594744, 
2373091; 594710, 2372721; 594720, 2372686; 594716, 2372633; 594678, 
2372623; 594566, 2372651; 594536, 2372666; 594506, 2372663; 594467, 
2372672; 594395, 2372663; 594406, 2372650; 594546, 2372567; 594558, 
2372553; 594551, 2372535; 594389, 2372452; 594395, 2372434; 594415, 
2372428; 594511, 2372449; 594603, 2372437; 594614, 2372421; 594607, 
2372385; 594593, 2372353; 594591, 2372317; 594618, 2372322; 594661, 
2372357; 594700, 2372384; 594696, 2372334; 594697, 2372333; 594697, 
2372283; 594652, 2372257; 594541, 2372266; 594454, 2372294; 594400, 
2372294; 594293, 2372267; 594231, 2372261; 594168, 2372241; 594126, 
2372258; 594075, 2372267; 594030, 2372303; 593999, 2372354; 593948, 
2372388; 593889, 2372397; 593812, 2372413; 593781, 2372425; 593756, 
2372442; 593742, 2372467; 593742, 2372490; 593736, 2372521; 593736, 
2372560; 593757, 2372587; 593790, 2372662; 593663, 2372772; 593543, 
2372859; 593558, 2372894; 593555, 2372910; 593526, 2372928; 593476, 
2372912; 593422, 2372953; 593420, 2372976; 593403, 2372997; 593400, 
2373025; 593373, 2373016; 593352, 2373044; 593328, 2373025; 593215, 
2373118; 593230, 2373171; 593214, 2373176; 593163, 2373154; 593095, 
2373213; 593091, 2373238; 593064, 2373243; 593019, 2373295; 592937, 
2373388; 592889, 2373462; 592897, 2373535; 592908, 2373597; 592923, 
2373668; 592914, 2373772; 592889, 2373866; 592868, 2373941; 592867, 
2373950; 592894, 2374029; 592908, 2374120; 592894, 2374162; 592860, 
2374213; 592854, 2374216; 593151, 2374494.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila montgomery--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch 
follows:

[[Page 514]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.016

    (7) Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 2--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 515]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 2--Palikea follows:

[[Page 516]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.017

    (8) Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 3--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 517]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 3--Puu Kaua follows:

[[Page 518]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.018

              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila mulli)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Hawaii, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila mulli are:
    (i) Wet, montane, ohia forest between the elevations of 1,955-3,250 
ft (596-1,093 m); and

[[Page 519]]

    (ii) The larval host plant Pritchardia beccariana, which exhibits 
one or more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila mulli 
follows:

[[Page 520]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.019

    (6) Drosophila mulli--Unit 1--Olaa Forest, Hawaii County, island of 
Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 898754, 2154890; 
898225, 2154740; 898030, 2154878; 897846, 2155268; 897927, 2155578; 
898328, 2155910; 898508, 2155922; 899064, 2155498; 899064, 2155268.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila mulli--Unit 1--Olaa Forest follows:

[[Page 521]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.020

    (7) Drosophila mulli--Unit 2--Stainback Forest, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 903259, 2169945; 
903159, 2169907; 903080, 2169965; 902974, 2170089; 902953, 2170247; 
903012, 2170346; 903101, 2170415; 903166, 2170439; 903245,

[[Page 522]]

2170490; 903324, 2170521; 903420, 2170603; 903509, 2170651; 903636, 
2170699; 903732, 2170771; 903849, 2170799; 903914, 2170789; 903955, 
2170730; 903869, 2170662; 903866, 2170658; 903718, 2170579; 903653, 
2170521; 903622, 2170487; 903441, 2170394; 903386, 2170322; 903399, 
2170250; 903451, 2170133; 903403, 2170058.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila mulli--Unit 2--Stainback Forest 
follows:

[[Page 523]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.021

    (8) Drosophila mulli--Unit 3--Waiakea Forest, Hawaii County, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 897021, 2168026; 
896225, 2167587; 895745, 2167704; 895687, 2167996; 895745, 2168207; 
896014, 2168335; 896480, 2168668; 896841, 2169108; 897302, 2169068; 
897522, 2168908; 897482, 2168607.

[[Page 524]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila mulli--Unit 3--Waiakea Forest follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.022
    

[[Page 525]]



            Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila musaphilia)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Kauai, island of 
Kauai, Hawaii, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila musaphilia are:
    (i) Mesic, montane, ohia and koa forest between the elevations of 
3,310-3,740 ft (1,009-1,128 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Acacia koa, which exhibits one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Drosophila musaphilia--Unit 1--Kokee, Kauai County, island of 
Kauai, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 432035, 2448683; 
432126, 2448510; 432111, 2448312; 432111, 2448119; 432106, 2447977; 
432010, 2447906; 432025, 2447779; 431992, 2447749; 431962, 2447768; 
431938, 2447766; 431926, 2447752; 431895, 2447719; 431861, 2447686; 
431825, 2447651; 431786, 2447616; 431745, 2447581; 431701, 2447544; 
431658, 2447505; 431616, 2447462; 431575, 2447417; 431535, 2447368; 
431496, 2447318; 431457, 2447271; 431418, 2447231; 431379, 2447198; 
431339, 2447172; 431299, 2447153; 431267, 2447131; 431247, 2447103; 
431239, 2447068; 431244, 2447027; 431260, 2446979; 431278, 2446930; 
431292, 2446881; 431300, 2446834; 431303, 2446788; 431302, 2446743; 
431300, 2446700; 431301, 2446659; 431306, 2446621; 431252, 2446466; 
431186, 2446345; 431181, 2446332; 430955, 2445963; 430860, 2445709; 
430831, 2445664; 430760, 2445497; 430648, 2445441; 430416, 2445421; 
430405, 2445422; 430396, 2445420; 430159, 2445358; 430153, 2445371; 
430148, 2445402; 430150, 2445437; 430157, 2445475; 430170, 2445517; 
430188, 2445562; 430212, 2445610; 430240, 2445660; 430270, 2445707; 
430302, 2445754; 430335, 2445799; 430371, 2445842; 430407, 2445883; 
430441, 2445921; 430474, 2445956; 430506, 2445988; 430535, 2446017; 
430559, 2446044; 430567, 2446070; 430558, 2446095; 430533, 2446120; 
430492, 2446144; 430441, 2446167; 430398, 2446193; 430363, 2446221; 
430337, 2446252; 430320, 2446284; 430311, 2446319; 430309, 2446353; 
430315, 2446388; 430327, 2446423; 430347, 2446457; 430373, 2446492; 
430401, 2446525; 430430, 2446558; 430459, 2446589; 430489, 2446619; 
430518, 2446649; 430531, 2446681; 430524, 2446716; 430497, 2446755; 
430451, 2446797; 430387, 2446842; 430330, 2446887; 430288, 2446930; 
430262, 2446971; 430250, 2447010; 430253, 2447047; 430263, 2447083; 
430274, 2447118; 430288, 2447153; 430304, 2447187; 430323, 2447220; 
430339, 2447254; 430350, 2447291; 430356, 2447331; 430358, 2447373; 
430354, 2447418; 430351, 2447461; 430354, 2447496; 430361, 2447524; 
430374, 2447545; 430392, 2447558; 430416, 2447567; 430445, 2447573; 
430479, 2447576; 430518, 2447577; 430563, 2447574; 430609, 2447572; 
430649, 2447573; 430684, 2447578; 430714, 2447587; 430737, 2447599; 
430755, 2447616; 430767, 2447639; 430772, 2447667; 430772, 2447701; 
430766, 2447740; 430756, 2447783; 430755, 2447821; 430762, 2447853; 
430778, 2447879; 430802, 2447900; 430834, 2447916; 430864, 2447928; 
430893, 2447937; 430920, 2447943; 430945, 2447947; 430968, 2447947; 
430989, 2447952; 431007, 2447961; 431022, 2447974; 431035, 2447992; 
431045, 2448014; 431049, 2448036; 431046, 2448057; 431036, 2448077; 
431019, 2448096; 430996, 2448113; 430971, 2448128; 430946, 2448140; 
430921, 2448149; 430896, 2448155; 430871, 2448158; 430849, 2448165; 
430830, 2448179; 430815, 2448200; 430804, 2448228; 430796, 2448263; 
430799, 2448299; 430816, 2448330; 430848, 2448356; 430894, 2448377; 
430956, 2448393; 431018, 2448407; 431064, 2448423; 431094, 2448440; 
431109, 2448459; 431107, 2448479; 431094, 2448502; 431076, 2448530; 
431054, 2448563; 431027, 2448601; 430996, 2448643; 430967, 2448687; 
430957, 2448722; 430966, 2448749; 430994, 2448766; 431042, 2448775; 
431103, 2448778; 431162, 2448779; 431218, 2448779; 431269, 2448779; 
431317, 2448777; 431361, 2448775; 431403, 2448767; 431443, 2448754; 
431480, 2448736; 431515, 2448712; 431548, 2448685; 431579, 2448661; 
431607, 2448643; 431633, 2448630; 431657, 2448622; 431678, 2448620; 
431692, 2448631; 431697, 2448656; 431694, 2448695; 431683, 2448749; 
431665, 2448816; 431657, 2448878; 431666, 2448928; 431692, 2448967; 
431735, 2448994; 431795, 2449009; 431857, 2449019; 431913, 2449024; 
431963, 2449027; 432008, 2449026; 432046, 2449022; 432076, 2449012; 
432094, 2448996; 432100, 2448974; 432095, 2448945; 432078, 2448910; 
432060, 2448872; 432053, 2448837; 432063, 2448834; 432035, 2448784.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila musaphilia--Unit 1--Kokee follows:

[[Page 526]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.023


[[Page 527]]



          Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila neoclavisetae)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Maui, island of Maui, 
Hawaii, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila neoclavisetae are:
    (i) Wet, montane, ohia forest between the elevations of 3,405-4,590 
ft (1,036-1,399 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cyanea kunthiana and C. macrostegia ssp. 
macrostegia, which exhibit one or more life stages (from seedlings to 
senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Drosophila neoclavisetae--Unit 1--Puu Kukui, Maui County, island 
of Maui, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 749957, 2315007; 
750017, 2314927; 750054, 2314874; 750054, 2314874; 750070, 2314854; 
750070, 2314854; 750070, 2314853; 750070, 2314853; 750095, 2314828; 
750095, 2314828; 750095, 2314828; 750118, 2314807; 750118, 2314807; 
750118, 2314806; 750119, 2314806; 750119, 2314806; 750137, 2314795; 
750137, 2314795; 750137, 2314795; 750137, 2314795; 750138, 2314795; 
750138, 2314795; 750172, 2314783; 750197, 2314770; 750214, 2314760; 
750222, 2314756; 750222, 2314756; 750222, 2314756; 750231, 2314751; 
750244, 2314735; 750244, 2314735; 750244, 2314735; 750245, 2314735; 
750263, 2314718; 750263, 2314718; 750263, 2314718; 750283, 2314702; 
750381, 2314361; 750381, 2314360; 750421, 2314232; 750421, 2314232; 
750421, 2314232; 750421, 2314231; 750421, 2314231; 750421, 2314231; 
750422, 2314231; 750422, 2314230; 750422, 2314230; 750402, 2314210; 
750397, 2314126; 750357, 2314098; 750329, 2314098; 750312, 2314143; 
750290, 2314227; 750239, 2314244; 750194, 2314227; 750133, 2314238; 
750076, 2314255; 750009, 2314238; 749958, 2314259; 749885, 2314289; 
749773, 2314435; 749721, 2314492; 749520, 2314710; 749515, 2314969; 
749509, 2315036; 749509, 2315093; 749565, 2315087; 749649, 2315036; 
749739, 2314991; 749756, 2315031; 749655, 2315132; 749599, 2315244; 
749554, 2315340; 749458, 2315407; 749368, 2315480; 749254, 2315543; 
749183, 2315602; 749145, 2315636; 749117, 2315676; 749125, 2315679; 
749125, 2315679; 749125, 2315679; 749125, 2315679; 749125, 2315678; 
749125, 2315678; 749126, 2315678; 749126, 2315678; 749126, 2315677; 
749138, 2315668; 749138, 2315668; 749172, 2315644; 749172, 2315644; 
749172, 2315644; 749172, 2315644; 749172, 2315644; 749186, 2315637; 
749203, 2315624; 749221, 2315611; 749221, 2315611; 749221, 2315611; 
749222, 2315611; 749222, 2315611; 749222, 2315611; 749243, 2315602; 
749331, 2315566; 749351, 2315553; 749351, 2315553; 749383, 2315533; 
749383, 2315533; 749383, 2315533; 749403, 2315522; 749419, 2315511; 
749468, 2315475; 749476, 2315462; 749483, 2315449; 749483, 2315449; 
749484, 2315449; 749484, 2315449; 749498, 2315429; 749498, 2315429; 
749498, 2315428; 749522, 2315400; 749522, 2315400; 749522, 2315400; 
749522, 2315400; 749523, 2315399; 749523, 2315399; 749523, 2315399; 
749548, 2315382; 749548, 2315382; 749548, 2315382; 749570, 2315370; 
749570, 2315370; 749570, 2315370; 749616, 2315349; 749626, 2315340; 
749626, 2315340; 749627, 2315340; 749650, 2315324; 749664, 2315305; 
749675, 2315287; 749679, 2315278; 749679, 2315278; 749679, 2315278; 
749679, 2315278; 749680, 2315278; 749698, 2315255; 749698, 2315254; 
749698, 2315254; 749718, 2315234; 749718, 2315234; 749718, 2315234; 
749718, 2315233; 749718, 2315233; 749734, 2315222; 749779, 2315184; 
749779, 2315184; 749780, 2315183; 749780, 2315183; 749780, 2315183; 
749802, 2315170; 749831, 2315145; 749872, 2315096; 749872, 2315096; 
749872, 2315096; 749872, 2315096; 749873, 2315095; 749873, 2315095; 
749886, 2315085; 749931, 2315044; 749957, 2315008.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila neoclavisetae--Unit 1--Puu Kukui 
follows:

[[Page 528]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.024


[[Page 529]]



              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila obatai)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Honolulu, island of 
Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila obatai are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,475-2,535 ft (450-773 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Pleomele forbesii, which exhibits one or 
more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for Drosophila 
obatai follows:

[[Page 530]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.025

    (6) Drosophila obatai--Unit 1--Puu Pane, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 591489, 2379704; 
591662, 2379690; 591807, 2379704; 591822, 2379699; 591901, 2379571; 
591871, 2379579; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830,

[[Page 531]]

2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 
2379596; 591791, 2379600; 591791, 2379600; 591791, 2379601; 591791, 
2379600; 591791, 2379600; 591791, 2379600; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 
2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 
2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591741, 2379583; 591741, 2379583; 591710, 
2379565; 591672, 2379554; 591672, 2379554; 591635, 2379542; 591614, 
2379537; 591614, 2379537; 591614, 2379537; 591582, 2379526; 591582, 
2379526; 591582, 2379526; 591582, 2379526; 591582, 2379526; 591545, 
2379500; 591523, 2379495; 591496, 2379495; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 
2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 
2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591444, 
2379502; 591444, 2379502; 591444, 2379502; 591444, 2379502; 591444, 
2379502; 591432, 2379498; 591421, 2379497; 591421, 2379497; 591421, 
2379497; 591421, 2379497; 591421, 2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591420, 
2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591405, 
2379487; 591405, 2379487; 591405, 2379487; 591405, 2379486; 591405, 
2379486; 591405, 2379486; 591403, 2379483; 591354, 2379454; 591283, 
2379460; 591240, 2379449; 591113, 2379474; 591116, 2379531; 591169, 
2379618; 591284, 2379716; 591345, 2379723.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila obatai--Unit 1--Puu Pane follows:

[[Page 532]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.026

    (7) Drosophila obatai--Unit 2--Wailupe, City and County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 629222, 2358352; 
629208, 2358307; 629199, 2358225; 629147, 2358205; 629100, 2358307; 
629048, 2358343; 629028, 2358316; 629023, 2358250; 629005,

[[Page 533]]

2358174; 628908, 2358169; 628890, 2358110; 628922, 2358034; 628883, 
2358011; 628795, 2358007; 628791, 2357939; 628753, 2357885; 628759, 
2357799; 628705, 2357743; 628676, 2357619; 628606, 2357592; 628536, 
2357607; 628552, 2357673; 628610, 2357731; 628574, 2357806; 628559, 
2357874; 628619, 2357932; 628637, 2357973; 628635, 2358074; 628660, 
2358185; 628735, 2358298; 628775, 2358411; 628936, 2358634; 629070, 
2358711; 629243, 2358647; 629307, 2358506.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila obatai--Unit 2--Wailupe follows:

[[Page 534]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.027


[[Page 535]]



            Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila ochrobasis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Hawaii, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila ochrobasis are:
    (i) Mesic to wet, montane, ohia, koa, and Cheirodendron sp. forest 
between the elevations of 3,850-5,390 ft (1,173-1,643 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Clermontia calophylla, C. 
clermontioides, C. clermontioides ssp. rockiana, C. drepanomorpha, C. 
hawaiiensis, C. kohalae, C. lindseyana, C. montis-loa, C. parviflora, C. 
peleana, C. pyrularia, C. waimeae, Marattia douglasii, Myrsine 
lanaiensis, M. lessertiana, and M. sandwicensis, which exhibit one or 
more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
ochrobasis follows:

[[Page 536]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.028

    (6) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 1--Kipuka 9, Hawaii County, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 884112, 2179392; 
884090, 2179333; 884069, 2179303; 884023, 2179281; 883971, 2179292; 
883936, 2179295; 883896, 2179273; 883855, 2179287; 883825, 2179319; 
883828, 2179335; 883861, 2179349; 883869, 2179346; 883885, 2179346; 
883888, 2179373; 883893, 2179409; 883896, 2179441; 883934, 2179473; 
883985, 2179484; 884036, 2179444; 884112, 2179409.

[[Page 537]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 1--Kipuka 9 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.029
    

[[Page 538]]


    (7) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 2--Kipuka 14, Hawaii County, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 884379, 2179103; 
884375, 2179051; 884351, 2178992; 884320, 2178889; 884264, 2178832; 
884236, 2178818; 884211, 2178834; 884141, 2178891; 884099, 2178924; 
884064, 2178929; 884026, 2178959; 884026, 2178976; 884052, 2178983; 
884071, 2179008; 884101, 2179013; 884137, 2179021; 884160, 2179035; 
884148, 2179051; 884151, 2179065; 884210, 2179063; 884208, 2179084; 
884242, 2179101; 884280, 2179131; 884323, 2179146; 884365, 2179146.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 2--Kipuka 14 follows:

[[Page 539]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.030

    (8) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 3--Kohala Mountains East, Hawaii 
County, island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 848091, 2222077; 
847912, 2222077; 847578, 2222142; 847461, 2222323; 847396, 2222654; 
847508, 2222900; 847620, 2223146; 847773, 2223179; 848104,

[[Page 540]]

2223079; 848172, 2222934; 848235, 2222798; 848327, 2222764; 848361, 
2222693; 848350, 2222595; 848317, 2222476; 848177, 2222184.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 3--Kohala Mountains 
East follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.031


[[Page 541]]


    (9) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 4--Kohala Mountains West, Hawaii 
County, island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 841990, 2224000; 
842156, 2223966; 842268, 2223966; 842486, 2223897; 842666, 2223757; 
842803, 2223586; 842840, 2223426; 842812, 2223314; 842758, 2223157; 
842584, 2223047; 842430, 2223096; 842355, 2223157; 842260, 2223278; 
842154, 2223345; 842020, 2223634; 841988, 2223746; 841967, 2223882.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 4--Kohala Mountains 
West follows:

[[Page 542]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.032

    (10) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 5--Upper Kahuku, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 850211, 2124185; 
849989, 2124179; 849874, 2124347; 849874, 2124516; 849975, 2124603; 
850177, 2124724; 850332, 2124866; 850474, 2124900; 850589,

[[Page 543]]

2124832; 850669, 2124785; 850690, 2124684; 850669, 2124549; 850508, 
2124448; 850339, 2124320.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 5--Upper Kahuku 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.033


[[Page 544]]



              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila sharpi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Kauai County, Hawaii, on 
the maps below.
    (2) Primary constituent elements.
    (i) In units 1, 2, and 3, the primary constituent elements of 
critical habitat for Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila sharpi) are:
    (A) Elevation: 3,000 to 5,243 ft (914 to 1,598 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: 50 to 75 inches (127 to 190 centimeters).
    (C) Substrate: Weathered aa lava flows, rocky mucks, thin silty 
loams, deep volcanic ash soils.
    (D) Canopy: Acacia, Metrosideros, Psychotria, Tetraplasandra, 
Zanthoxylum.
    (E) Subcanopy: Cheirodendron, Coprosma, Kadua, Ilex, Myoporum, 
Myrsine.
    (F) Understory: Bidens, Dryopteris, Leptecophylla, Poa, Scaevola, 
Sophora.
    (G) Larval host plants (Cheirodendron sp., Tetraplasandra sp.).
    (ii) In units 4, 5, and 6, the primary constituent elements of 
critical habitat for Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila sharpi) are:
    (A) Elevation: 3,000 to 5,243 ft (914 to 1,598 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 inches (190 centimeters).
    (C) Substrate: Well-developed soils, montane bogs.
    (D) Canopy: Acacia, Charpentiera, Cheirodendron, Metrosideros.
    (E) Subcanopy: Broussaisia, Cibotium, Eurya, Ilex, Myrsine.
    (F) Understory: Ferns, Carex, Coprosma, Leptecophylla, Oreobolus, 
Rhynchospora, Vaccinium.
    (G) Larval host plants (Cheirodendron sp., Tetraplasandra sp.).
    (3) Manmade features and structures, such as buildings, roads, 
railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other urban 
landscaped areas, existing on the effective date of this rule do not 
contain one or more of the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Maps were created in GIS, with 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with units in meters using North American 
datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
    (5) Index map of critical habitat units for Hawaiian picture-wing 
fly (Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 545]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.028

    (6) Unit 1-Montane Mesic, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 1-Montane Mesic consists of 2,422.6 ac (980.4 ha) and 
includes land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 430107, 2447429; 430242, 2447664; 430073, 2447126; 430793, 2448310; 
430124, 2446907; 430393, 2447748; 430690, 2447765; 430671, 2447997; 
430764, 2448188; 430886, 2448507; 430903, 2448664; 430985, 2448705; 
431560, 2448675; 431414, 2448890; 430291, 2446570; 431058, 2446300; 
431200, 2449070; 431362, 2449169; 431171, 2448699; 430854, 2445930; 
432530, 2450196; 431391, 2449273; 431323, 2447013; 431211, 2446394; 
431101, 2446447; 431112, 2446394; 431069, 2446331; 431007, 2446203; 
430944, 2446145; 430902, 2445976; 430191, 2446386; 430826, 2445805; 
430857, 2445727; 430824, 2445631; 430442, 2445640; 430323, 2445779; 
430204, 2445809; 430191, 2445898; 429898, 2446100; 429871, 2446234; 
430939, 2446061; 432796, 2450365; 432504, 2449961; 432579, 2450036;

[[Page 546]]

432552, 2450080; 432551, 2450083; 432001, 2447726; 432534, 2450174; 
431629, 2448739; 432565, 2450262; 432531, 2450116; 432740, 2450249; 
432441, 2449848; 432808, 2450383; 432882, 2450351; 432904, 2450341; 
432827, 2447751; 432932, 2447668; 433014, 2447717; 433109, 2447775; 
433094, 2447922; 432560, 2450267; 431875, 2449780; 431322, 2449418; 
431403, 2449436; 431727, 2449372; 431769, 2449447; 431705, 2449569; 
431720, 2449620; 431805, 2449591; 431919, 2449578; 432498, 2449952; 
431904, 2449665; 432486, 2449909; 432046, 2449781; 432052, 2449783; 
432113, 2449740; 432217, 2449712; 432251, 2449685; 432259, 2449679; 
432344, 2449744; 432419, 2449806; 431322, 2449372; 431905, 2449660; 
434486, 2447126; 434073, 2448685; 434228, 2448620; 434292, 2448479; 
434318, 2448298; 434279, 2447951; 434163, 2447783; 434086, 2447693; 
434073, 2447500; 434623, 2446526; 434357, 2447229; 433545, 2449136; 
434627, 2447088; 434686, 2447020; 434682, 2447017; 434657, 2446977; 
434652, 2446933; 434612, 2446807; 434641, 2446663; 434631, 2446528; 
434202, 2447345; 433399, 2449709; 431205, 2448983; 432073, 2447674; 
433046, 2450280; 433196, 2450196; 433287, 2450063; 433353, 2449880; 
433467, 2449787; 433429, 2449741; 433880, 2448827; 433407, 2449708; 
433725, 2448994; 433401, 2449697; 433339, 2449600; 433313, 2449484; 
433339, 2449381; 433368, 2449293; 433368, 2449292; 433369, 2449255; 
433389, 2449256; 434254, 2447886; 433408, 2449708; 433527, 2447856; 
434086, 2446095; 433862, 2446165; 433606, 2446193; 433449, 2446235; 
433397, 2446440; 433257, 2446958; 433577, 2447086; 433706, 2447138; 
434090, 2446098; 433562, 2447841; 432639, 2447624; 432918, 2447407; 
432672, 2447598; 434620, 2446512; 432609, 2447647; 434318, 2448182; 
432195, 2447587; 432136, 2447629; 432133, 2447631; 432081, 2447668; 
433746, 2447766; 434500, 2446448; 432320, 2447497; 434103, 2446297; 
434618, 2446459; 434582, 2446443; 434558, 2446439; 434514, 2446449; 
434471, 2446422; 434457, 2446416; 434447, 2446420; 434392, 2446421; 
434423, 2446441; 434416, 2446441; 434625, 2446467; 434201, 2446573; 
434403, 2446435; 434628, 2446479; 434400, 2446429; 434434, 2446428; 
434386, 2446429; 434533, 2446441.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1-Montane Mesic for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 547]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.029

    (7) Unit 2-Montane Mesic, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 2-Montane Mesic consists of 375.6 ac (152.0 ha) and 
includes land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 431975, 2446280; 432559, 2446255; 432659, 2446240; 432948, 2446150; 
433067, 2445928; 432758, 2445304; 432001, 2445941; 431873, 2444849;

[[Page 548]]

432912, 2445580; 432674, 2444970; 431626, 2445435; 431730, 2445114; 
431950, 2444792; 432135, 2444807; 432377, 2444722; 432548, 2444752; 
431645, 2445326; 431736, 2445617.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2-Montane Mesic for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.030


[[Page 549]]


    (8) Unit 3-Montane Mesic, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 3-Montane Mesic consists of 138.5 ac (56.0 ha) and includes 
land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
438012, 2440389; 438014, 2440437; 438023, 2440484; 438111, 2440652; 
438112, 2440588; 437817, 2440071; 438028, 2440577; 437922, 2440355; 
437336, 2440335; 437912, 2440201; 437827, 2440132; 437785, 2440013; 
437687, 2439960; 437636, 2439819; 437870, 2440140; 437545, 2439761; 
438149, 2440714; 437529, 2439721; 437987, 2441027; 437450, 2440047; 
437335, 2440180; 437335, 2440329; 438159, 2440914; 438249, 2440857; 
438253, 2440854; 438243, 2440830; 438287, 2440738; 437602, 2440771; 
438227, 2440730; 437586, 2439743.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3-Montane Mesic for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 550]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.031

    (9) Unit 4-Montane Wet, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 4-Montane Wet consists of 13,055.0 ac (5,283.2 ha) and 
includes land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 448638, 2440764; 448601, 2440679; 448606, 2440704; 448612, 2440722; 
448615, 2440731; 448619, 2440740; 448630, 2440759; 448650, 2440769;

[[Page 551]]

448600, 2440668; 448622, 2440749; 448599, 2440647; 448601, 2440652; 
448678, 2440741; 448777, 2440842; 448663, 2440773; 449006, 2441012; 
448764, 2440857; 449068, 2441051; 449121, 2441114; 449121, 2441114; 
448887, 2440934; 448811, 2440896; 448954, 2441097; 448943, 2441063; 
448943, 2441053; 448943, 2441044; 448941, 2441024; 448940, 2441006; 
448918, 2440982; 448877, 2440939; 448861, 2440927; 448735, 2440829; 
448837, 2440912; 448678, 2440780; 448802, 2440889; 448788, 2440878; 
449115, 2442038; 448745, 2440841; 449111, 2441196; 448727, 2440820; 
448720, 2440813; 448711, 2440806; 448691, 2440790; 448841, 2440914; 
447374, 2443275; 449244, 2441819; 447623, 2443445; 447616, 2443588; 
447603, 2443646; 447556, 2443686; 447325, 2443651; 447295, 2443639; 
447247, 2443586; 448634, 2443800; 447287, 2443339; 448657, 2443629; 
447481, 2443262; 447636, 2443160; 447645, 2443143; 447645, 2443146; 
447894, 2443371; 447865, 2443358; 447712, 2443351; 447631, 2443389; 
448948, 2441084; 447249, 2443451; 448917, 2442504; 449106, 2441435; 
449173, 2441529; 449201, 2441638; 449249, 2441697; 449275, 2441773; 
449148, 2441893; 449090, 2442135; 449064, 2442221; 448614, 2443950; 
448983, 2442384; 449078, 2441297; 448880, 2442563; 448861, 2442593; 
448805, 2442677; 448765, 2442787; 448696, 2442955; 448653, 2443075; 
448651, 2443187; 448674, 2443301; 448669, 2443477; 449024, 2442290; 
444824, 2443350; 444161, 2444181; 445808, 2442898; 445681, 2442977; 
445559, 2443010; 445437, 2443077; 446100, 2442628; 445045, 2443240; 
446256, 2442602; 444659, 2443447; 444532, 2443516; 444456, 2443572; 
444423, 2443638; 444334, 2443811; 446499, 2441271; 445254, 2443156; 
446686, 2441764; 441856, 2446328; 446673, 2441408; 446651, 2441424; 
446641, 2441436; 446587, 2441501; 445966, 2442725; 446640, 2441627; 
444075, 2444349; 446694, 2442007; 446591, 2442195; 446650, 2442430; 
446675, 2442432; 446482, 2442513; 446373, 2442574; 446587, 2441543; 
443497, 2444548; 444237, 2444013; 443579, 2444514; 443571, 2444521; 
443557, 2444532; 443553, 2444537; 443610, 2444483; 443516, 2444546; 
443617, 2444477; 443483, 2444551; 443478, 2444555; 443464, 2444570; 
443459, 2444579; 443452, 2444591; 443447, 2444608; 443534, 2444543; 
443722, 2444464; 444016, 2444444; 443984, 2444419; 443985, 2444416; 
443769, 2444440; 443760, 2444446; 443598, 2444493; 443732, 2444458; 
446375, 2441172; 443703, 2444469; 443685, 2444463; 443677, 2444459; 
443666, 2444456; 443647, 2444460; 443628, 2444469; 443740, 2444454; 
441656, 2441573; 442568, 2441274; 440114, 2440528; 440464, 2440832; 
440528, 2440844; 440586, 2440905; 440110, 2440524; 441650, 2441573; 
440014, 2440441; 441659, 2441579; 441727, 2441586; 441774, 2441575; 
441900, 2441576; 441968, 2441515; 446610, 2441349; 441637, 2441552; 
439096, 2441847; 438866, 2442347; 438934, 2442351; 438960, 2442270; 
438967, 2442246; 438976, 2442220; 440113, 2440527; 439088, 2441871; 
442723, 2441295; 439491, 2440617; 439551, 2440431; 439556, 2440414; 
439832, 2440430; 439931, 2440426; 440002, 2440430; 439037, 2442031; 
445551, 2441162; 442287, 2441225; 445235, 2441328; 445344, 2441376; 
445380, 2441414; 445392, 2441392; 444560, 2441032; 445510, 2441194; 
444480, 2440997; 445886, 2441308; 446122, 2441415; 446214, 2441291; 
448944, 2441075; 446300, 2441227; 446357, 2441185; 445395, 2441389; 
443889, 2441172; 442843, 2441314; 442924, 2441340; 442982, 2441350; 
442977, 2441356; 443016, 2441342; 445124, 2441205; 443707, 2441132; 
443440, 2444655; 444062, 2441230; 444083, 2441215; 444109, 2441224; 
444113, 2441221; 444124, 2441223; 444455, 2440990; 443023, 2441344; 
442711, 2445664; 442430, 2445827; 442668, 2445560; 442666, 2445576; 
442668, 2445590; 442674, 2445604; 442672, 2445510; 442713, 2445661; 
442668, 2445494; 442501, 2445803; 442492, 2445803; 442467, 2445799; 
442448, 2445805; 442444, 2445807; 443444, 2444627; 442710, 2445647; 
442709, 2445399; 442804, 2445357; 442798, 2445359; 442785, 2445364; 
442765, 2445370; 442747, 2445377; 442673, 2445515; 442727, 2445386; 
442430, 2445830; 442694, 2445414; 442689, 2445419; 442682, 2445433; 
442675, 2445453; 442671, 2445471; 442667, 2445490; 442743, 2445378; 
441897, 2446273; 442435, 2445813; 442019, 2446165; 442005, 2446171; 
441982, 2446194; 441963, 2446219; 442059, 2446159; 441929, 2446268; 
442071, 2446146; 441879, 2446263; 441852, 2446219; 441838, 2446221; 
441834, 2446230; 441848, 2446265; 441855, 2446295; 441943, 2446256; 
442202, 2445986; 442428, 2445851; 442381, 2445882; 442372, 2445885; 
442317, 2445917; 442301, 2445924; 442039, 2446165; 442261, 2445949; 
442858, 2445342; 442175, 2445995; 442100, 2446007; 442082, 2446029; 
442072, 2446052; 442067, 2446082; 442073, 2446121; 442273, 2445945; 
443240, 2444927; 442821, 2445353; 443294, 2444870; 443290, 2444876; 
443281, 2444890; 443271, 2444898; 443307, 2444833; 443252, 2444914; 
443309, 2444829; 443234, 2444932; 443215, 2444938; 443196, 2444944; 
443193, 2444946; 443177, 2444962; 443175, 2444965; 443260, 2444907; 
443352, 2444721; 438757, 2442331; 443435, 2444664; 443423, 2444686; 
443403, 2444695; 443385, 2444699; 443301, 2444851; 443366, 2444706; 
443156, 2445003; 443346, 2444728; 443341, 2444740; 443333, 2444758; 
443327, 2444778; 443320, 2444796; 443313, 2444815; 443373, 2444702; 
442952, 2445303; 443029, 2445263; 443009, 2445266; 443006, 2445268; 
442990, 2445276; 442981, 2445284; 443163, 2444984; 442956, 2445301; 
443068, 2445227; 442934, 2445314; 442915, 2445323; 442898, 2445330; 
442877, 2445336; 442862, 2445341; 443443, 2444647; 442972, 2445292; 
443122, 2445132; 442842, 2445347; 443153, 2445020; 443153, 2445040; 
443152, 2445059; 443150, 2445078; 443144, 2445096; 443047, 2445260; 
443135, 2445115; 443065, 2445247; 443103, 2445152; 443083, 2445171; 
443066, 2445190; 443066, 2445209; 443067, 2445215; 443158, 2444995; 
443140, 2445105; 440025, 2445056; 439668, 2444981; 440214, 2445151; 
440216, 2445150; 440347, 2445106; 440289, 2445097; 440078, 2445204; 
440124, 2445056; 439994, 2445245; 439910, 2445087; 439796, 2445123; 
439719, 2445133; 439696, 2445110; 439681, 2445072; 439364, 2444192; 
440216, 2445076; 439480, 2445095; 438927, 2444790; 438982, 2444746; 
439037, 2444786; 439157, 2444829; 439238, 2444846; 440165, 2445166; 
439434, 2444999; 439643, 2444902; 439484, 2445120; 439501, 2445220; 
439598, 2445317; 439699, 2445360; 439794, 2445352; 439883, 2445309; 
439360, 2444907; 439945, 2444540; 439673, 2445011; 439890, 2444912; 
439948, 2444922; 439994, 2444883; 440052, 2444784; 439859, 2444782; 
439996, 2444642; 439859, 2444723; 439876, 2444423; 439825, 2444344; 
439759, 2444342; 439685, 2444334; 439583, 2444266; 438838, 2442340; 
440032, 2444731; 439254, 2444472; 439571, 2444823; 439485, 2444800; 
439386, 2444762; 439258, 2444658; 439172, 2444564; 439864, 2444845; 
439156, 2444527; 438580, 2444854; 439413, 2444371; 439522, 2444418; 
439617, 2444459; 439747, 2444522; 439800, 2444594; 439843, 2444655; 
439145, 2444538; 435698, 2452376;

[[Page 552]]

438807, 2444845; 436003, 2452334; 435955, 2452326; 435902, 2452378; 
435838, 2452443; 436579, 2452559; 435719, 2452378; 436804, 2452559; 
435477, 2452358; 435478, 2452345; 435479, 2452304; 435517, 2452192; 
435519, 2452190; 435540, 2452168; 435810, 2452427; 438006, 2453313; 
438476, 2452702; 438465, 2452788; 438430, 2452817; 438386, 2452854; 
438269, 2452930; 436189, 2452365; 438110, 2453148; 435895, 2451700; 
437935, 2453510; 437933, 2453512; 437797, 2453318; 437592, 2453026; 
437202, 2452948; 437201, 2452932; 438116, 2453088; 438263, 2444805; 
436811, 2449026; 437237, 2447714; 437230, 2447713; 437248, 2447657; 
437232, 2447645; 435631, 2452072; 438179, 2444732; 436566, 2449559; 
438343, 2444896; 438406, 2444952; 438475, 2444955; 438523, 2444886; 
438536, 2444858; 439298, 2444154; 438168, 2444734; 436235, 2450550; 
438677, 2444833; 435961, 2451591; 436027, 2451466; 436103, 2451262; 
436162, 2451016; 436212, 2450766; 436739, 2449180; 436234, 2450558; 
436706, 2449252; 436250, 2450410; 436234, 2450237; 436386, 2449952; 
436472, 2449769; 436566, 2449560; 435779, 2451881; 436230, 2450590; 
438030, 2442243; 438130, 2442234; 437996, 2442188; 437998, 2442202; 
437998, 2442205; 437999, 2442211; 437973, 2442147; 438012, 2442229; 
437954, 2442136; 438049, 2442246; 438065, 2442246; 438088, 2442240; 
438095, 2442238; 438098, 2442237; 439456, 2444205; 438000, 2442216; 
437826, 2442106; 437754, 2441991; 437758, 2441998; 437766, 2442017; 
437777, 2442052; 437791, 2442074; 437984, 2442167; 437806, 2442092; 
438157, 2442234; 437839, 2442110; 437873, 2442121; 437887, 2442121; 
437912, 2442123; 437926, 2442125; 437939, 2442128; 437799, 2442084; 
438656, 2442321; 438114, 2442232; 438535, 2442314; 438536, 2442314; 
438561, 2442316; 438577, 2442315; 438517, 2442310; 438626, 2442315; 
438496, 2442310; 438668, 2442322; 438679, 2442324; 438694, 2442327; 
438704, 2442326; 438721, 2442329; 446348, 2441177; 438609, 2442314; 
438392, 2442294; 438219, 2442244; 438238, 2442248; 438254, 2442248; 
438305, 2442256; 438355, 2442265; 438523, 2442310; 438376, 2442278; 
437745, 2441950; 438418, 2442311; 438433, 2442319; 438436, 2442321; 
438453, 2442321; 438453, 2442321; 438460, 2442320; 438373, 2442277; 
437363, 2443282; 437751, 2441981; 437981, 2443476; 437808, 2443397; 
437928, 2443310; 437950, 2443233; 438143, 2443587; 437364, 2443298; 
438183, 2443628; 437277, 2443228; 437144, 2443208; 437065, 2443211; 
437060, 2443212; 436974, 2443182; 436997, 2443061; 437657, 2443231; 
438835, 2443883; 439282, 2444110; 439268, 2444068; 439181, 2444032; 
439094, 2444009; 439048, 2443913; 438208, 2443477; 438964, 2443837; 
437226, 2442709; 438723, 2443923; 438608, 2443916; 438453, 2443825; 
438438, 2443814; 438318, 2443723; 438201, 2443629; 439043, 2443859; 
437697, 2441878; 437601, 2441867; 437602, 2441867; 437617, 2441866; 
437635, 2441866; 437647, 2441866; 437052, 2442940; 437689, 2441877; 
437522, 2441879; 437705, 2441878; 437711, 2441887; 437717, 2441899; 
437736, 2441928; 437740, 2441938; 438821, 2442339; 437674, 2441875; 
437294, 2442356; 437747, 2441961; 437088, 2442647; 437103, 2442643; 
437156, 2442615; 437159, 2442579; 437120, 2442503; 437566, 2441876; 
437174, 2442422; 437532, 2441880; 437425, 2442191; 437307, 2442101; 
437476, 2442051; 437493, 2441868; 437495, 2441869; 437182, 2442830; 
437105, 2442445; 448431, 2442766; 448447, 2442675; 448469, 2442871; 
448462, 2442858; 448442, 2442821; 448437, 2442805; 448481, 2442894; 
448432, 2442775; 448486, 2442910; 448428, 2442750; 448428, 2442738; 
448432, 2442727; 448437, 2442711; 448443, 2442699; 448671, 2442369; 
448435, 2442791; 448579, 2443112; 448582, 2443190; 448582, 2443172; 
448582, 2443162; 448583, 2443151; 448585, 2443140; 448477, 2442887; 
448585, 2443122; 448447, 2442663; 448562, 2443086; 448545, 2443051; 
448529, 2443019; 448507, 2442976; 448498, 2442952; 448490, 2442930; 
448586, 2443129; 448642, 2442440; 448447, 2442688; 448602, 2442477; 
448615, 2442472; 448623, 2442466; 448634, 2442459; 448566, 2442503; 
448640, 2442451; 448550, 2442513; 448642, 2442430; 448642, 2442419; 
448643, 2442410; 448648, 2442399; 448657, 2442387; 447996, 2444312; 
448637, 2442455; 448464, 2442531; 448443, 2442636; 448443, 2442627; 
448440, 2442604; 448438, 2442565; 448441, 2442549; 448587, 2442486; 
448455, 2442534; 448589, 2443224; 448474, 2442530; 448488, 2442531; 
448505, 2442534; 448515, 2442533; 448530, 2442527; 448536, 2442523; 
448449, 2442536; 448502, 2443743; 448586, 2443203; 448512, 2443792; 
448512, 2443783; 448513, 2443779; 448513, 2443769; 448473, 2443878; 
448504, 2443752; 448470, 2443888; 448504, 2443735; 448507, 2443727; 
448522, 2443706; 448538, 2443682; 448546, 2443665; 448552, 2443643; 
448509, 2443760; 447932, 2443750; 447925, 2444320; 447843, 2444325; 
447864, 2444277; 447942, 2444178; 448003, 2444015; 448500, 2443823; 
447967, 2443867; 448549, 2443613; 447904, 2443646; 447921, 2443582; 
447949, 2443460; 447939, 2443412; 448458, 2443882; 448470, 2443889; 
448008, 2443903; 448590, 2443306; 448578, 2443441; 448572, 2443417; 
448576, 2443405; 448584, 2443388; 448590, 2443369; 448552, 2443630; 
448593, 2443325; 448591, 2443484; 448591, 2443291; 448592, 2443277; 
448592, 2443261; 448592, 2443254; 448591, 2443241; 448673, 2442365; 
448595, 2443352; 448553, 2443539; 448587, 2443214; 448544, 2443601; 
448533, 2443587; 448527, 2443576; 448523, 2443570; 448518, 2443559; 
448585, 2443461; 448528, 2443546; 448588, 2443466; 448560, 2443535; 
448569, 2443527; 448577, 2443516; 448582, 2443508; 448589, 2443493; 
448551, 2443621; 448518, 2443552; 449003, 2441449; 448936, 2441403; 
449064, 2441492; 449060, 2441481; 449053, 2441472; 449049, 2441471; 
449066, 2441511; 449032, 2441461; 449061, 2441528; 448971, 2441443; 
448964, 2441441; 448952, 2441427; 448948, 2441420; 448945, 2441411; 
448665, 2442379; 449040, 2441466; 449012, 2441616; 448972, 2441689; 
446228, 2441279; 448995, 2441668; 449000, 2441660; 449004, 2441650; 
449065, 2441502; 449009, 2441625; 448930, 2441400; 449017, 2441611; 
449030, 2441595; 449037, 2441588; 449043, 2441578; 449046, 2441569; 
449050, 2441561; 449006, 2441639; 448967, 2441159; 448940, 2441404; 
448926, 2441212; 448930, 2441194; 448933, 2441184; 448941, 2441177; 
448940, 2441238; 448961, 2441163; 448944, 2441250; 448972, 2441150; 
448973, 2441143; 448972, 2441136; 448971, 2441119; 448969, 2441116; 
448964, 2441109; 448949, 2441170; 448928, 2441313; 448922, 2441392; 
448918, 2441381; 448916, 2441369; 448917, 2441357; 448919, 2441341; 
448934, 2441230; 448925, 2441322; 448933, 2441715; 448935, 2441302; 
448944, 2441291; 448948, 2441281; 448948, 2441273; 448948, 2441264; 
448946, 2441259; 448920, 2441333; 448677, 2442140; 441868, 2446401; 
448673, 2442209; 448671, 2442202; 448674, 2442187; 448680, 2442169; 
448684, 2442226; 448682, 2442148; 448692, 2442233; 448675, 2442123; 
448677, 2442115; 448683, 2442101; 448694, 2442089; 448710, 2442077; 
448718, 2442069; 448684, 2442157;

[[Page 553]]

448722, 2442303; 448677, 2442356; 448682, 2442350; 448697, 2442342; 
448711, 2442341; 448721, 2442331; 448678, 2442221; 448723, 2442309; 
448736, 2442055; 448718, 2442295; 448712, 2442283; 448707, 2442267; 
448706, 2442257; 448705, 2442250; 448699, 2442238; 448724, 2442320; 
448915, 2441796; 448850, 2441844; 448877, 2441825; 448884, 2441820; 
448890, 2441818; 448892, 2441817; 448723, 2442061; 448910, 2441807; 
448820, 2441871; 448913, 2441774; 448914, 2441760; 448913, 2441753; 
448915, 2441738; 448925, 2441722; 448957, 2441700; 448900, 2441814; 
448787, 2441967; 448939, 2441710; 448746, 2442051; 448755, 2442041; 
448764, 2442029; 448768, 2442019; 448773, 2442013; 448840, 2441852; 
448781, 2441990; 448831, 2441859; 448789, 2441938; 448803, 2441914; 
448813, 2441900; 448814, 2441894; 448817, 2441884; 448728, 2442058; 
448777, 2442002; 440375, 2448361; 440198, 2448467; 440421, 2448239; 
440415, 2448290; 440416, 2448314; 440411, 2448336; 440401, 2448191; 
440391, 2448353; 440384, 2448138; 440350, 2448395; 440331, 2448411; 
440307, 2448418; 440254, 2448428; 440237, 2448434; 439526, 2448944; 
440402, 2448352; 440409, 2447991; 440377, 2447819; 440378, 2447845; 
440384, 2447871; 440395, 2447896; 440436, 2447941; 440413, 2448216; 
440426, 2447974; 440190, 2448485; 440343, 2448005; 440329, 2448016; 
440325, 2448033; 440331, 2448061; 440341, 2448084; 440374, 2448123; 
440435, 2447959; 439678, 2448950; 440218, 2448446; 439853, 2448941; 
439830, 2448945; 439788, 2448929; 439761, 2448926; 439900, 2448928; 
439697, 2448941; 439922, 2448928; 439656, 2448949; 439633, 2448940; 
439611, 2448928; 439578, 2448906; 439553, 2448909; 439539, 2448922; 
439733, 2448930; 440089, 2448747; 440179, 2448496; 440157, 2448511; 
440136, 2448537; 440120, 2448633; 440125, 2448690; 439875, 2448932; 
440112, 2448732; 440451, 2447620; 440073, 2448762; 440036, 2448815; 
440000, 2448878; 439982, 2448899; 439961, 2448915; 439941, 2448924; 
440121, 2448718; 441363, 2447030; 440383, 2447794; 441405, 2446869; 
441402, 2446899; 441403, 2446972; 441399, 2446995; 441455, 2446804; 
441373, 2447026; 441476, 2446797; 441317, 2447043; 441283, 2447083; 
441268, 2447104; 441240, 2447171; 441231, 2447186; 441219, 2447195; 
441398, 2446997; 441674, 2446682; 448141, 2444294; 448986, 2441677; 
441864, 2446424; 441847, 2446451; 441836, 2446475; 441434, 2446820; 
441829, 2446505; 441148, 2447188; 441648, 2446705; 441620, 2446723; 
441584, 2446741; 441549, 2446752; 441532, 2446763; 441521, 2446777; 
441829, 2446501; 440674, 2447485; 440710, 2447368; 440699, 2447389; 
440693, 2447407; 440695, 2447430; 440703, 2447452; 441201, 2447195; 
440693, 2447475; 440800, 2447339; 440599, 2447501; 440579, 2447511; 
440540, 2447539; 440487, 2447571; 440468, 2447593; 440124, 2448663; 
440703, 2447461; 440941, 2447230; 440413, 2447711; 441133, 2447183; 
441113, 2447170; 441095, 2447154; 441083, 2447147; 441058, 2447153; 
440722, 2447354; 440969, 2447210; 440740, 2447346; 440888, 2447250; 
440873, 2447265; 440865, 2447286; 440858, 2447311; 440842, 2447328; 
441172, 2447190; 441039, 2447168; 438599, 2451708; 438434, 2451069; 
438440, 2451600; 438425, 2451652; 438429, 2451670; 438442, 2451682; 
438419, 2451509; 438529, 2451692; 438410, 2451464; 438657, 2451738; 
439516, 2448971; 438675, 2451766; 440125, 2448578; 438680, 2451858; 
438715, 2451908; 438484, 2451690; 438467, 2451228; 438455, 2451089; 
438463, 2451098; 438475, 2451113; 438484, 2451141; 438486, 2451163; 
438435, 2451571; 438472, 2451209; 438888, 2452163; 438472, 2451261; 
438481, 2451287; 438485, 2451346; 438478, 2451359; 438454, 2451380; 
438422, 2451414; 438481, 2451188; 448609, 2443974; 438669, 2452384; 
438605, 2452379; 438540, 2452374; 438510, 2452340; 438449, 2452330; 
438761, 2452013; 438490, 2452605; 438816, 2452396; 448591, 2444072; 
448566, 2444172; 448548, 2444233; 448510, 2444279; 448464, 2444284; 
448299, 2444289; 438431, 2452414; 439138, 2452428; 438670, 2451754; 
438936, 2452213; 438977, 2452232; 438979, 2452233; 439031, 2452285; 
439037, 2452297; 438716, 2452393; 439083, 2452342; 438779, 2452391; 
439171, 2452514; 439201, 2452565; 439114, 2452513; 438954, 2452430; 
438851, 2452395; 438833, 2452090; 439061, 2452327; 439044, 2449631; 
438944, 2449813; 439167, 2449414; 439146, 2449435; 439114, 2449463; 
439102, 2449480; 439220, 2449318; 439065, 2449586; 439230, 2449287; 
439037, 2449642; 439025, 2449671; 439016, 2449687; 438999, 2449702; 
438974, 2449738; 438965, 2449767; 439076, 2449548; 439382, 2449107; 
439508, 2448984; 439451, 2449000; 439437, 2449023; 438680, 2451783; 
439433, 2449078; 439200, 2449362; 439399, 2449097; 439421, 2449088; 
439361, 2449126; 439330, 2449145; 439307, 2449169; 439277, 2449220; 
439260, 2449242; 439244, 2449261; 438425, 2451047; 438554, 2450559; 
438737, 2450311; 438736, 2450325; 438731, 2450342; 438715, 2450373; 
438690, 2450392; 438621, 2450415; 438732, 2450286; 438578, 2450438; 
438501, 2450796; 438488, 2450686; 438472, 2450910; 438435, 2450985; 
438427, 2450964; 438919, 2449853; 439437, 2449066; 438581, 2450423; 
438816, 2450028; 438717, 2450241; 438894, 2449879; 438884, 2449918; 
438904, 2449863; 438831, 2450010; 438850, 2449982; 438791, 2450036; 
438765, 2450051; 438744, 2450081; 438730, 2450109; 438717, 2450158; 
438716, 2450162; 438713, 2450206.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4-Montane Wet for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 554]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.032

    (10) Unit 5-Montane Wet, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 5-Montane Wet consists of 789.9 ac (319.7 ha) and includes 
land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
433436, 2449707; 433445, 2449707; 433444, 2449707; 433443, 2449707; 
433458, 2449707; 433436, 2449707; 433426, 2449707; 433408, 2449708; 
433429,

[[Page 555]]

2449741; 433493, 2449765; 433633, 2449724; 433742, 2449724; 433467, 
2449787; 433460, 2449707; 433468, 2449706; 433484, 2449694; 433414, 
2449628; 433461, 2449623; 433457, 2449622; 433339, 2449600; 433440, 
2449604; 433437, 2449592; 433426, 2449556; 433419, 2449599; 433831, 
2449767; 434991, 2449344; 433401, 2449697; 433480, 2449629; 434938, 
2449321; 433313, 2449484; 433455, 2449620; 434842, 2449253; 434839, 
2449258; 434834, 2449277; 434833, 2449278; 434833, 2449278; 434833, 
2449280; 434833, 2449281; 434872, 2449294; 434881, 2449297; 434884, 
2449298; 435010, 2449343; 434899, 2449305; 433903, 2449882; 435011, 
2449352; 435010, 2449343; 435005, 2449310; 434948, 2449300; 434908, 
2449290; 434908, 2449290; 434890, 2449251; 434872, 2449246; 434848, 
2449239; 434844, 2449248; 434034, 2449950; 434026, 2449951; 433969, 
2449958; 434898, 2449304; 435183, 2449401; 434713, 2447038; 434738, 
2447045; 434738, 2447030; 434795, 2447069; 434994, 2447085; 435093, 
2447245; 435290, 2447449; 435295, 2447440; 435360, 2447538; 435282, 
2448685; 435266, 2448909; 435236, 2449351; 434686, 2447020; 435232, 
2449399; 435272, 2448835; 435080, 2449407; 434920, 2449394; 434752, 
2449405; 434498, 2449522; 434338, 2449660; 434208, 2449767; 434141, 
2449863; 434137, 2449869; 434124, 2449948; 434074, 2449972; 433461, 
2449623; 433339, 2449381; 435234, 2449384; 433589, 2449323; 433725, 
2448994; 433545, 2449136; 433389, 2449256; 433567, 2449260; 433588, 
2449244; 433880, 2448827; 433612, 2449262; 433525, 2449415; 433567, 
2449398; 433546, 2449412; 434627, 2447088; 433448, 2449426; 435236, 
2449347; 433368, 2449293; 433599, 2449252; 434202, 2447345; 433367, 
2449352; 434073, 2448685; 434357, 2447229; 434073, 2447500; 434086, 
2447693; 434163, 2447783; 434254, 2447886; 434318, 2448182; 434318, 
2448298; 434292, 2448479; 434279, 2447951; 434486, 2447126; 434228, 
2448620.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5-Montane Wet for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 556]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.033

    (11) Unit 6-Montane Wet, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 6-Montane Wet consists of 413.5 ac (167.3 ha) and includes 
land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
448516, 2447525; 447976, 2448470; 448042, 2448338; 448133, 2448200; 
448235, 2448042; 448834, 2447273; 448288, 2447915; 448412, 2447653; 
448669,

[[Page 557]]

2447406; 447943, 2448562; 448763, 2447342; 448059, 2449434; 448321, 
2447795; 447961, 2448628; 448037, 2448780; 448088, 2448897; 448122, 
2449037; 448119, 2449134; 448056, 2449368; 448099, 2449454; 448242, 
2449457; 448328, 2449449; 448440, 2449296; 448382, 2449406; 448887, 
2447191; 448091, 2449266; 448610, 2449255; 448931, 2447092; 448511, 
2449199; 448623, 2449141; 448641, 2449184; 448593, 2449298; 448613, 
2449357; 448702, 2449395; 448812, 2449420; 448906, 2449440; 448959, 
2449443; 448964, 2449425; 448952, 2449316; 448954, 2449143; 448881, 
2447609; 448987, 2448959; 448980, 2446980; 448979, 2446983; 448577, 
2449143; 448980, 2446982; 448981, 2446981; 449105, 2447827; 449087, 
2447916; 449044, 2448132; 449032, 2448326; 449045, 2448506; 449040, 
2448659; 449012, 2448822.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6-Montane Wet for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 558]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.034


[[Page 559]]



          Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila substenoptera)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Honolulu, island of 
Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila substenoptera are:
    (i) Mesic to wet, lowland to montane, ohia and koa forest between 
the elevations of 1,920-4,030 ft (585-1,228 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cheirodendron platyphyllum ssp. 
platyphyllum, C. trigynum ssp. trigynum, Tetraplasandra kavaiensis, and 
T. oahuensis, which exhibit one or more life stages (from seedlings to 
senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
substenoptera follows:

[[Page 560]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.034

    (6) Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 1--Mt. Kaala, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 588692, 2378661; 
588740, 2378622; 588806, 2378595; 588799, 2378573; 588790, 2378564; 
588785, 2378562; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776,

[[Page 561]]

2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588765, 2378566; 588765, 2378566; 588765, 
2378566; 588753, 2378551; 588731, 2378529; 588722, 2378520; 588722, 
2378520; 588722, 2378520; 588714, 2378509; 588660, 2378470; 588660, 
2378470; 588660, 2378470; 588660, 2378470; 588617, 2378429; 588584, 
2378412; 588563, 2378405; 588530, 2378398; 588530, 2378398; 588484, 
2378387; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 
2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 
2378384; 588459, 2378380; 588459, 2378380; 588459, 2378380; 588459, 
2378380; 588459, 2378379; 588459, 2378379; 588459, 2378379; 588459, 
2378379; 588395, 2378293; 588361, 2378254; 588361, 2378254; 588361, 
2378254; 588361, 2378254; 588361, 2378254; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 
2378234; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 
2378234; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 
2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378186; 588344, 
2378186; 588344, 2378186; 588344, 2378186; 588349, 2378161; 588349, 
2378161; 588349, 2378161; 588349, 2378161; 588373, 2378097; 588385, 
2378041; 588384, 2378026; 588380, 2378003; 588364, 2377972; 588364, 
2377972; 588364, 2377972; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 
2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 
2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588354, 
2377924; 588354, 2377924; 588354, 2377923; 588354, 2377923; 588354, 
2377923; 588362, 2377904; 588362, 2377904; 588362, 2377904; 588362, 
2377904; 588362, 2377904; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 
2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588376, 
2377888; 588308, 2377906; 588255, 2377885; 588156, 2377924; 588103, 
2377905; 588064, 2377903; 587879, 2378062; 587792, 2378228; 587806, 
2378342; 587939, 2378515; 588067, 2378659; 588232, 2378655; 588363, 
2378748; 588503, 2378737; 588614, 2378668.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 1--Mt. Kaala 
follows:

[[Page 562]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.035

    (7) Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 2--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 563]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 2--Palikea follows:

[[Page 564]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.036


[[Page 565]]



          Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila tarphytrichia)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila tarphytrichia are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,720-2,985 ft (524-910 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Charpentiera obovata, which exhibits one 
or more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
tarphytrichia follows:

[[Page 566]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.037

    (6) Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch, City and County 
of Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593240, 2374436; 
593231, 2374371; 593281, 2374410; 593315, 2374385; 593612, 2374173; 
593656, 2374138; 593621, 2374096; 593641, 2374077; 593676,

[[Page 567]]

2374072; 593703, 2374057; 593734, 2374039; 593758, 2374058; 593793, 
2374029; 593779, 2373964; 593731, 2373894; 593660, 2373784; 593609, 
2373702; 593592, 2373648; 593592, 2373594; 593598, 2373553; 593657, 
2373561; 593770, 2373549; 593792, 2373496; 593797, 2373417; 593842, 
2373411; 593842, 2373326; 593905, 2373404; 594053, 2373383; 594103, 
2373292; 594134, 2373228; 594156, 2373250; 594194, 2373256; 594178, 
2373323; 594196, 2373386; 594229, 2373390; 594312, 2373340; 594341, 
2373350; 594339, 2373421; 594383, 2373487; 594381, 2373513; 594460, 
2373552; 594496, 2373553; 594497, 2373518; 594526, 2373509; 594572, 
2373460; 594632, 2373519; 594649, 2373523; 594699, 2373475; 594728, 
2373476; 594762, 2373532; 594791, 2373529; 594828, 2373501; 594852, 
2373465; 594903, 2373501; 594933, 2373500; 594952, 2373489; 594974, 
2373334; 594800, 2373150; 594718, 2373120; 594718, 2373102; 594744, 
2373091; 594710, 2372721; 594720, 2372686; 594716, 2372633; 594678, 
2372623; 594566, 2372651; 594536, 2372666; 594506, 2372663; 594467, 
2372672; 594395, 2372663; 594406, 2372650; 594546, 2372567; 594558, 
2372553; 594551, 2372535; 594389, 2372452; 594395, 2372434; 594415, 
2372428; 594511, 2372449; 594603, 2372437; 594614, 2372421; 594607, 
2372385; 594593, 2372353; 594591, 2372317; 594618, 2372322; 594661, 
2372357; 594700, 2372384; 594696, 2372334; 594697, 2372333; 594697, 
2372283; 594652, 2372257; 594541, 2372266; 594454, 2372294; 594400, 
2372294; 594293, 2372267; 594231, 2372261; 594168, 2372241; 594126, 
2372258; 594075, 2372267; 594030, 2372303; 593999, 2372354; 593948, 
2372388; 593889, 2372397; 593812, 2372413; 593781, 2372425; 593756, 
2372442; 593742, 2372467; 593742, 2372490; 593736, 2372521; 593736, 
2372560; 593757, 2372587; 593790, 2372662; 593663, 2372772; 593543, 
2372859; 593558, 2372894; 593555, 2372910; 593526, 2372928; 593476, 
2372912; 593422, 2372953; 593420, 2372976; 593403, 2372997; 593400, 
2373025; 593373, 2373016; 593352, 2373044; 593328, 2373025; 593215, 
2373118; 593230, 2373171; 593214, 2373176; 593163, 2373154; 593095, 
2373213; 593091, 2373238; 593064, 2373243; 593019, 2373295; 592937, 
2373388; 592889, 2373462; 592897, 2373535; 592908, 2373597; 592923, 
2373668; 592914, 2373772; 592889, 2373866; 592868, 2373941; 592867, 
2373950; 592894, 2374029; 592908, 2374120; 592894, 2374162; 592860, 
2374213; 592854, 2374216; 593151, 2374494.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch 
follows:

[[Page 568]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.038

    (7) Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 2--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 569]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 2--Palikea follows:

[[Page 570]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.039

    (8) Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 3--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 571]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 3--Puu Kaua 
follows:

[[Page 572]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.040


[[Page 573]]



       Zayante Band-Winged Grasshopper (Trimerotropis infantilis)

    1. The unit of critical habitat is depicted for Santa Cruz County, 
California, on the map below.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07FE01.017


[[Page 574]]


    2. Within this area, the primary constituent elements for the 
Zayante band-winged grasshopper are those physical and biological 
elements that provide conditions that are essential for the primary 
biological needs of thermoregulation, foraging, sheltering, 
reproduction, and dispersal. The primary constituent elements are--(a) 
the presence of Zayante soils, (b) the occurrence of Zayante sand hills 
habitat and the associated plant species, and (c) certain microhabitat 
conditions, including areas that receive large amounts of sunlight, 
widely scattered tree and shrub cover, bare or sparsely vegetated 
ground, and loose sand. Zayante sand hills habitat is characterized by 
plant species associated with ponderosa pine sand parkland and/or 
silverleaf manzanita mixed chaparral. Plant species that may occur 
within the boundaries include, but are not limited to--ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa), silver-leafed manzanita (Arctostaphylos silvicola), 
California lilac (Ceonothus sp.), Adenostoma sp., yerba santa 
(Eriodictyon sp.), sandwort (Minuartia sp.), pussypaws (Calyptridium 
umbellatum), Ben Lomond spineflower (Erysimum teretifolium), 
monkeyflower (Mimulus rattanii), miniature lupine (Lupinis bicolor), 
gilia (Gilia tenuiflora), California aster (Lessingia filaginifolia), 
Ben Lomond buckwheat (Eriogonum nudum ssp. decurrens), and Ben Lomond 
spineflower (Chorizanthe pungens var. hartwegiana).
    3. Critical habitat does not include existing developed sites 
consisting of buildings, roads, aquaducts, railroads, airports, paved 
areas, and similar features and structures.
    Santa Cruz County, California. Boundaries are based upon the Public 
Land Survey System. Within the historical boundaries of the Land Grants 
of Zayanta, San Augustin, La Carbonera, and Canada Del Rincon En El Rio 
San Lorenzo De Santa Cruz, boundaries are based upon section lines that 
are extensions to the Public Land Survey System developed by the 
California Department of Forestry and obtained by the Service from the 
State of California's Stephen P. Teale Data Center. Township and Range 
numbering is derived from the Mount Diablo Base and Meridian. The 
following lands located within Santa Cruz County are being proposed for 
critical habitat: T.9 S., R.1 W., SE\1/4\ sec. 31; T.9 S., R.2 W., SE\1/
4\ sec. 33, E\1/2\ sec. 34, SW\1/4\ sec. 35, S\1/2\ sec. 3; T.10 S., R1 
W., W\1/2\ sec. 6; T.10 S., R.2 W., sec. 1, S\1/2\ NW\1/4\ sec. 2, sec. 
3, W\1/2\ sec. 4, W\1/2\ sec. 9, sec. 10, sec. 11, sec. 13, sec. 14, 
N\1/2\ SE\1/4\ sec. 15, NE\1/4\ sec. 22, secs. 23-26, N\1/2\ sec. 35, 
sec. 36, excluding all lands covered under the Revised Habitat 
Conservation Plan for the Quail Hollow Quarry and the Habitat 
Conservation Plan for the Hanson Aggregates' Felton Plant.

              Blackburn's Sphinx Moth (Manduca blackburni)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for the Hawaiian islands of 
Maui, Kahoolawe, Hawaii, and Molokai on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Blackburn's sphinx moth include specific habitat components identified 
as essential for the primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, 
maturation, dispersal, breeding, and egg-laying.
    (i) Based on our current knowledge of the species, the primary 
constituent elements required by Blackburn's sphinx moth larvae for 
foraging and maturation are two larval host plant species in the endemic 
genus Nothocestrum (N. breviflorum and N. latifolium) and the habitats 
that support these plants, i.e., dry and mesic habitats between the 
elevations of sea level and 1,525 m (5,000 ft) that receive between 25 
and 250 cm (10 and 100 in) of annual precipitation.
    (ii) Based on our current knowledge of the species, the primary 
constituent elements required by Blackburn's sphinx moth adults for 
foraging, sheltering, dispersal, breeding, and egg production are native 
nectar-supplying plants, including, but not limited to, Ipomoea spp., 
Capparis sandwichiana, and Plumbago zeylanica, and the habitats that 
support these plants, i.e., dry and mesic habitats between the 
elevations of sea level and 1,525 m (5,000 ft) that receive between 25 
and 250 cm (10 and 100 in) of annual precipitation.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures within the boundaries 
of the mapped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements described for the species in paragraph (2) of this 
section, and therefore, are not included in the critical habitat 
designations. These features include, but are not limited to: buildings; 
roads; aqueducts and other water system features such as pumping 
stations, irrigation ditches, pipelines, siphons, tunnels, water tanks, 
gauging stations (section in a stream channel equipped with facilities 
for obtaining streamflow data), intakes, and wells; telecommunications 
towers and associated structures and equipment; electrical power 
transmission lines and associated rights-of-way; radars; telemetry 
antennas; missile launch sites; arboreta and gardens; heiau (indigenous 
places of worship or shrines); airports; other paved areas; lawns; and 
other rural residential landscaped areas.
    (4) Critical habitat units are described below. Coordinates are in 
UTM Zone 4 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 
(NAD83). The following index map shows the general locations of the 9 
critical habitat units designated on the islands of Hawaii, Kahoolawe, 
Maui, and Molokai.
    (i) Note:Map 1--State of Hawaii General Locations of Units for 
Blackburn's Sphinx

[[Page 575]]

Moth on Molokai, Maui, Kahoolawe, and Hawaii follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.004

    (ii) Unit 1: Island of Maui, Puu O Kali (1,604 ha; 3,965 ac):
    (A) Unit 1 consists of the following 38 boundary points: Start at 
770230, 2293671; 769969, 2293640; 769876, 2293794; 769523, 2293779; 
769444, 2293784; 769146, 2293904; 769358, 2294451; 769492, 2294471; 
769569, 2294563; 770123, 2294379; 770384, 2294317; 770707, 2294517; 
770169, 2294794; 769629, 2295149; 769732, 2295410; 770032, 2295219; 
769985, 2295371; 770360, 2295328; 769892, 2295671; 770362, 2295705; 
770578, 2295954; 771492, 2296086; 772138, 2296102; 772522, 2296179; 
772876, 2295933; 773384, 2295733; 773324, 2296764; 775265, 2296040; 
775041, 2295484; 774484, 2295757; 774033, 2294844; 774654, 2294538; 
774448, 2294006; 774392, 2292779; 773825, 2291760; 772032, 2292639; 
770772, 2293255; 770524, 2293353; return to starting point.

    (B) Note: Unit 1 is depicted below on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--
Island of Maui.

    (iii) Unit 2: Island of Maui, Cape Kinau (603 ha; 1,490 ac):
    (A) Unit 2 consists of the following 36 boundary points: 769419, 
2281688; 769716, 2281856; 769854, 2281648; 769726, 2281351; 769548, 
2281173; 769433, 2280683; 769312, 2280406; 769251, 2280342; 769175, 
2280353; 769073, 2280442; 768954, 2280466; 768791, 2280406; 768658, 
2280329; 768621, 2280282; 768645, 2279874; 768737, 2279820; 767046, 
2281800; 767136, 2281768; 767208, 2281837; 767139, 2281940; 767151, 
2281994; 767136, 2282020; 767607, 2282308; 767710, 2282266; 767837, 
2282318; 767857, 2282291; 768160, 2282410; 769380, 2282944; 769746, 
2282588; 769429, 2282400; 769103, 2282123; 768598, 2281510; 768687, 
2281391; 768737, 2281399; 768836, 2281460. 768738, 2279820. Coast.

    (B) Note: Unit 2 is depicted below on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--
Island of Maui.

    (iv) Unit 3: Island of Maui, Kanaio (2,420 ha; 5,981 ac):
    (A) Unit 3 consists of the following 45 boundary points: 777366, 
2282219; 777421, 2281595; 777453, 2281235; 777531, 2280334; 777588, 
2279661; 777719, 2278166; 770402, 2278173; 770445, 2278268; 770936, 
2279194; 771208, 2279714; 771289, 2279691; 771211, 2279314; 771211, 
2278906; 771368, 2278922; 771525, 2279173; 771854, 2279424; 772011, 
2279707; 772231, 2279974; 772357, 2280335; 772451, 2280445; 772514, 
2280351; 772561, 2280068; 772687,

[[Page 576]]

2279848; 772938, 2279801; 773221, 2279817; 773425, 2280021; 773676, 
2280335; 773676, 2280665; 773888, 2280993; 773606, 2281355; 774253, 
2281430; 774897, 2280433; 775340, 2281119; 774662, 2281499; 775105, 
2281701; 775435, 2282376; 775590, 2284264; 776004, 2284678; 776020, 
2285055; 776484, 2284998; 776553, 2285169; 776691, 2285141; 776878, 
2283402; 777021, 2282206; 777227, 2278017. Coast.
    (B) Unit excludes an area (1 ha; 2 ac) consisting of the following 6 
boundary points: 771887, 2277914; 771944, 2277910; 771986, 2277995; 
771948, 2277989; 771909, 2277980; 771870, 2277975.

    (C) Note: Unit 3 is depicted below on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--
Island of Maui.

    (v) Unit 4: Island of Maui, Kahikinui (4,799 ha; 11,859 ac):
    (A) Unit 4 consists of the following 79 boundary points: 786068, 
2283893; 786089, 2283760; 782956, 2282353; 783312, 2282399; 784167, 
2282606; 784764, 2282682; 785521, 2282878; 786198, 2283068; 786227, 
2282882; 786706, 2282953; 786657, 2283206; 787388, 2283424; 787555, 
2283500; 788907, 2284087; 789388, 2283321; 789534, 2283053; 788185, 
2282559; 786399, 2281761; 785563, 2281400; 785715, 2281039; 786057, 
2280754; 786112, 2280548; 779950, 2278500; 779720, 2280135; 779703, 
2280237; 779617, 2280887; 779412, 2282307; 779402, 2282377; 779372, 
2282585; 779368, 2282602; 779376, 2282933; 779427, 2285142; 779549, 
2285133; 779550, 2285007; 780604, 2285092; 781898, 2285373; 781956, 
2285061; 781923, 2284848; 781966, 2284607; 781902, 2284320; 782032, 
2283672; 782491, 2282783; 782731, 2282340; 783230, 2282514; 783112, 
2282850; 782587, 2283565; 782996, 2283744; 783721, 2283912; 784941, 
2284106; 784823, 2284611; 785088, 2284724; 785012, 2285109; 784719, 
2285271; 784639, 2285526; 784482, 2285613; 784385, 2285910; 786498, 
2286367; 787288, 2286710; 787415, 2286765; 787506, 2286804; 787311, 
2286772; 782285, 2285909; 782162, 2286366; 781651, 2286291; 781569, 
2286457; 782827, 2286695; 786589, 2287817; 787091, 2287913; 787800, 
2286248; 787893, 2286297; 787957, 2285636; 788105, 2285388; 788261, 
2285257; 788481, 2284803; 788363, 2284742; 786517, 2283943; 786510, 
2283966; 786068, 2283893; 779965, 2278394. Coast.

    (B) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--Island 
of Maui, which follows:

[[Page 577]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.005

    (vi) Unit 5: Island of Maui, Kanaha Pond (56 ha; 139 ac):
    (A) Unit 5 consists of the following 35 boundary points: Start at 
764695, 2312624; 764849, 2312615; 765062, 2312636; 765174, 2312639; 
765226, 2312636; 765201, 2312573; 765221, 2312534; 765223, 2312502; 
765259, 2312452; 765291, 2312304; 765287, 2312260; 765291, 2312223; 
765281, 2312190; 765356, 2312144; 765352, 2312121; 765325, 2312090; 
765284, 2312093; 765213, 2312118; 765183, 2312109; 765157, 2312091; 
765106, 2312075; 765069, 2312044; 765036, 2312036; 764954, 2311971; 
764872, 2311927; 764845, 2311912; 764588, 2311880; 764530, 2311946; 
764474, 2311988; 764424, 2312038; 764390, 2312140; 764336, 2312293; 
764397, 2312539; 764542, 2312565; 764615, 2312613; return to starting 
point.

    (B) Note: Unit 5 is depicted below on Map 3--Units 5 and 6--Island 
of Maui.
    (vii) Unit 6: Island of Maui, Kanaha Park (25 ha; 62 ac):
    (A) Unit 6 consists of the following 7 boundary points: 766783, 
2313583; 766781, 2313351; 766330, 2313141; 765776, 2312874; 765717, 
2312838; 765689, 2312823; 765557, 2313073. Coast.

    (B) Note: Unit 6 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5 and 6--Island of 
Maui, which follows:

[[Page 578]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.006

    (viii) Unit 7: Island of Kahoolawe, Upper Kahoolawe (1,721 ha; 4,252 
ac):
    (A) Unit 7 consists of the following 39 boundary points: Start at 
751848, 2276600; 751944, 2276801; 752021, 2277051; 752708, 2277402; 
752817, 2277444; 752922, 2277482; 753039, 2277468; 754266, 2276996; 
754390, 2276868; 754486, 2276715; 754758, 2275711; 754871, 2275319; 
754880, 2275141; 754868, 2275021; 754822, 2274844; 754523, 2273789; 
754438, 2273635; 754364, 2273546; 754213, 2273418; 753057, 2272446; 
752825, 2272362; 750995, 2272184; 750869, 2272206; 750787, 2272247; 
749069, 2273302; 749575, 2273659; 750287, 2273729; 750943, 2273970; 
751205, 2274403; 751431, 2274927; 751475, 2275037; 751531, 2275180; 
751447, 2275330; 751428, 2275366; 751291, 2275543; 751032, 2275938; 
751109, 2276062; 751570, 2276254; 751752, 2276408; return to starting 
point.

    (B) Note: Unit 7 is depicted on Map 4--Unit 7--Island of Kahoolawe, 
which follows:

[[Page 579]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.007

    (ix) Unit 8: Island of Hawaii, Puuwaawaa--Hualalai (9,954 ha; 24,598 
ac):
    (A) Unit 8 consists of the following 449 boundary points: Start at 
193748, 2193379; 193979, 2193518; 194022, 2193428; 194091, 2193386; 
194109, 2193303; 194145, 2193281; 194185, 2193225; 194212, 2193188; 
194225, 2193213; 194201, 2193260; 194232, 2193325; 194227, 2193356; 
194266, 2193381; 194290, 2193366; 194306, 2193379; 194301, 2193431; 
194281, 2193478; 194292, 2193504; 194286, 2193538; 194291, 2193598; 
194328, 2193648; 194331, 2193666; 194320, 2193710; 194969, 2194077; 
195027, 2194069; 195065, 2194098; 195121, 2194107; 195172, 2194152; 
195231, 2194087; 195235, 2194013; 195256, 2193957; 195324, 2193909; 
195378, 2193840; 195441, 2193804; 195564, 2193455; 195558, 2193407; 
195590, 2193322; 195588, 2193245; 195641, 2193182; 195659, 2193134; 
195645, 2193064; 195682, 2192983; 195722, 2192963; 195793, 2192836; 
195838, 2192773; 195829, 2192664; 195844, 2192499; 195907, 2192445; 
196009, 2192213; 196079, 2192144; 196061, 2192063; 196077, 2191999; 
196121, 2191888; 196184, 2191891; 196196, 2191837; 196250, 2191837; 
196287, 2191749; 196280, 2191681; 196331, 2191672; 196361, 2191560; 
196379, 2191428; 196414, 2191446; 196473, 2191524; 196497, 2191624; 
196494, 2191708; 196593, 2191768; 196656, 2191837; 196644, 2191885; 
196593, 2192093; 196576, 2192195; 196596, 2192288; 196581, 2192409; 
196566, 2192451; 196506, 2192484; 196397, 2192655; 196367, 2192770; 
196427, 2192764; 196452, 2192703; 196581, 2192577; 196614, 2192547; 
196623, 2192577; 196605, 2192634; 196608, 2192685; 196679, 2192667; 
196749, 2192610; 196804, 2192476; 196831, 2192436; 196879, 2192403; 
196885, 2192466; 196815, 2192586; 196717, 2192687; 196614, 2192809; 
196241, 2193037; 196094, 2193227; 196003, 2193494; 195985, 2193759; 
196088, 2193858; 195949, 2194099; 195958, 2194379; 195865, 2194469; 
195811, 2194559; 196050, 2194687; 196076, 2194653; 196055, 2194610; 
196109, 2194511; 196184, 2194505; 196223, 2194361; 196256, 2194337; 
196322, 2194285; 196334, 2194171; 196370, 2194174; 196348, 2194291; 
196379, 2194331; 196367, 2194427; 196363, 2194508; 196372, 2194578; 
196427, 2194610; 196385, 2194670; 196314, 2194718; 196304, 2194841; 
196831, 2195161; 196944, 2195021; 196930, 2194959; 197092, 2194830; 
197104, 2194773; 197179, 2194752; 197273, 2194622; 197279, 2194550; 
197361, 2194467; 197477, 2194325; 197573, 2194252; 197613, 2194177; 
197654, 2194115;

[[Page 580]]

197640, 2194033; 197654, 2193943; 197697, 2193753; 197750, 2193692; 
197778, 2193488; 197871, 2193374; 197922, 2193401; 197995, 2193392; 
198304, 2193109; 198362, 2193103; 198518, 2192944; 198584, 2192854; 
198620, 2192761; 198680, 2192715; 198716, 2192658; 198731, 2192586; 
198801, 2192589; 198879, 2192547; 198921, 2192493; 199051, 2192352; 
199101, 2192412; 199177, 2192324; 199171, 2192201; 199246, 2192141; 
199252, 2192243; 199294, 2192252; 199303, 2192291; 199225, 2192348; 
199243, 2192397; 199186, 2192439; 199156, 2192529; 199084, 2192566; 
199047, 2192643; 198948, 2192736; 198956, 2192786; 198949, 2192835; 
198931, 2192888; 198913, 2192924; 198819, 2192954; 198760, 2192979; 
198741, 2193028; 198777, 2193070; 198746, 2193098; 198718, 2193126; 
198730, 2193180; 198683, 2193290; 198609, 2193325; 198679, 2193472; 
198648, 2193542; 198669, 2193598; 198623, 2193633; 198602, 2193685; 
198553, 2193675; 198480, 2193748; 198442, 2193839; 198494, 2193857; 
198550, 2193860; 198819, 2193594; 198819, 2193514; 198882, 2193479; 
198872, 2193388; 198872, 2193252; 198861, 2193199; 198844, 2193143; 
198935, 2193063; 198981, 2193027; 199010, 2192968; 199103, 2193492; 
199103, 2193552; 199015, 2193608; 198931, 2193619; 198910, 2193717; 
198753, 2193867; 198735, 2193951; 198805, 2193972; 198889, 2193941; 
198942, 2193853; 199005, 2193794; 199050, 2193829; 199001, 2193880; 
199029, 2193930; 199092, 2193962; 199110, 2194004; 199025, 2194133; 
199012, 2194241; 198896, 2194308; 198861, 2194399; 198799, 2194485; 
198862, 2194479; 198938, 2194378; 199015, 2194329; 198987, 2194392; 
198934, 2194434; 198931, 2194472; 198798, 2194560; 198795, 2194672; 
198749, 2194749; 198623, 2194860; 198553, 2194937; 198550, 2195004; 
198637, 2195060; 198683, 2195074; 198746, 2195175; 198714, 2195256; 
198707, 2195340; 198588, 2195399; 198497, 2195417; 198402, 2195429; 
198344, 2195490; 198302, 2195511; 198274, 2195563; 198179, 2195584; 
198172, 2195658; 198127, 2195703; 198641, 2195878; 198662, 2195829; 
198714, 2195780; 198732, 2195665; 198809, 2195633; 198970, 2195626; 
199047, 2195549; 199075, 2195469; 199141, 2195427; 199087, 2195235; 
199101, 2195127; 199124, 2194955; 199208, 2194840; 199267, 2194675; 
199270, 2194567; 199260, 2194504; 199263, 2194437; 199310, 2194460; 
199347, 2194479; 199306, 2194541; 199326, 2194591; 199424, 2194595; 
199508, 2194525; 199522, 2194441; 199582, 2194392; 199598, 2194329; 
199643, 2194295; 199662, 2194406; 199599, 2194462; 199596, 2194588; 
199515, 2194853; 199368, 2195011; 199260, 2195319; 199312, 2195434; 
199235, 2195476; 199274, 2195696; 199169, 2195847; 199138, 2195938; 
199071, 2196039; 199663, 2196234; 199977, 2195921; 200985, 2194989; 
201320, 2194454; 201268, 2194305; 201289, 2194176; 201150, 2193708; 
201809, 2193212; 202487, 2192751; 202713, 2192557; 202794, 2192559; 
203007, 2192869; 203088, 2192979; 203136, 2192967; 203139, 2192921; 
203197, 2192911; 203224, 2192943; 203218, 2192991; 203264, 2193014; 
203275, 2193130; 203278, 2193165; 203253, 2193224; 203277, 2193250; 
203296, 2193248; 203321, 2193200; 203355, 2193261; 203340, 2193353; 
203398, 2193434; 203487, 2193372; 203534, 2193296; 203580, 2193267; 
203611, 2193247; 203631, 2193197; 203661, 2193126; 203650, 2193032; 
203644, 2192994; 203649, 2192943; 203665, 2192930; 203692, 2192935; 
203681, 2193005; 203695, 2193038; 203743, 2193045; 203751, 2193024; 
203738, 2192991; 203747, 2192970; 203800, 2192948; 203810, 2192905; 
203819, 2192867; 203833, 2192838; 203878, 2192830; 203916, 2192790; 
203944, 2192724; 203935, 2192680; 203951, 2192655; 203968, 2192628; 
203952, 2192587; 203978, 2192535; 203975, 2192477; 203992, 2192466; 
204025, 2192444; 204044, 2192404; 204086, 2192392; 204133, 2192395; 
204170, 2192417; 204186, 2192474; 204162, 2192528; 204130, 2192602; 
204129, 2192641; 204081, 2192714; 204046, 2192717; 204022, 2192755; 
204021, 2192835; 204057, 2192840; 204076, 2192827; 204105, 2192829; 
204151, 2192846; 204218, 2192835; 204283, 2192808; 204311, 2192754; 
204327, 2192655; 204350, 2192684; 204434, 2192709; 204459, 2192700; 
204478, 2192684; 204469, 2192614; 204482, 2192593; 204485, 2192570; 
204478, 2192547; 204485, 2192512; 204523, 2192529; 204540, 2192511; 
204553, 2192479; 204294, 2191977; 203325, 2189871; 203670, 2189403; 
203884, 2188867; 203876, 2188804; 204461, 2186966; 204241, 2186814; 
203491, 2186573; 202905, 2186615; 201914, 2186332; 201935, 2186229; 
201876, 2186192; 201969, 2186029; 201914, 2185947; 201962, 2185871; 
201921, 2185754; 201866, 2185830; 201776, 2185816; 201838, 2185534; 
201270, 2183971; 200424, 2183478; 194641, 2182859; 194391, 2182952; 
194378, 2183030; 194326, 2183157; 194456, 2183246; 194375, 2183319; 
194389, 2183392; 194641, 2183400; 195006, 2183522; 195441, 2183574; 
195719, 2183591; 196066, 2183591; 196362, 2183670; 196372, 2183812; 
195923, 2185051; 195805, 2185370; 195527, 2186175; 195324, 2186794; 
195333, 2187189; 195544, 2187388; 195515, 2187690; 195450, 2187775; 
193517, 2187814; 192035, 2187735; 191436, 2188145; 191395, 2188201; 
191330, 2188228; 191183, 2188413; 191053, 2188549; 192020, 2188888; 
192202, 2189030; 192137, 2189101; 192046, 2189432; 191945, 2189652; 
191926, 2189817; 192000, 2189918; 191994, 2190055; 192009, 2190194; 
191926, 2190322; 191954, 2190387; 191972, 2190616; 191961, 2190800; 
191953, 2190938; 191917, 2191094; 191981, 2191296; 191943, 2191461; 
191923, 2191548; 191871, 2191672; 191850, 2191864; 191834, 2192269; 
return to starting point.
    (B) This unit excludes three areas:
    (1) Unit excludes an area (292 ha; 723 ac) consisting of the 
following 53 boundary points: Start at 194866, 2189663; 194567, 2189462; 
194355, 2189326; 194325, 2189306; 194187, 2189261; 193786, 2189183; 
193790, 2189211; 193677, 2189413; 193430, 2189605; 193325, 2189528; 
192941, 2190012; 192773, 2190361; 192668, 2190673; 192763, 2190854; 
192807, 2191149; 192721, 2191436; 192600, 2191671; 192527, 2191928; 
192513, 2192089; 192642, 2191999; 192658, 2191915; 192697, 2191881; 
192913, 2191886; 193004, 2191923; 193133, 2191855; 193180, 2191784; 
193280, 2191621; 193278, 2191563; 193175, 2191653; 193109, 2191763; 
193075, 2191789; 192949, 2191779; 192960, 2191622; 193028, 2191556; 
193012, 2191490; 193102, 2191393; 193291, 2191346; 193364, 2191272; 
193540, 2191230; 193782, 2191099; 193918, 2190994; 193958, 2190933; 
193989, 2190799; 193984, 2190718; 194048, 2190643; 194008, 2190547; 
194039, 2190466; 194149, 2190358; 194304, 2190298; 194449, 2190177; 
194695, 2189967; 194808, 2189833; 194848, 2189683; return to starting 
point.
    (2) Unit excludes an area (15 ha; 38 ac) consisting of the following 
12 boundary points: Start at 202034, 2189562; 202141, 2189566; 202153, 
2189649; 202308, 2189645; 202298, 2189564; 202339, 2189548; 202329, 
2189219; 202193, 2189187; 202230,

[[Page 581]]

2189088; 202042, 2189024; 202020, 2189151; 202024, 2189554; return to 
starting point.
    (3) Unit excludes an area (11 ha; 28 ac) consisting of the following 
23 boundary points: Start at 199447, 2195793; 199533, 2195796; 199635, 
2195736; 199639, 2195696; 199701, 2195643; 199708, 2195591; 199713, 
2195537; 199743, 2195499; 199737, 2195444; 199746, 2195368; 199725, 
2195312; 199732, 2195273; 199753, 2195207; 199772, 2195162; 199732, 
2195181; 199706, 2195245; 199646, 2195283; 199615, 2195345; 199573, 
2195368; 199509, 2195416; 199449, 2195478; 199437, 2195611; 199430, 
2195734; return to starting point.

    (C) Note: Unit 8 is depicted on Map 5-Unit 8--Island of Hawaii, 
which follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.008

    (x) Unit 9: Island of Molokai, Kamoko Flats--Puukolekole (1,256 ha; 
3,105 ac):
    (A) Unit 9 consists of the following 170 boundary points: Start at 
713960, 2337883; 713787, 2337815; 713641, 2337737; 713587, 2337686; 
713542, 2337635; 713525, 2337608; 713514, 2337604; 713488, 2337574; 
713275, 2337497; 713260, 2337442; 713302, 2337415; 713444, 2337400; 
713651, 2337482; 713677, 2337507; 713828, 2337580; 713834, 2337585; 
713841, 2337587; 713989, 2337659; 714006, 2337664; 714030, 2337681; 
714036, 2337674; 714090, 2337691; 714150, 2337601; 714065, 2337490; 
714169, 2337531; 714182, 2337553; 714217, 2337500; 714313, 2337356; 
714267, 2337327; 713658, 2336950; 713641, 2336937; 713639, 2336938; 
713638, 2336937; 713592, 2336909; 713171, 2337020; 713128, 2337025; 
713101, 2337039; 712948, 2337083; 712768, 2337134; 712739, 2337127; 
712714, 2337150; 712707, 2337152; 712647, 2337156;

[[Page 582]]

711929, 2337023; 712115, 2336844; 712527, 2336930; 712811, 2336772; 
712314, 2336653; 712783, 2336203; 712700, 2336108; 712785, 2336093; 
712927, 2336085; 713147, 2336184; 713257, 2336224; 713265, 2336238; 
712778, 2336365; 712783, 2336372; 712923, 2336457; 713217, 2336633; 
714333, 2337309; 714341, 2337313; 715056, 2336242; 715073, 2336232; 
716805, 2335668; 717490, 2335146; 717565, 2335112; 718350, 2334490; 
718276, 2333666; 717554, 2332806; 717447, 2332851; 717080, 2333001; 
716796, 2333195; 715114, 2334345; 715139, 2334491; 715684, 2334688; 
716000, 2334857; 715980, 2334880; 715849, 2335177; 715914, 2335254; 
715842, 2335306; 715274, 2335635; 715213, 2335636; 715076, 2335749; 
715046, 2335773; 714377, 2335948; 714372, 2335938; 714373, 2335938; 
714280, 2335711; 714494, 2335653; 714617, 2335594; 714901, 2335519; 
715544, 2335359; 715547, 2335358; 715174, 2335053; 715005, 2334932; 
714716, 2334982; 714205, 2335078; 714040, 2335127; 714024, 2335088; 
711244, 2336986; 711354, 2337009; 711401, 2337037; 711322, 2337112; 
711727, 2337380; 711733, 2337403; 711948, 2337483; 712220, 2337776; 
712433, 2338103; 712602, 2338152; 712517, 2338265; 712284, 2338486; 
711968, 2338683; 711759, 2338845; 711681, 2338900; 711900, 2338941; 
711710, 2339118; 711642, 2339123; 711579, 2339096; 711465, 2339097; 
711625, 2339356; 711763, 2339365; 711777, 2339323; 711817, 2339308; 
711969, 2339303; 712089, 2339324; 712130, 2339297; 712272, 2339304; 
712447, 2339115; 712346, 2339007; 712231, 2338953; 712098, 2338911; 
712002, 2338805; 712132, 2338664; 712392, 2338783; 712579, 2338783; 
712421, 2338675; 712279, 2338579; 712353, 2338489; 712568, 2338528; 
712635, 2338591; 712780, 2338508; 712777, 2338472; 712895, 2338488; 
713001, 2338534; 713003, 2338502; 713072, 2338512; 713177, 2338629; 
713424, 2338561; 713452, 2338533; 712978, 2338207; 712867, 2337997; 
712845, 2337873; 713121, 2337952; 713150, 2337771; 713181, 2337784; 
713184, 2337801; 713189, 2337803; 713196, 2337826; 713191, 2337829; 
713197, 2337831; 713204, 2337853; 713303, 2337864; 713482, 2338023; 
713503, 2338044; 713520, 2338067; 713525, 2338081; 713557, 2338108; 
713664, 2338205; 713713, 2338254; 713731, 2338228; return to starting 
point.
    (B) This unit excludes two areas:
    (1) Unit excludes an area (2 ha; 4 ac) consisting of the following 5 
boundary points: Start at 712804, 2337632; 712923, 2337724; 712990, 
2337608; 712917, 2337600; 712748, 2337553; return to starting point.
    (2) Unit excludes an area (5 ha; 13 ac) consisting of the following 
10 boundary points: Start at 712742, 2337968; 712839, 2337857; 712748, 
2337850; 712646, 2337870; 712632, 2337823; 712481, 2337590; 712425, 
2337550; 712313, 2337564; 712299, 2337574; 712360, 2337661; return to 
starting point.

    (C) Note: Unit 9 is depicted on Map 6-Unit 9-Island of Molokai, 
which follows:

[[Page 583]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.009

                Ash Meadows Naucorid (Ambrysus amargosus)

    Nevada, Nye County, Point of Rocks Springs and their immediate 
outflows in SE\1/4\ sec. 7, T18S, R51E.
    Known primary constituent elements include flowing warm water over 
rock and gravel substrate.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.153
    

[[Page 584]]



            Laguna Mountains Skipper (Pyrgus ruralis lagunae)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for San Diego County, 
California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Laguna Mountains skipper are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) The hostplants, Horkelia clevelandii or Potentilla glandulosa, 
which are needed for reproduction, in meadows or forest openings.
    (ii) Nectar sources suitable for feeding by adult Laguna Mountains 
skipper, including Lasthenia spp., Pentachaeta aurea, Ranunculus spp., 
and Sidalcea spp., found in woodlands or meadows.
    (iii) Wet soil or standing water associated with features such as 
seeps, springs, or creeks where water and minerals are obtained during 
the adult flight season.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Data layers defining map units were created on a base of USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle maps, and critical habitat units were then mapped 
using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Map 1 (index map) follows:

[[Page 585]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE06.001

    (6) Unit 1: Laguna Mountain, San Diego County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle maps Monument Peak and Mount Laguna.
    (i) Subunit 1A: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 551900, 3635400; 551900, 3635600; 551800, 3635600; 551800, 
3635300; 552000, 3635300; 552000, 3634900; 551800, 3634900; 551800, 
3635000; 551600, 3635000; 551600, 3634900; 551400, 3634900; 551400, 
3635300; 551300, 3635300; 551300, 3635600; 551200, 3635600; 551200, 
3635700; 551100, 3635700; 551100, 3636000; 551000,

[[Page 586]]

3636000; 551000, 3636100; 550900, 3636100; 550900, 3636200; 550800, 
3636200; 550800, 3636100; 550700, 3636100; 550700, 3636000; 550800, 
3636000; 550800, 3635800; 550600, 3635800; 550600, 3635700; 550500, 
3635700; 550500, 3635500; 550400, 3635500; 550400, 3635400; 550300, 
3635400; 550300, 3635300; 550100, 3635300; 550100, 3635500; 550000, 
3635500; 550000, 3636200; 549800, 3636200; 549800, 3636500; 549900, 
3636500; 549900, 3636600; 549800, 3636600; 549800, 3636700; 549700, 
3636700; 549700, 3637000; 549800, 3637000; 549800, 3637100; 549900, 
3637100; 549900, 3637600; 550200, 3637600; 550200, 3637900; 550100, 
3637900; 550100, 3638500; 550000, 3638500; 550000, 3638600; 549900, 
3638600; 549900, 3638500; 549800, 3638500; 549800, 3638000; 549700, 
3638000; 549700, 3637700; 549500, 3637700; 549500, 3638000; 549600, 
3638000; 549600, 3638100; 549500, 3638100; 549500, 3638200; 549100, 
3638200; 549100, 3638400; 549200, 3638400; 549200, 3638500; 549300, 
3638500; 549300, 3638800; 549400, 3638800; 549400, 3638900; 549300, 
3638900; 549300, 3639000; 549600, 3639000; 549600, 3638600; 549700, 
3638600; 549700, 3638700; 549800, 3638700; 549800, 3638900; 549900, 
3638900; 549900, 3639000; 549700, 3639000; 549700, 3639200; 549600, 
3639200; 549600, 3639300; 549500, 3639300; 549500, 3639500; 549400, 
3639500; 549400, 3639600; 549300, 3639600; 549300, 3640000; 549400, 
3640000; 549400, 3640100; 549700, 3640100; 549700, 3640000; 549800, 
3640000; 549800, 3640100; 549900, 3640100; 549900, 3640200; 549700, 
3640200; 549700, 3640300; 549600, 3640300; 549600, 3640500; 549800, 
3640500; 549800, 3640600; 550100, 3640600; 550100, 3640500; 550200, 
3640500; 550200, 3640400; 550300, 3640400; 550300, 3640000; 551000, 
3640000; 551000, 3639900; 551100, 3639900; 551100, 3639700; 550500, 
3639700; 550500, 3639400; 550400, 3639400; 550400, 3639300; 550500, 
3639300; 550500, 3639200; 550600, 3639200; 550600, 3639100; 550700, 
3639100; 550700, 3639000; 550800, 3639000; 550800, 3638900; 551000, 
3638900; 551000, 3639300; 551100, 3639300; 551100, 3639500; 551300, 
3639500; 551300, 3639700; 551700, 3639700; 551700, 3639400; 551800, 
3639400; 551800, 3639300; 551900, 3639300; 551900, 3639100; 551800, 
3639100; 551800, 3639000; 551900, 3639000; 551900, 3638900; 551800, 
3638900; 551800, 3638800; 551900, 3638800; 551900, 3638700; 552100, 
3638700; 552100, 3638800; 552200, 3638800; 552200, 3638700; 552500, 
3638700; 552500, 3638300; 552300, 3638300; 552300, 3638400; 552200, 
3638400; 552200, 3638300; 551900, 3638300; 551900, 3638100; 551500, 
3638100; 551500, 3637900; 551700, 3637900; 551700, 3637800; 551800, 
3637800; 551800, 3637700; 552100, 3637700; 552100, 3637600; 552200, 
3637600; 552200, 3637500; 552500, 3637500; 552500, 3637700; 552600, 
3637700; 552600, 3637800; 553000, 3637800; 553000, 3638000; 553100, 
3638000; 553100, 3638100; 553600, 3638100; 553600, 3638000; 553800, 
3638000; 553800, 3637900; 553700, 3637900; 553700, 3637600; 553800, 
3637600; 553800, 3637400; 553700, 3637400; 553700, 3637500; 553500, 
3637500; 553500, 3637200; 553100, 3637200; 553100, 3637100; 553200, 
3637100; 553200, 3636900; 552900, 3636900; 552900, 3637000; 552800, 
3637000; 552800, 3637100; 552700, 3637100; 552700, 3637000; 552600, 
3637000; 552600, 3637100; 552400, 3637100; 552400, 3637200; 552300, 
3637200; 552300, 3637100; 552200, 3637100; 552200, 3637000; 552000, 
3637000; 552000, 3637100; 551900, 3637100; 551900, 3637300; 551500, 
3637300; 551500, 3637200; 551400, 3637200; 551400, 3637100; 551200, 
3637100; 551200, 3636700; 551300, 3636700; 551300, 3636600; 551400, 
3636600; 551400, 3636500; 551600, 3636500; 551600, 3636400; 551700, 
3636400; 551700, 3636300; 551800, 3636300; 551800, 3636200; 552000, 
3636200; 552000, 3636100; 552100, 3636100; 552100, 3636000; 552200, 
3636000; 552200, 3635900; 552300, 3635900; 552300, 3635500; 552200, 
3635500; 552200, 3635400; 551900, 3635400.
    (ii) Subunit 1B: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 549300, 3642300; 549400, 3642300; 549400, 3642400; 
549600, 3642400; 549600, 3642300; 549800, 3642300; 549800, 3642200; 
549900, 3642200; 549900, 3641900; 550000, 3641900; 550000, 3641400; 
550100, 3641400; 550100, 3640900; 549600, 3640900; 549600, 3641000; 
549300, 3641000; 549300, 3642300.
    (iii) Subunit 1C: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 553000, 3634400; 553000, 3634500; 552900, 3634500; 
552900, 3634900; 552800, 3634900; 552800, 3635600; 553100, 3635600; 
553100, 3635400; 553300, 3635400; 553300, 3635300; 553400, 3635300; 
553400, 3635200; 553300, 3635200; 553300, 3635100; 553200, 3635100; 
553200, 3635000; 553300, 3635000; 553300, 3634900; 553400, 3634900; 
553400, 3634800; 553600, 3634800; 553600, 3634600; 553700, 3634600; 
553700, 3634200; 553600, 3634200; 553600, 3634100; 553500, 3634100; 
553500, 3634000; 553400, 3634000; 553400, 3633800; 553300, 3633800; 
553300, 3633600; 553200, 3633600; 553200, 3633300; 553300, 3633300; 
553300, 3633200; 553500, 3633200; 553500, 3633300; 553600, 3633300; 
553600, 3633000; 553700, 3633000; 553700, 3632300; 553600, 3632300; 
553600, 3632200; 553300, 3632200; 553300, 3632300; 553200, 3632300; 
553200, 3633000; 553100, 3633000; 553100, 3633200; 553000, 3633200; 
553000, 3633300; 552900, 3633300; 552900, 3632800; 552600, 3632800; 
552600, 3633000; 552700, 3633000; 552700, 3633400; 552800, 3633400; 
552800, 3633800; 552700, 3633800; 552700, 3634300; 552800, 3634300; 
552800, 3634400; 553000, 3634400.
    (iv) Note: Map of Unit 1 (Map 2, Subunits 1A, 1B, and 1C) follows:

[[Page 587]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE06.002

    (7) Unit 2: Palomar Mountain, San Diego County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Boucher Hill and Palomar Observatory.
    (i) Subunit 2A: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E, N): 511300, 3689300; 511400, 3689300; 511400, 3689200; 511600, 
3689200; 511600, 3689100; 511700, 3689100; 511700, 3689000; 511800, 
3689000; 511800, 3688900; 512300, 3688900; 512300, 3688800; 512400, 
3688800; 512400, 3689000; 512900, 3689000; 512900, 3688900; 513200, 
3688900; 513200, 3688800; 513400, 3688800;

[[Page 588]]

513400, 3688700; 513700, 3688700; 513700, 3688600; 513900, 3688600; 
513900, 3688500; 514000, 3688500; 514000, 3688400; 514100, 3688400; 
514100, 3688300; 514400, 3688300; 514400, 3688200; 514500, 3688200; 
514500, 3688100; 515300, 3688100; 515300, 3688000; 515400, 3688000; 
515400, 3687900; 515500, 3687900; 515500, 3687800; 515700, 3687800; 
515700, 3687600; 515900, 3687600; 515900, 3687300; 515800, 3687300; 
515800, 3687200; 515900, 3687200; 515900, 3687100; 516000, 3687100; 
516000, 3687000; 516300, 3687000; 516300, 3686900; 516400, 3686900; 
516400, 3686800; 516500, 3686800; 516500, 3686700; 516600, 3686700; 
516600, 3686600; 517000, 3686600; 517000, 3686300; 517200, 3686300; 
517200, 3686200; 517300, 3686200; 517300, 3686000; 517100, 3686000; 
517100, 3685800; 517200, 3685800; 517200, 3685700; 516700, 3685700; 
516700, 3685800; 516600, 3685800; 516600, 3686000; 516500, 3686000; 
516500, 3686100; 516400, 3686100; 516400, 3686200; 516300, 3686200; 
516300, 3686300; 516200, 3686300; 516200, 3686400; 516000, 3686400; 
516000, 3686600; 515900, 3686600; 515900, 3686700; 515800, 3686700; 
515800, 3686800; 515700, 3686800; 515700, 3686900; 515500, 3686900; 
515500, 3687000; 515200, 3687000; 515200, 3687100; 514900, 3687100; 
514900, 3687200; 514800, 3687200; 514800, 3687300; 514500, 3687300; 
514500, 3687500; 514400, 3687500; 514400, 3687600; 514300, 3687600; 
514300, 3687700; 514200, 3687700; 514200, 3687800; 514100, 3687800; 
514100, 3687900; 514000, 3687900; 514000, 3688000; 513700, 3688000; 
513700, 3688100; 513500, 3688100; 513500, 3688000; 513400, 3688000; 
513400, 3687700; 513300, 3687700; 513300, 3687400; 513200, 3687400; 
513200, 3687300; 513000, 3687300; 513000, 3687600; 512900, 3687600; 
512900, 3688000; 512800, 3688000; 512800, 3688100; 512500, 3688100; 
512500, 3688200; 512400, 3688200; 512400, 3688400; 512300, 3688400; 
512300, 3688500; 512000, 3688500; 512000, 3688600; 511900, 3688600; 
511900, 3688500; 511700, 3688500; 511700, 3688800; 511500, 3688800; 
511500, 3688900; 511400, 3688900; 511400, 3689000; 511300, 3689000; 
511300, 3689100; 511200, 3689100; 511200, 3689200; 511300, 3689200; 
511300, 3689300.
    (ii) Subunit 2B: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 513000, 3690900; 513000, 3690800; 513200, 3690800; 
513200, 3690600; 513100, 3690600; 513100, 3690400; 513200, 3690400; 
513200, 3690300; 513300, 3690300; 513300, 3690000; 513200, 3690000; 
513200, 3689900; 513300, 3689900; 513300, 3689600; 512900, 3689600; 
512900, 3689400; 512700, 3689400; 512700, 3689500; 512600, 3689500; 
512600, 3689300; 512300, 3689300; 512300, 3689400; 512200, 3689400; 
512200, 3689500; 512000, 3689500; 512000, 3689700; 511900, 3689700; 
511900, 3689900; 511800, 3689900; 511800, 3690200; 511700, 3690200; 
511700, 3690300; 511600, 3690300; 511600, 3690500; 511500, 3690500; 
511500, 3690600; 511200, 3690600; 511200, 3690700; 511100, 3690700; 
511100, 3690800; 510800, 3690800; 510800, 3690900; 510700, 3690900; 
510700, 3690800; 510600, 3690800; 510600, 3690900; 510500, 3690900; 
510500, 3691000; 510200, 3691000; 510200, 3690900; 510300, 3690900; 
510300, 3690600; 510400, 3690600; 510400, 3690300; 510200, 3690300; 
510200, 3690400; 509800, 3690400; 509800, 3690500; 509700, 3690500; 
509700, 3690600; 509500, 3690600; 509500, 3690700; 509400, 3690700; 
509400, 3690800; 509300, 3690800; 509300, 3690900; 509100, 3690900; 
509100, 3691000; 509000, 3691000; 509000, 3691200; 509200, 3691200; 
509200, 3691100; 509400, 3691100; 509400, 3691300; 509300, 3691300; 
509300, 3691500; 509500, 3691500; 509500, 3691400; 510000, 3691400; 
510000, 3691500; 510100, 3691500; 510100, 3691600; 510200, 3691600; 
510200, 3691700; 510700, 3691700; 510700, 3691600; 511000, 3691600; 
511000, 3691500; 511100, 3691500; 511100, 3691400; 511400, 3691400; 
511400, 3691200; 511600, 3691200; 511600, 3691100; 511700, 3691100; 
511700, 3691000; 511900, 3691000; 511900, 3690900; 512000, 3690900; 
512000, 3690700; 511800, 3690700; 511800, 3690600; 511900, 3690600; 
511900, 3690500; 512000, 3690500; 512000, 3690400; 512100, 3690400; 
512100, 3690300; 512200, 3690300; 512200, 3690200; 512500, 3690200; 
512500, 3690300; 512700, 3690300; 512700, 3690400; 512600, 3690400; 
512600, 3690600; 512500, 3690600; 512500, 3690700; 512400, 3690700; 
512400, 3690800; 512300, 3690800; 512300, 3691100; 512500, 3691100; 
512500, 3691200; 513100, 3691200; 513100, 3691300; 513200, 3691300; 
513200, 3691200; 513300, 3691200; 513300, 3690900; 513000, 3690900; 
excluding lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
509900, 3691000; 510100, 3691000; 510100, 3690900; 510000, 3690900; 
510000, 3690800; 509900, 3690800; 509900, 3691000; and 512800, 3691000; 
513000, 3691000; 513000, 3690900; 512800, 3690900; 512800, 3691000.
    (iii) Subunit 2C: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E, N): 509200, 3689100; 509400, 3689100; 509400, 3689000; 
509700, 3689000; 509700, 3688700; 509800, 3688700; 509800, 3688600; 
510200, 3688600; 510200, 3688900; 510800, 3688900; 510800, 3688800; 
511100, 3688800; 511100, 3688600; 511200, 3688600; 511200, 3688500; 
511300, 3688500; 511300, 3688400; 511200, 3688400; 511200, 3688300; 
511500, 3688300; 511500, 3688200; 511600, 3688200; 511600, 3687900; 
511300, 3687900; 511300, 3687600; 511200, 3687600; 511200, 3687500; 
511100, 3687500; 511100, 3687400; 511200, 3687400; 511200, 3687100; 
511000, 3687100; 511000, 3687200; 510900, 3687200; 510900, 3687300; 
510600, 3687300; 510600, 3687500; 510500, 3687500; 510500, 3687400; 
510400, 3687400; 510400, 3687500; 510300, 3687500; 510300, 3687600; 
510400, 3687600; 510400, 3687700; 510500, 3687700; 510500, 3687800; 
510400, 3687800; 510400, 3687900; 510300, 3687900; 510300, 3687800; 
510100, 3687800; 510100, 3687900; 509900, 3687900; 509900, 3688200; 
509800, 3688200; 509800, 3688300; 509700, 3688300; 509700, 3688400; 
509500, 3688400; 509500, 3688500; 509300, 3688500; 509300, 3688600; 
509200, 3688600; 509200, 3689100.
    (iv) Subunit 2D: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 507700, 3690800; 508000, 3690800; 508000, 3690700; 
508100, 3690700; 508100, 3690800; 508300, 3690800; 508300, 3690600; 
508400, 3690600; 508400, 3690500; 508500, 3690500; 508500, 3690300; 
508400, 3690300; 508400, 3690100; 508500, 3690100; 508500, 3690000; 
508600, 3690000; 508600, 3689900; 508700, 3689900; 508700, 3689700; 
508800, 3689700; 508800, 3689600; 508900, 3689600; 508900, 3689100; 
508700, 3689100; 508700, 3689200; 508600, 3689200; 508600, 3689300; 
508400, 3689300; 508400, 3689400; 508200, 3689400; 508200, 3689800; 
508000, 3689800; 508000, 3690000; 507900, 3690000; 507900, 3690200; 
507800, 3690200; 507800, 3690400; 507500, 3690400; 507500, 3690300; 
507400,

[[Page 589]]

3690300; 507400, 3690500; 507500, 3690500; 507500, 3690700; 507700, 
3690700; 507700, 3690800.
    (v) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Map 3, Subunits 2A, 2B, 2C, and 2D) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE06.003


[42 FR 47840, Sept. 22, 1977]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
17.95, see the List of CFR

[[Page 590]]

Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding Aids section of the 
printed volume and at www.fdsys.gov.

    Effective Date Note: At 77 FR 57747, Sept. 18, 2012, Sec. 17.95(i) 
was amended by adding critical habitat for ``Blackline Hawaiian 
Damselfly (Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum),'' ``Crimson Hawaiian 
Damselfly (Megalagrion leptodemas),'' and ``Oceanic Hawaiian Damselfly 
(Megalagrion oceanicum)'', in the same alphabetical order as these 
species occur in the table at Sec. 17.11(h), effective Oct. 18, 2012. 
For the convenience of the user, the added text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 17.95  Critical habitat--fish and wildlife.

                                * * * * *

    (i) Insects.

                                * * * * *

  Blackline Hawaiian Damselfly (Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Honolulu County, Hawaii, 
on the maps below.
    (2) Primary constituent elements. The primary constituent elements 
of critical habitat for the blackline Hawaiian damselfly (Megalagrion 
nigrohamatum nigrolineatum) are:
    (i) Elevation: Less than 3,300 ft (1,000 m).
    (ii) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 in (190 cm).
    (iii) Substrate: Clays; ashbeds; deep, well-drained soils; lowland 
bogs.
    (iv) Canopy: Antidesma, Metrosideros, Myrsine, Pisonia, Psychotria.
    (v) Subcanopy: Cibotium, Claoxylon, Kadua, Melicope.
    (vi) Understory: Alyxia, Cyrtandra, Dicranopteris, Diplazium, 
Machaerina, Microlepia.
    (vii) Perennial streams.
    (viii) Slow reaches of streams.
    (ix) Pools.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas, existing trails, campgrounds and their immediate 
surrounding landscaped area, scenic lookouts, remote helicopter landing 
sites, and existing fences are not included in the critical habitat 
designation. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, would 
not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they may 
affect the species or adjacent critical habitat.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Maps were created in GIS, with 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4, units in meters using North American datum of 
1983 (NAD 83). The maps in this entry, as modified by any accompanying 
regulatory text, establish the boundaries of the critical habitat 
designation. The coordinates or plot points or both on which each map is 
based are available to the public at the Service's internet site, http:/
/www.fws.gov/pacificislands; at http://www.regulations.gov at Docket No. 
FWS-R1-ES-2010-0043: and at the field office responsible for the 
designation. You may obtain field office location information by 
contacting one of the Service regional offices, the addresses of which 
are listed at 50 CFR 2.2.
    (5) Index map of critical habitat units for the blackline Hawaiian 
damselfly (Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum) follows:

[[Page 591]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.009

    (6) Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 1--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (790 ac; 320 ha); Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 2--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (1,787 ac; 
723 ha); and Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 3--Lowland 
Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (3,041 ac; 1,231 ha). These units are 
critical habitat for the blackline Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion 
nigrohamatum nigrolineatum. Map of Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 1--Lowland Wet, Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 2--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 3--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 592]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.010

    (7) Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 4--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (15,728 ac; 6,365 ha). This unit is critical 
habitat for the blackline Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum. Map of Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 4--
Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 593]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.011

    (8) Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 5--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (124 ac; 50 ha); Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 6--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (123 ac; 50 
ha); and Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 7--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (53 ac; 21 ha). These units are critical habitat 
for the blackline Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum. Map of Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 5--
Lowland Wet, Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 6--Lowland 
Wet, and Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 7--Lowland Wet 
follows:

[[Page 594]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.012

    (9) Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 8--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (75 ac; 30 ha); Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 9--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (478 ac; 193 
ha); Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 10--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (407 ac; 165 ha); and Megalagrion nigrohamatum 
nigrolineatum--Unit 11--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (2,507 ac; 
1,014 ha). These units are critical habitat for the blackline Hawaiian 
damselfly, Megalagrion nigrohamatum nigrolineatum. Map of Megalagrion 
nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 8--Lowland Wet, Megalagrion 
nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 9--Lowland Wet, Megalagrion 
nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 10--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion 
nigrohamatum nigrolineatum--Unit 11--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 595]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.013

           Crimson Hawaiian Damselfly (Megalagrion leptodemas)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Honolulu County, Hawaii, 
on the maps below.
    (2) Primary constituent elements.
    (i) In units 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, the primary 
constituent elements of critical habitat for the crimson Hawaiian 
damselfly are:
    (A) Elevation: Less than 3,300 ft (1,000 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 in (190 cm).
    (C) Substrate: Clays; ashbeds; deep, well-drained soils; lowland 
bogs.
    (D) Canopy: Antidesma, Metrosideros, Myrsine, Pisonia, Psychotria.
    (E) Subcanopy: Cibotium, Claoxylon, Kadua, Melicope.
    (F) Understory: Alyxia, Cyrtandra, Dicranopteris, Diplazium, 
Machaerina, Microlepia.
    (G) Perennial streams.
    (H) Slow reaches of streams or ponds.
    (ii) In units 12, 13, and 14, the primary constituent elements of 
critical habitat for the crimson Hawaiian damselfly are:

[[Page 596]]

    (A) Elevation: Unrestricted.
    (B) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 in (190 cm).
    (C) Substrate: Greater than 65 degree slope, shallow soils, 
weathered lava.
    (D) Canopy: None.
    (E) Subcanopy: Broussaisia, Cheirodendron, Leptecophylla, 
Metrosideros.
    (F) Understory: Ferns, Bryophytes, Coprosma, Dubautia, Kadua, 
Peperomia.
    (G) Perennial streams.
    (H) Slow reaches of streams or ponds.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas, existing trails, campgrounds and their immediate 
surrounding landscaped area, scenic lookouts, remote helicopter landing 
sites, and existing fences are not included in the critical habitat 
designation. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, would 
not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they may 
affect the species or physical or biological features in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Maps were created in GIS, with 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4, units in meters using North American datum of 
1983 (NAD 83). The maps in this entry, as modified by any accompanying 
regulatory text, establish the boundaries of the critical habitat 
designation. The coordinates or plot points or both on which each map is 
based are available to the public at the Service's internet site, http:/
/www.fws.gov/pacificislands; at http://www.regulations.gov at Docket No. 
FWS-R1-ES-2010-0043; and at the field office responsible for the 
designation. You may obtain field office location information by 
contacting one of the Service regional offices, the addresses of which 
are listed at 50 CFR 2.2.
    (5) Index map of critical habitat units for the crimson Hawaiian 
damselfly (Megalagrion leptodemas) follows:

[[Page 597]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.014

    (6) Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 1--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (790 ac; 320 ha); Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 2--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (1,787ac; 723 ha); and Megalagrion leptodemas--
Unit 3--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (3,041 ac; 1,231 ha). These 
units are critical habitat for the crimson Hawaiian damselfly, 
Megalagrion leptodemas. Map of Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 1--Lowland 
Wet, Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 2--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion 
leptodemas--Unit 3--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 598]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.015

    (7) Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 4--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (15,728 ac; 6,365 ha). This unit is critical habitat for the 
crimson Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion leptodemas. Map of Megalagrion 
leptodemas--Unit 4--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 599]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.016

    (8) Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 5--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (124 ac; 50 ha); Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 6--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (123 ac; 50 ha); and Megalagrion leptodemas--
Unit 7--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (53 ac; 21 ha). These units 
are critical habitat for the crimson Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion 
leptodemas. Map of Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 5--Lowland Wet, 
Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 6--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion 
leptodemas--Unit 7--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 600]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.017

    (9) Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 8--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (75 ac; 30 ha); Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 9--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (478 ac; 193 ha); Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 
10--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (407 ac; 165 ha); and 
Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 11--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii 
(2,507 ac; 1,014 ha). These units are critical habitat for the crimson 
Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion leptodemas. Map of Megalagrion 
leptodemas--Unit 8--Lowland Wet, Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 9--Lowland 
Wet, Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 10--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion 
leptodemas--Unit 11--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 601]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.018

    (10) Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 12--Wet Cliff, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (151 ac; 61 ha) and Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 13--Wet Cliff, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (144 ac; 58 ha). These units are critical 
habitat for the crimson Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion leptodemas. Map 
of Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 12--Wet Cliff and Megalagrion --Unit 
13--Wet Cliff follows:

[[Page 602]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.019

    (11) Megalagrion leptodemas--Unit 14--Wet Cliff, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (4,649 ac; 1,881 ha). This unit is critical habitat for the 
crimson Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion leptodemas. Map of Megalagrion 
leptodemas--Unit 14--Wet Cliff follows:

[[Page 603]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.020

           Oceanic Hawaiian Damselfly (Megalagrion oceanicum)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Honolulu County, Hawaii, 
on the maps below.
    (2) Primary constituent elements.
    (i) In unit 1, the primary constituent elements of critical habitat 
for the oceanic Hawaiian damselfly (Megalagrion oceanicum) are:
    (A) Elevation: Less than 3,300 ft (1,000 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: 50 to 75 in (130 to 190 cm).
    (C) Substrate: Shallow soils, little to no herbaceous layer.
    (D) Canopy: Acacia, Diospyros, Metrosideros, Myrsine, Pouteria, 
Santalum.
    (E) Subcanopy: Dodonaea, Freycinetia, Leptecophylla, Melanthera, 
Osteomeles, Pleomele, Psydrax.
    (F) Understory: Carex, Dicranopteris, Diplazium, Elaphoglossum, 
Peperomia.
    (G) Perennial streams.
    (H) Swift-flowing sections and riffles of streams.

[[Page 604]]

    (ii) In units 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, the primary 
constituent elements of critical habitat for the oceanic Hawaiian 
damselfly (Megalagrion oceanicum) are:
    (A) Elevation: Less than 3,300 ft (1,000 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 in (190 cm).
    (C) Substrate: Clays; ashbeds; deep, well-drained soils; lowland 
bogs.
    (D) Canopy: Antidesma, Metrosideros, Myrsine, Pisonia, Psychotria.
    (E) Subcanopy: Cibotium, Claoxylon, Kadua, Melicope.
    (F) Understory: Alyxia, Cyrtandra, Dicranopteris, Diplazium, 
Machaerina, Microlepia.
    (G) Perennial streams.
    (H) Swift-flowing sections and riffles of streams.
    (iii) In units 13, 14, and 15, the primary constituent elements of 
critical habitat for the oceanic Hawaiian damselfly (Megalagrion 
oceanicum) are:
    (A) Elevation: Unrestricted.
    (B) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 in (190 cm).
    (C) Substrate: Greater than 65 degree slope, shallow soils, 
weathered lava.
    (D) Canopy: None.
    (E) Subcanopy: Broussaisia, Cheirodendron, Leptecophylla, 
Metrosideros.
    (F) Understory: Ferns, Bryophytes, Coprosma, Dubautia, Kadua, 
Peperomia.
    (G) Perennial streams.
    (H) Swift-flowing sections and riffles of streams.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas, existing trails, campgrounds and their immediate 
surrounding landscaped area, scenic lookouts, remote helicopter landing 
sites, and existing fences are not included in the critical habitat 
designation. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, would 
not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they may 
affect the species or physical and biological features in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Maps were created in GIS, with 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4, units in meters using North American datum of 
1983 (NAD 83). The maps in this entry, as modified by any accompanying 
regulatory text, establish the boundaries of the critical habitat 
designation. The coordinates or plot points or both on which each map is 
based are available to the public at the Service's internet site, http:/
/www.fws.gov/pacificislands; at http://www.regulations.gov at Docket No. 
FWS-R1-ES-2010-0043; and at the field office responsible for the 
designation. You may obtain field office location information by 
contacting one of the Service regional offices, the addresses of which 
are listed at 50 CFR 2.2.
    (5) Index map of critical habitat units for the oceanic Hawaiian 
damselfly (Megalagrion oceanicum) follows:

[[Page 605]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.021

    (6) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 1--Lowland Mesic, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (247 ac; 100 ha). This unit is critical habitat for the oceanic 
Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion oceanicum. Map of Megalagrion 
oceanicum--Unit 1--Lowland Mesic (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 606]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.022

    (7) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 2--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (790 ac; 320 ha); Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 3--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (1,787 ac; 723 ha); and Megalagrion oceanicum--
Unit 4--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (3,041 ac; 1,231 ha). These 
units are critical habitat for the oceanic Hawaiian damselfly, 
Megalagrion oceanicum. Map of Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 2--Lowland 
Wet, Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 3--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion 
oceanicum--Unit 4--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 607]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.023

    (8) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 5--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (15,728 ac; 6,365 ha). This unit is critical habitat for the 
oceanic Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion oceanicum. Map of Megalagrion 
oceanicum--Unit 5--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 608]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.024

    (9) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 6--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (124 ac; 50 ha); Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 7--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (123 ac; 50 ha); and Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 
8--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (53 ac; 21 ha). These units are 
critical habitat for the oceanic Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion 
oceanicum. Map of Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 6--Lowland Wet, 
Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 7--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion oceanicum--
Unit 8--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 609]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.025

    (10) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 9--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (75 ac; 30 ha); Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 10--Lowland Wet, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (478 ac; 193 ha); Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 
11--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii (407 ac; 165 ha); and 
Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 12--Lowland Wet, Honolulu County, Hawaii 
(2,507 ac; 1,014 ha). These units are critical habitat for the oceanic 
Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion oceanicum. Map of Megalagrion 
oceanicum--Unit 9--Lowland Wet, Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 10--Lowland 
Wet, Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 11--Lowland Wet, and Megalagrion 
oceanicum--Unit 12--Lowland Wet follows:

[[Page 610]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.026

    (11) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 13--Wet Cliff, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (151 ac; 61 ha) and Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 14--Wet Cliff, 
Honolulu County, Hawaii (144 ac; 58 ha). These units are critical 
habitat for the oceanic Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion oceanicum. Map 
of Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 13--Wet Cliff and Megalagrion oceanicum--
Unit 14--Wet Cliff follows:

[[Page 611]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.027

    (12) Megalagrion oceanicum--Unit 15--Wet Cliff, Honolulu County, 
Hawaii (4,649 ac; 1,881 ha). This unit is critical habitat for the 
oceanic Hawaiian damselfly, Megalagrion oceanicum. Map of Megalagrion 
oceanicum--Unit 15--Wet Cliff follows:

[[Page 612]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18SE12.028

                                * * * * *

[[Page 613]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 615]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2012)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
       III  Administrative Conference of the United States (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide 
                Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 2--199)
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                (200--299)
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements
       III  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-- 
                399)
        IV  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Defense (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
     XVIII  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        XX  United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 
                2000--2099)
      XXII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2200--2299)
     XXIII  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
      XXIV  Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400--2499)
       XXV  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                2600--2699)
     XXVII  Small Business Administration (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)

[[Page 616]]

       XXX  Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100--
                3199)
     XXXII  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300--
                3399)
     XXXIV  Department of Education (Parts 3400--3499)
      XXXV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500--
                3599)
    XXXVII  Peace Corps (Parts 3700--3799)
     LVIII  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800--5899)

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  Government Accountability Office (Parts 1--199)
        II  Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Parts 
                200--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100--2199)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200--
                3299)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Parts 3300--3399)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400--
                3499)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Parts 3500--3599)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Parts 3600-- 3699)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 3800--3899)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)

[[Page 617]]

    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300--
                4399)
     XXXIV  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400--4499)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500--4599)
    XXXVII  Federal Election Commission (Parts 4700--4799)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000--5099)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100--
                5199)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Parts 5200--5299)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Parts 5300--5399)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500--
                5599)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600--5699)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700--5799)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800--5899)
      XLIX  Federal Labor Relations Authority (Parts 5900--5999)
         L  Department of Transportation (Parts 6000--6099)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200--
                6299)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400--6499)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500--6599)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600--
                6699)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Parts 6700--6799)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
                (Parts 6800--6899)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                6900--6999)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Parts 7000--7099)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100--7199)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200--
                7299)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300--7399)
      LXIV  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400--7499)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                7500--7599)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                7600--7699)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700--
                7799)
    LXVIII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800--7899)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900--7999)
       LXX  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 8000--8099)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100--8199)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300--8399)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 8400--8499)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                8600--8699)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700--8799)
      LXXX  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 9000--9099)
    LXXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 9200--9299)

[[Page 618]]

   LXXXIII  Special Inspector General for Afghanistan 
                Reconstruction (Parts 9300--9399)
    LXXXIV  Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 9400--
                9499)
     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 
                9700--9799)

                      Title 6--Domestic Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 1--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 619]]

     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
       XXV  Office of Advocacy and Outreach, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 
                3400--3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 620]]

       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XIII  Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1300--
                1399)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Parts 1800--1899)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)
        II  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400--9499)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 1000--
                1099)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Financial Stability Oversight Council (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Office of Financial Research (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

[[Page 621]]

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--1199)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

[[Page 622]]

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department 
                of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 623]]

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Millennium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)

[[Page 624]]

        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XV  Emergency Mortgage Insurance and Loan Programs, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2700--2799)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
      XXIV  Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program 
                (Parts 4000--4099)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)

[[Page 625]]

        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--End)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)

[[Page 626]]

      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)
       XII  Office of Natural Resources Revenue, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)
         X  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)

[[Page 627]]

         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education [Reserved]
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 628]]

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
        VI  [Reserved]
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500--
                1599)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--199)
        II  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 200--299)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

[[Page 629]]

        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle A--Federal Procurement Regulations System 
                [Note]
            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
   62--100  [Reserved]
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
  103--104  [Reserved]
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
  129--200  [Reserved]
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 630]]

        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--599)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 400--999)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10099)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899) 
                [Reserved]
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)

[[Page 631]]

      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce, and 
                National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of 
                Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Health and Human Services (Parts 300--399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 632]]

        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement [Reserved]
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services 
                Administration (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 633]]

       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation [Reserved]
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 635]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2012)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Administrative Conference of the United States    1, III
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
Advocacy and Outreach, Office of                  7, XXV
Afghanistan Reconstruction, Special Inspector     22, LXXXIII
     General for
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              2, VII; 22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            2, IV; 5, LXXIII
  Advocacy and Outreach, Office of                7, XXV
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of           2, IX; 7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  National Institute of Food and Agriculture      7, XXXIV
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII, L
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV, L
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII

[[Page 636]]

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase from People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation,    30, II
     and Enforcement
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chemical Safety and Hazardous Investigation       40, VI
     Board
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       5, LXVIII; 45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    5, LXX
     for the District of Columbia
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               2, XIII; 44, IV; 50, VI
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau              5, LXXXIV; 12, X
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Copyright Royalty Board                           37, III
Corporation for National and Community Service    2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    5, LXX; 28, VIII
   for the District of Columbia
[[Page 637]]

Customs and Border Protection                     19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                2, XI; 5, XXVI; 32, 
                                                  Subtitle A; 40, VII
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Acquisition Regulations System          48, 2
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 2, XI; 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          5, LXX; 28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          2, XXXIV; 5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Election Assistance Commission                    2, LVIII; 11, II
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             2, IX; 5, XXIII; 10, II, 
                                                  III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, 
                                                  VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV

[[Page 638]]

  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                2, Subtitle A; 5, III, 
                                                  LXXVII; 14, VI; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       5, XXXVII; 11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Agency                    5, LXXX; 12, XII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority                 5, XIV, XLIX; 22, XIV
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network              31, X
Financial Research Office                         12, XVI
Financial Stability Oversight Council             12, XIII
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX

[[Page 639]]

Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Accountability Office                  4, I
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          2, III; 5, XLV; 45, 
                                                  Subtitle A,
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  2, XXX; 6, I; 8, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection                   19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors   24, XXIV
     of
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, 
                                                  Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV

[[Page 640]]

Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII, XV
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department                               2, XIV
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation,  30, II
       and Enforcement
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Natural Resource Revenue, Office of             30, XII
  Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of              30, V
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
Investment Security, Office of                    31, VIII
Iraq Reconstruction, Special Inspector General    5, LXXXVII
     for
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                2, XXVIII; 5, XXVIII; 28, 
                                                  I, XI; 40, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII

[[Page 641]]

  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs        20, VII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
  Copyright Royalty Board                         37, III
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II, LXIV
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Millennium Challenge Corporation                  22, XIII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
Museum and Library Services, Institute of         2, XXXI
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Endowment for the Arts                   2, XXXII
National Endowment for the Humanities             2, XXXIII
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Food and Agriculture        7, XXXIV
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Intelligence, Office of Director of      32, XVII
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X

[[Page 642]]

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Natural Resource Revenue, Office of               30, XII
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
     Commission
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of                30, V
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Office of Workers' Compensation Programs          20, VII
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       2, XXXVII; 22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems, Department of Homeland Security
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Regulatory Commission                      5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board    4, II
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Innovative Technology                49, XI
     Administration
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII, L
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV, L

[[Page 643]]

Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                5, XXXIV; 17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     2, XXVII; 13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     2, XII; 5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety         49, I
       Administration
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection                   19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network            31, X
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  Investment Security, Office of                  31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII

[[Page 644]]

United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       2, VIII; 38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 645]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations that were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

50 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) added.....................................................9244
    (g) added......................................................35560
    (h) amended....................................................29404
    (i) amended..............................................9231, 21475

                                  2002

50 CFR
                                                                   67 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended...........................................44515, 54053
    (f) amended; eff. 10-28-02.....................................61034
    (i) amended....................................................18383

                                  2003

50 CFR
                                                                   68 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (g) and (h) amended..........................................17456
    (g) and (i) amended............................................17191
    (h) amended....................................................46757
    (i) amended....................................................34758

                                  2004

50 CFR
                                                                   69 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended...........................................40117, 53161

                                  2005

50 CFR
                                                                   70 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended..................................................46329
    (h) amended.............................................19199, 46956

                                  2006

50 CFR
                                                                   71 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended...........................................63908, 74609
    (h) amended.....................................................7123

                                  2007

50 CFR
                                                                   72 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended..................................................64314
    (h) amended....................................................70692
    (h) and (i) amended............................................39265
    (i) amended; eff. 10-5-07......................................51137

                                  2008

50 CFR
                                                                   73 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (i) amended...........................................50433, 73821

                                  2009

50 CFR
                                                                   74 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (i) amended..................................................28837

[[Page 646]]

                                  2010

50 CFR
                                                                   75 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended..................................................67539
    (i) amended......................................17481, 19048, 21429

                                  2011

50 CFR
                                                                   76 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (f) amended..................................................37675
    (f) and (h) amended............................................33053
    (i) amended; eff. 10-24-11.....................................58994
    (f) amended....................................................62955

                                  2012

  (Regulations published from January 1, 2012, through October 1, 2012)

50 CFR
                                                                   77 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (g) and (i) amended...........................................8485
    (f) amended.............................................23088, 41106
    (i) amended; eff. 10-18-12.....................................57747


                                  [all]
</pre></body></html>
